 Procedure 005 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual:  Mental and Behavioral Health  
Title: 
Medical Clearance and 
Medical Stability from ED 
to EMBH 
Section: 
Emergency Mental 
and Behavioral 
Health (EMBH) 
Date of Origination: June 29, 2015 Procedure  
Reference #: 05 
Last Date Revised: January 2019 Supersedes #:  
  Last Review Date: January 14, 2025 
 
PURPOSE: 
This procedure outlines the process for the coordination of medical and psychiatric care between the 
Emergency Department (ER) and Emergency Mental and Behavioral Health Services (EMBH). This 
procedure will ensure safe and appropriate patient disposition, appropriate documentation of psychiatric 
and medical diagnoses, and minimize time of disposition for the patient. Medical Stability should 
ascertain whether the patient is impaired or not, whether there is a medical cause for the behavioral 
health symptoms, whether there is an unstable medical condition, and at times whether the patient is 
suicidal, homicidal or gravely disabled.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
A. Medical Clearance 
B. Medically Stable 
 
Procedure with initial presentation at Main Emergency Room: 
 
A. Patient presents to ER and is seen in triage 
B. If patient has a mental or behavioral health complaint, a physician or designee will assess patient 
and determine if he/she is medically stable.  
1. If medically stable, patient may be escorted to EMBH from Triage.  
a. Triage will call EMBH to inform them of the psychiatric patient in triage and ensure an 
available bed (EMBH max census 22) 
b. Security and an additional CPI trained team member will escort the patient to EMBH 
c. Patient will be transferred using a wheelchair or stretcher 
2. Patients who are not medically stable will remain in the main ER until stability is reached or 
another disposition is determined.  
a. If patient becomes medically stable while in ER, patient may be transferred to EMBH 
b. EMBH RN will be phoned to inform them of transfer and relay pertinent information 
regarding the patient’s care 
c. Security and an additional CPI trained team member will escort patient to EMBH 
d. Patient will be transferred using a wheelchair or a stretcher 
C. Physicians or their designees may medically clear patients for inpatient treatment while in 
EMBH, or Main ER areas.  
  Procedure 005 
Page 2 of 2 
Procedure for patients arriving to EMBH from satellite Emergency Rooms (OLOL Livingston or 
North Baton Rouge): 
 
A. Sending facility RN will call report to EMBH RN and notify Main ER Charge Nurse of pending 
transfer 
B. Patients who are transferred from satellite emergency will be brought directly to EMBH from the 
ambulance bay 
C. All patients will be transferred by Ambulance  
D. Admissions/Registration at satellite location will place patient in LALK location in “Off the 
Floor” status 
E. EMBH RN will electronically assign patient to EMBH 
 
 
 
 