ECLS-012 102-10314-2512 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Mental Health Unit 
102-10314-2512 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 102-10314-
2512 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: November 3, 2017 Review Date: June 17, 2024 
Revision Date: June 17, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exits are located at the North end of Acute hallway and South end of Acute Hallway 
• There are no adjacent smoke compartments.  
o Patient meeting room door (1st door to left of Acute Hallway entrance), entrance door to 
laundry room, entrance door to soiled utility room and stairwell exit door at the end of 
the acute hallway. 
 ECLS-012 102-10314-2512 
Page 2 of 3 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response. 
• Mental Health Technician or designee will clear hallway of any carts or equipment by moving 
them to the hallway cubby area on the west side of the hall.  
• Mental Health Technician or designee will close all doors and windows. 
• There are no automatic fire doors on Mental Health unit.  
• Registered Nurse and Mental Health Technician or designee will move patients and visitors to 
safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety.” 
• Mental Health Technician or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) 
and those with sensory or mobility disabilities. 
• Charge Nurse or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for. 
• Charge Nurse or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for. 
• Registered Nurse or designee will ensure each room is empty.  
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off. 
Med Gas Shut off valves are located on the East side of the Nurse’s station. 
The Charge Nurse or designee will notify either Plant Services or Respiratory to turn off the medical 
gas.  
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Wheelchairs may be used as special patient transporting devices. This is patient specific and if 
someone needs a wheelchair it will be on the unit to be used during emergencies.   
• If a patient is bound to a wheelchair, it will be either in use or in the patient’s room with the 
patient.    
• Patients in this department are ambulatory.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The fire extinguisher is located at the end of the patient hall opposite of nurse’s station.  
• Manual pull stations are located: 
o South end of the patient hall 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• These are psychiatric patients that are legally committed. They may be violent, aggressive or 
psychotic and responding to internal stimuli. Additional hospital resources will be required if 
horizontal evacuation is required.  
• Oxygen tanks are used/stored on the unit.  
• The unit requires special badge access. MBH Team members, Security Team members and 
House Managers have badge access to the area.  
• In the event of a Fire Drill or Alarm, all magnet doors automatically unlock. Mental Health 
Technicians, Customer Service Representatives, Nurses, and Social Workers are required to 
monitor exit doors to ensure no one enters or leaves.  
 
 ECLS-012 102-10314-2512 
Page 3 of 3 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route and destination to the east will be the Chapel. The 
primary horizontal evacuation route and destination to the west will be the Auditorium (A or 
B). 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route and destination to the east if evacuation from the 
Chapel is necessary would be to the east under the patient drop off point at the main entrance to 
the hospital. To the west will be out of the Auditorium and towards Plaza 1 to gain entry to the 
space between Plaza 1 and parking garage 4.  
 