OUR LADY OF THE LAKE

MED AL CENTER

/

R

2021 Medical Equipment Management Plan

 Facility Representative TRIMEDX ] _,\_m:.m»
(Signature Approval or EOC Minutes Approval Required)

APPROVAL DATE: MINHUI Gl

A. PURPOSE

The purpose of the Medical Equipment Management Plan (“MEMP”) is to support a safe patient care and treatment environment by managing
risks associated with the use of medical equipment. The specific medical equipment risks of the environment are identified by conducting and
maintaining a proactive risk assessment plan based on various risk criteria, including risks identified by the Joint Commissi on®and other
accreditation agencies.

B. SCOPE

The MEMP describes the risk and routine management activities and identifies the policies and procedures implemented to mitig ate the potential
for adverse impact on the safety and health of patients, associates, and other people, entering the organization’s facilities, and assure compliance
with applicable standards.

The program is applied to the Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, including Assumption Community Hospital, Our Lady of the Lake
Ascension, Our Lady of the Lake Livingston, LSU Health, Our Lady of the Lake Physicians Group, and FMOL Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital

TMX-F-0012

REV. 2 Prgecl

in accordance with the TRIMEDX contract for Medical Equipment Management for the organization.

C. PRINCIPLES

Selection of appropriate:equipment is an essential part of providing safe, effective care and treatment,
Orientation, education, and training of operators of medical equipment are essential parts of the program.

Assessment of needs for continuing techinical support of medical equipment and design of appropriate calibration, inspection, maintenance,
and repair services is:an essential part of assuring that medical equipment is safe and reliable.

D. OBJECTIVES

Use established criteria and relevant historical information to identify potential medical equipment risks. ldentified risks are mitigated
through development of appropriate processes for equipment management to enstreé that equipment is appropriate for intended use and
that associates members are properly trained. It also ensures:that equipment is maintained appropriately by qualified individuals.

Identify and respond appropriately to equipment hazard and recali notices in a timely manner.

Record, report, and analyze medical equipment problems, failures, and use errors. Implement processes designed to further reduce the
risks associated with medical equipment throughout the facility, to improve the overall environment of care.

E. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE

The authority over the plan and responsibility for the plan development, performance measures, appropriate regulatory compliance, and
achievement of the goals has been delegated tothe EOC Committee in coliaboration with the Safety Officer and Clinical Engineering staff.
The Management Plan is approved by the EOC Committee.

The manager of the medical equipment management program administers the'plan through the services of the Clinical Engineering
departmentin conjunction with the applicable clinical care areas.

PR et e e 0t R Pt A8 P 1»“0 2 A 3 N A 1 158 Pt L

o The Clinical Engineering associates manage the timely completion of scheduled maintenance activities required for safe, reliable
performance of medical equipment. In-addition, technicians facilitate necessary repairs, hazard alerts/recalls, and other unscheduled
service activities as requested.

F. DEFINITIONS

High-Risk Equipment (Life Suppoit & Critical Equipment) - Equipment that is critical to patient health and safety. At a minimum, such critical
equipment includes, but is not limited to, life-support devices, key resuscitation devices, critical monitoring devices, and other devices whose
failure may result.in serious injury to or death of patients or associates.

Medical Equipment — Fixed and portable equipment used for the diagnosis, treatment, monitoring, and direct care of individuals.

Temporary Equipment — Equipment brought into the facility and intended for short-term use. Typically, the length of time the equipment resides
in the facility is not to exceed the duration of one Default PM cycle or one year. Temporary equipment can be classified as loaner, rental; trial,
patient-owned, or physician-owned.

Computerized Maintenance Management System {CMMS) - TRIMEDX proprietary system for maintaining medical equipment inventory and
service records.

EC.01.01.01 The hospital plans activities to minimize risksin the environment of care. Note 1: One or more persons can be assigned to manage risks
associated with the management plans described in this standard. Note 2: For hospitals that use Joint Commission accreditation for deemed status purposes:
The hospital complies with the 2012 edition of NFPA 99: Health Care Facilities Code. Chapters 7, 8, 12, and 13 of the Health Care Facilities.Code do not apply.
Note 3: For further information on waiver and equivalency requests, see https://www.jointcommission.org/resources/patient-safety-topics/the-physical-
environment/life-safety-code-information-and-resources/ and NFPA 99-2012: 1.4,

- EC.01.01.01 EP 3 The hospital has a library of information regarding inspection, testing, and maintenance of its equipment and systems. Note: This
library includes manuals, procedures provided by manufacturers; technical bulletins, and other information. TRIMEDX Note: Each Clinical Engineering
manager is charged with maintaining @ local library of service manuals, pracedures, technical bulletins, and other infotmation on-site refated to the
actual service of the device. in addition, the Clinical Engineering Team has-access to additional service manuals, procedures, technical bulletins, and
otherinformation within the TRIMEDX CMMS, should there be any missing information on-site, TRIMEDX Policy and Procedure: Secure Documentation

TMX-F-0012

e e e e e e e PR APt e i i A b e W»N& 3 e A ARl e A e P

REV. 2


Technology and Contrals; TRIMEDX Database, Local Site Repository. Hospital Policy and Procedure: ECLS013, ECLS014, ECUS001, ECUS003,
ECUS004, ECUiS005, ECUS007, ECUSG08, ECSU009. ECSU013, ECSUO16, ECSUI020, ECSU(22, ECSU023

EC.01.01.01 EP 8 The hospital has a written plan for managing medical equipment. TRIMEDX Policy and Procedure: Medical Equipment Management Plan

EC.02.01.01 EP 11 The hospital responds to product notices and recalls. (See also MM.05.01.17, Eps 1-4). TRIMEDX Note: Documentation of medical
alert/recalls is managed in the TRIMEDX Computerized Maintenance Management System-and through Manage Recalls. TRIMEDX Policy and Procedure:
Alerts and Recalls Management, CE CYBER Patch Vulnerability-Threat Management. Hospital Policy and Procedure: FMOLHS- M207 Recall Product Alert.

EC:02.04.01 The hospital manages medical equipment risks.

EC.02.04.01 EP 2 The hospital maintains either a written inventory of all medical equipment or a written.inventory of selected equipment categorized by physical
risk associated with use {including all life-support equipment) and equipment incident history. The hospital evaluates.new types of equipment before initial use
to determine whether they shouid be included in the inventory. TRIMEDX Note: Clinical Engineering establishes and maintains a current inventory of medical
equipment. In accordance with applicable policies and pracedures, the manager of the MEMP will keep the inventory up-to-date as medical equipment is
acquired or retired. The hospital evaluates new types of equipment before initial use to determine whether they should be included in the inventory based on
contractual or scope of service terms. TRIMEDX Policy and Procedures: Temporary Equipment, Performance Verification, Retirement of Equipment. Hospital
Palicy and Procedure: MIVL.O2.002 Supplier Selection Process.

EC.02.04.01 EP 3 The hospital identifies high-risk medical equipment on the inventory for which there'is a risk of serious injury or death to a patient or staff
member should the-equipmentfail. Note: High-risk equipment includes life-support equipment. TRIMEDX Note: Medical equipment listed in the invenitory
receives a ‘Model Class’ categorizing the type of device as ‘Life Support,” ‘High-Risk,” or-‘Non-High-Risk.’ The device’s item class is determined by the Equipment
Management (EM) Score; which considers the device’s function and consequence of failure:  TRIMEDX Policy and Procedure: Electrical Safety Testing,
Alternative Equipment Management (AEM)-and Default Maintenance Program Review, Request for Equipment Management (EM) Score, AEM Schedule or
Default Program Evaluation, PM Schedule Assignment (at Device Level), Request for PM Schedule Change

EC.02.04.01 EP 4 The hospital identifies the activities and associated frequencies, in writing, for maintaining; inspecting, and testing all medical equipment on the
inventory. These activities and associated frequencies are inaccordance with manufacturers’ recommendations or with strategies of an alternative equipment
maintenance (“AEM”) program. Note 1: Thestrategies of an AEM program must not reduce the safety of equipment and must be based on accepted standards
of practice, such as the American National Standards Institute/Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation handbook ANSI/AAMI EQ56:2013,
Recommended Practice for g Medical Equipment Management Program. Note 2: Medical equipment with activities and associated frequencies in accordance
with manufocturers’ recommendations must have a 100% completion rate. Note 3: Scheduled maintendnce activities for high-risk medical equipment in an-AEM
program inventory must have a 100% completion rate. Scheduled maintenance activities for non-high-risk medical equipment in-an AEM program inventoty ore

TMX-F-0012

e s e A LA A A A A S k8 A0St et o et e et et et ey P g PP | PP PR .Tn_.mm & e A AR A 8 e e e A A Rt A e e e e et g R 50

"REV.2

to-be completed at 100%. AEM frequency is determined by the-hospital’s AEM progrom. TRIMEDX Policy and Procedure: Preventative Maintenance (PM), AEM
and Default Maintenance Program Assignmenit, PM Schedule Assigiment (at Device Level), Request for PM Schedule Change.

’

EC.02.04.01 EP 5 The hospital’s acti s and frequencies for inspecting, testing, and maintaining the following items must be in accordance with manufacturers
recommendations: Equipment subject to federal or state law or Medicare Conditions of Participation. in which inspecting, testing, and maintaining be in
accordarice with the manufacturers’ recommendations, or otherwise establishes more stringent maintenance requirements. Medical Laser Devices Imaging and
Radiologic-equipment {whether used for diagnastic or therapeutic purposes.) New Medical equipment with insufficient maintenance history to support the use
of alternative maintenance strategies. Note: Muaintenance history includes any of the following documented evidence: Records provided by the hospital’s
contractors, Information made public by nationally recognized sources, Records of the hospital’s experience over time. TRIMEDX Note: If the manufacturers’
recommendations are not available, recammendations from like-and-kind equipiment are utilized or genetit procedures are created hy qualified personnel.
TRIMEDX Policy and Procedure: Preventative Maintenance (PM), AEM and Defauit Mainteénance Program Assignment; PM Schedule Assignment (at Device
Level), Request for PM Schedule Change.

EC.02.04.01 EP 6 A gualified individual(s) uses written criteria to support the determination whether it is safe to permit medical equipment to -be maintained in
an.aiternate manner that includes the following: How equipment is-used, including the seriousness and prevalence of harm during normal use, Likely
conseguences of equipment failure or malfunction, including sericusness-of and prevalence of harm, Availability of alternative or back-up-equipment in the
eventthe equipment fails. or malfunctions, Incident history of identical or sitnilar equipment, Maintenance requirements of the equipment. (For more
information on defining staff qualifications; refer to Standard HR.01.02:01} TRIMEDX Note: TRIMEDX utilizes a reliability centered maintenance program
whereby qualified personne! are involved at both the corporate and local level in reviewing AEM eligible equipment. Local field experience is used to determine
maintenance strategies while considering safety, equipment availability, and service life. The strategies rely on the involvement of the equipment users and any
reported patient safety issues pertaining to medical equipment. TRIMEDX Policy and Procedure: Preventative Maintenance (PM), AEM and Defauit
Maintenance Program Assignment, PM Schedule Assignment (at Device Level), Reguest far PM Schedule Change.

EC.02.04.01 EP 7 The hospital identifies medical equipment on its inventory that is included in an alternative equipment maintenance program. TRIMEDX Policy
and Procedure: Preventative Maintenance (PM), AEM and Default.Maintenance Program Assignment, PM Schedule Assignment {at Device Level), Reguest for
PM Schedule Change.

£C.02.04.01.EP 9 The hospital has written procedures to follow when medical equipment faits; including using emergency clinical interventions and backup
equipment. TRIMEDX Note: Clinical staff develop processes to manage the response te medical equipment failure or disruption. The processes include actions
to take in the event of equipment disruption or failure, availability of alternate equipment, and emergency clinical procedures and conditions for when they are
implemented. Clinical engineering may provide technical documentation as needed. Hospital Policy and Procedure: OrgOps/GNO19 Safety Event {Incident or
Variance Reporting).

e it er st 1 o A 8 B e o e b e o S .—wNNw 5 e e e e ettt 1 ettt

EC.02.04.01 EP 10 The hospital identifies quality control and maintenance activities to maintain the quality of the diagnostic computed tomography (CT),
positron emission tomography (PET), magnetic resonance imaging {MRI), and nuclear medicine {(NM) images produced. The hospital identifies how often these
activities should be conducted. Hospital Policy and Procedure: RS 014 Radiation Safety ALARA.

EC.02.04.03 The hospital inspects, tests, and maintains medical equipment.

EC.02.04.03 EP 1 Before initial use and after repairs or upgrades of medical equipment on the medical equipment inventory, the hospital performs safety,
operational, and functional checks; TRIMEDX Note: The hospital works collaboratively with the CE manager to ensure Clinical engineering is notified when new
equipment enters the site. Upon receiving that information, CE will add the device to the CMMS database and verify the device is ready for patient use.
TRIMEDX Policies and Procedure: Electrical Safety Testing, Performance Verification regardless of ownership {(hospital, foaner, rental, and patient owned)

EC.02.04.03.EP 2 The hospital inspects, tests, and maintains all high-risk equipment, These activities are' documented. (See also PC.02.01:11, EP 2). Note 1: High-
Risk equipment includes medical equipment for which there is a risk of serious injury or even death to o patient or staff member shouid it fail, which includes life-
support equipment. Note 2: Required activities and associated frequencies for maintaining, inspecting, and testing of medical equipment completed in
accordance with manufacturers” recommendations must have a 100% completion rate. Note 3+ Scheduled maintenance activities for high-risk medical equipment
in.an AEM program inventory must have a 100% completion rate. AEM frequency is determined by the hospital’s AEM program. TRIMEDX Note: The manager of
the MEMP assures scheduled maintenance.of high-risk equipment is performed. Reports of managed rate of schedule inspections and maintenance are
regularly presented to the EC/Safety Commiittee for review.

If the rate of Managed (Managed = Timely PM + Could Not Locate (CNL) + In Patient Use + Out to Vendor) PM completion falls below 100%, the CE manager will
demonstrate through documentation that the equipment is being actively managed and will make recommendations for addressing the situation to the EC
Committee as determined by policy and procedure.

TRIMEDX Policies-and Procedure: Medical Equipment Management Plan, AEM-and Default Maintenance Program Assignment, PM Schedule Assignment (at
Device Level), Request for PM Schedule Change, Equipment Could Not Locate (CNL) and Equipment “In Use on Patient”, TRIMEDX CMMS Database (RSQ}

EC.02.04.03 EP-3 The hospital inspects, tests; and maintains non-high-risk equipment on the medical equipment inventory. These activities are documented.
Note: Scheduled maintenance activities for non-high-risk medical equipment in-an AEM program inventory are to be completed at 100%. AEM fréquency is
determined by the hospital’s AEM program. TRIMEDX Note: The manager of the MEMP assures that scheduled maintenance of non-high-risk-equipment is
performed. Reports of managed rate of schedule inspections and maintenance are regularly presented to the EC/Safety Committee for review.

TMX-F-0012

REV. 2

R m«Nmn 6 T T T T T

if the rate of Managed (Managed = Timely PM + Could Not Locate (CNL} + {n Patient Use + OQut to Vendor) PM completion falls below 100%, the CE manager will
document that the-equipment is-being actively managed and will make recommendations for addressing the situation to the EC Committee as determined by
policy and procedure:

TRIMEDX Policy and Procedure: Medical Equipment Management Plan, AEM and Default Maintenance Program Assignment, PM Schedule Assignment (at
Device Level), Request for PM Schedule Change, Equipment Could Not Locate (CNL) and Equipment “In Use on Patient”, TRIMEDX CMMS Database (RSQ)

£C.02.04.03 EP 4 The hospital conducts performance testing of and maintains all sterifizers. These activities-are documented. (See also1€.0202.01, EP 2).
TRIMEDX Note: The SPD.staff are responsible for biological culture testing and performance verification of sterilizers. Records of load testing are retained and
any improper results-are documented and reported to the Infection Control Department for evaluation and action. TRIMEDX and Steris Corp is/are responsible
for preventative maintenance of all sterilizers. Hospita! Policy and Procedure: SPS041 Steam Biological Challenge test.

EP.02.04.03 EP 5 The hospital performs equipment maintenance and chemical and biological testing of water used in hemodialysis. These activities are
documented. Hospital Policy and Procedure: ECME013 Management of Hemodialysis System.

E£P.02.04.03 EP 8 Equipment listed for use in oxygen-enriched atmiospheres are clearly and permanently {abeled (withstands cleaning/disinfecting) as follaws:
Oxygen-metering equipment, pressure-reducing regulators, humidifiers, and nebulizers are labeled with the name of manufacturer or supplier. .Oxygen-
metering equipment and pressure reducing regulators are labeled “OXYGEN-USE NO OiL.” Labels on flowmeters, pressure-reducing regulators, and oxygen-
dispensing apparatuses designate the gases for which they are intended. Cylinders-and containers are labeled in accordance with Compressed Gas Association
{CGA} C-7.

Note: Color coding is not utilized.as the primary method of determining cylinder or container contents. TRIMEDX Policy and Procedure: Performance
Verification, Preventative Mainténance (PM). Hospital Policy and Procedure: N/A.

EC.02.04.03 EP 10 All occupancies containing hyperbaric facilities comply with construction, equipment, administration, -and maintenance requirements of NFPA
99-2012: Chapter 14, TRIMEDX Policy-and Procedures: Preventative-Maintenance (PM), PM Schedule Assignment (at Device Level), AEM and Default
Maintenance Program Review.. Hospital Policy and.Procedure: N/A.

£C.02.04.03 EP 16 Qualified hospital staff inspect, test, and calibrate nuclear medicine equipment annually. The results-and completion dates are documented.
TRIMEDX Note: The hospital’s Radiation Safety Officer oversees the process to ensure that inspections; testing and calibration comply with applicable rules for
the nuclear medicine equipment. The manager of the MEMP assures that scheduled and preventative mainténance inspections are performed. The Nuclear
Medicine department staff perform daily quality assurance. Hospital Policy and Procedure: (RS 014 Radiation Safety.

£C.02.04.03 EP 18 The hospital maintains the quality of the diagnostic cormputed tomography (CT), positron emissiontomography (PET), magnetic resonance
imaging {MRI),:and nuclear medicine (NM) images produced. Hospital Policy and Procedure: IRS 014 Radiation Safety.

TMX-F-0012

ettt e e e e A 1 A P ﬁumo 7

REV. 2


E£C.02.04.03 EP 20 For diagnostic computed tomography (CT) sérvices: At least annually, a diagnostic medical physicist does the following: Measures the
radiation dose (in the form of volume computed torography: dose index [CTDIvol]) produced by each diagnostic CT imaging system for the following four CT
protocols: adult brain, adult abdomen, pediatric brain, and pediatric abdomen. If one of these protocols.is not used by the hospital other commonly used CT
protocols may be substituted.

Verifies that the radiation dose {in the form of CTDIvol} produced-and measured for each protocol tested is within 20 percentof the CTDIvol displayed on the CT
console. The dates; results, and verification of these measurements are docufmented. Note 1: This element of performance is only applicable for systems
capable of calculating and displaying radiation.doses. Note 2: This efement of performance does not apply to dental.cone bedm CT radiographic imaging studies
performed for diagnosis of conditions affecting the maxillofacial region or to obtain guidance for the treatment of such conditions.

Note 3: Medical physicists are accountable for these activities. They may be assisted with the testing and evaluation of equipment performance by individuals
who have the required training and skills, as determined by the physicist. (See HR:01.02.01 EP1; HR.01.02.05, EP20; HR.01.02.07 £Ps 1 and 2; HR.01.06.01 EP1;
and LD.03,06.01 EP4). Hospital Policy-and Procedure: 1RS-014 Radiation Safety ALARA.

£C.02.04.03 EP 21 For diagnostic computed tomography (CT) services: At least annually, a diagriostic medical physicist conducts a performance evaluation of all
CT imaging equipment. The evaluation results; along with recommendations for correcting any problems identified, are documented. The evaluation includes
the use of phantoms to assess the following imaging metrics: Image uniformity, Scout prescription accuracy, Aligniient light accuracy, Table travel accuracy,
Radiation beam width, High-contrast resolution, Low-contrast detectability, Geometric or distance accuracy, CT number accuracy and uniformity

Artifact evaluation, Note 1: This element of performance does not apply to dentaf cone beam CT radiographic imaging studies performed for diagnosis of
conditions affecting the maxillofacial region or to obtain guidance for the treatment of such conditions.

Note 2: Medical physicists are accountable for these activities. They may be assisted with the.testing and evaluation of equipment performance by individuals
who have the required training and skills, as deterrnined by the physicist. (See HR.01.02.01 EP1; HR.01.02.05, EP20; HR.01.02.07 EPs 1 and 2; HR.01.06.01 EP1;
and LD.03.06.01 EP4). ‘Hospital Policy and Procedure: IRS 014 Radiation Safety ALARA.

EC.02.94.03 EP 22 At least annual, a diagnostic medical physicist or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scientist conducts a performance evaluation of alf MRI
imaging equipment. The evaluation results, along with recommendations for correcting any problems identified, are documented. The evaluation includes the
use-of phantoms to assess the following imaging metrics; Image uniformity for all radiofrequency (RF) coils-used clinically, Signai-to-noise ratio {SNIR) forall coils
used clinically, Slice thickness-accuracy, Slice position accuracy, Alignment light accuracy, High-contrast resolution, Low-contrast resolution (of contrast-to-noise
ratio}, Geometric or distance accuracy, Magnetic field homogeneity, Artifact evaluation. Note: Medical physicists.or MRI scientists are accountable for these
activities. They may be ossisted with the testing and evaluation of equipment performance by individuals who have the required training and skills, os
determined by the medical physicist or MRI scientist. (See HR.01.02.01, EP1; HR.01.02.05, £P20;-HR.01.02.07, EPs 1 and 2; HR.01.06.01, EP1; and LD.03.06.01,
£P4).

Hospital Policy and Procedure: IRS 014 Radiation Safety,

TMX-F-0012 - S e Pues
REV. 2 age


EC.02.04.03 EP 23 At ieast annually, a diagnostic medical physicist or nuclear medicine physicist conducts a performance evaluation of all nuclear medicine
imaging equipment. The evaluation results, along with recommendations for correcting any problems identified, are documented. The evaluations are
conducted for all of the image types produced clinically by each NM scanner (for example, .planar and/or tomographic) and include the use of phantoms to
assess the following imaging metrics: Image uniformity/system-uniformity; High-contrast resolution/system spatial resclutions; Sensitivity, Energy resolution,
Count-rate performance, Artifact evaluation. Note 1: The folfowing test.is recommended; but not required: Low-contrast resoiution or detectability for non-
planar acquisitions. Note 2: The medical physicist or nuclear medicine physicist is accountable for these activities. He or she may be assisted with the testing and
evaluation of equipment performance by individuals who have the required training and skills, as determined by the medical physicist or nuclear medicine
physicist. {See HR.01.02.01 EP1; HR.01.02.05, EP20; HR.01.02,07 EPs 1-and 2; HR.01.06,01 EP1, and LD.03.06.01 £P4). Hospital Policy and Procedure: IRS 014
Radiation Safety.

EC.02.04.03 EP 24 At least annually, a diagnostic medical physicist conducts a performance evaluation of all positron emission tomography {PET) imaging
equipment. The evaluation resuits, along with recommendations for correcting any problems identified, are documented. The evaluations are conducted for all
of the image types produced clinically by each PET scanner (for example, planar and/or tomographic} and include the use of phantoms to assess the following
imaging metrics: Image uniformity/system uniformity, High-contrast resolution/system spatial resolutions, Low-contrast resolution or detectability {rot
applicable for planar acquisitions}, Aitifact evaluation. Note 1: The following test is recommended, but not required, for PET scanner testing: sensitivity, energy
resolution, and count-rate performance. Note 2: Medical physicists are accountable for these activities. They may be assisted with the testing and evaluation of
equipment perforimance by individuals who have the required training and skills, as determined by the physicist. (See HR.01.02.01 EP1; HR.01.02.05, EP20;
HR.01.02.07 EPs 1 and 2; HR.01.06.01 EP1; and LD.03,06.01 EP4). Hospital Policy and Procedure: IRS 014 Radiation Safety ALARA.

EC.02.04.03 EP 25 For computed tomography {CT), positren.emission tomography (PET), nuclear medicine (NM) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) services:
The annual performance evaluation conducted by the diaghostic medical physicist er MRI scientist (for MRI only) includes testing of image acquisition display
monitors formaximum: and minimum luminance, luminance uniformity, resolution, and spatial accuracy.. Note.1: This element of performance does not apply
to dental cone-beam CT radiographic imaging studies performed for didgnosis of conditions dffecting the maxiliofacial region or to obtain guidance for the
treatment of such conditions. Note 2: Medical physicists or MRI scientists are gccountable for these activities. They may be assisted with the testing and
evaluation of equipment performance by individuals who have the required training and skills, as determined by the physicist or MR scientist. {See HR.01.02,01
EP1; HR.01.02.05, EP20; HR.01.02.07 EPs 1 and 2; HR.01.06.01 EP1; and.LD.03.06.01 EP4).

Hospital Policy and Procedure: 'IRS 014 Radiation Safety.

- EC.02.04.03 EP 26 The hospital performs equipment mainfenance on anesthesia apparatus. The apparatus are tested at the final path to
patient after any adjustment, modification, or repair. Before the apparatus is returned to service, each connection is checked to verify proper
gas flow.and an oxygen analyzer is used to verify oxygen concentration, Areas designated for servicing of oxygen equipment are clean and free
of oil, grease, or other flammables. {For full text refer to NFPA 99-2012: 11.4.1.3; 11.5.1.3; 11.6.2.5; and 11.6.2.6). TRIMEDX Policy and
Procedures:; Preventative Maintenance {PM), PM Schedule Assignment (at Device Level), AEM and Default Maintenance Program Review.
Hospital Policy and Procedure: ECHMO007, SAA007, SAA0L6

TMX-F-0012

REV.2

e ‘m.\ﬂﬂﬁ G U ——

EC.02:04.03 EP 27 The hospital meets all other HealthCare Facilities Code Requirements; facilities code for eléctrical equipment in the patient care vicinity as
related to NFPA 99-2012: Chapter 10. Note: For hospitals that use Jeint Commission accreditation for deemed status purposes: the hospital meets the applicable
provisions of the HealthCare Facilities Code Tentative:interim Amendment (TIA) 12-5. TRIMEDX Policy and Procedures: Electrical Safety Testing.

Hospital Policy and Procedure: ECSFQ13.

EC.02.04.03 EP- 34 For hospitals that provide fluoroscopic services: at least annually, a diagnostic medical physicist conducts a performance evaluation of
fluoroscopic imaging equipment. The evaluation results, along with recommendations for correcting any problems identified, are documented. The evaluation
includes and assessment of the following:  Beam alignment and collimation, Tube potential/kilovolt peak (kV/kVp) accuracy, Beam fiftration (haif-value layer),
High-contrast resoution, Low-contrast detectability, Maximum exposure rate in fluoroscopic mode, Displayed air-kefrma rate and. cumuiative-air kerma accuracy
(when applicable). Note 1: Medical physicists conducting performance evaluations may be assisted with the testing and evaluation of equipment performance
by individuals whao have the required training and skills, as determined by the physicist. Note 2: This element of performance does not-apply to fluoroscopy
equipment used for therapeutic radiation treatment planning or delivery. Hospital Policy and Procedure: IRS-014 Radiation Safety ALARA.

EC.02.06.01 The hospital establishes and maintains a safe, functional environment. Note: The environment is constructed, arranged, and mointained to foster
patient-safety, provide facilities for diagnosis and treatment; and provide for special services appropriate to the fhieeds of the commuinity.

EC.02.06.01 EP 26 The hospital keeps furnishings and equipment safe and in good repair. TRIMEDX Policy'and Procédures: Preventative Maintenance (PM)
EC.03.01.01 Staff-and licensed independent practitioners are familiar with their roles and responsibilities relative to the environment of care.

EC.03.01.01 EP1 Staff responsible for the maintenance, inspection, testing, and use of medical équipment, utility systems and equipment, fire systems and
equipment, and safe handling of hazardous materials are competent and receive continuing education and training. TRIMEDX Note: TRIMEDX will provide

continuing education and training for TRIMEDX associates responsible for the maintenance, inspections; and testing of medical equipment. TRIMEDX Policy and
Procedures: Safe Use of Equipment, Safety Guidelines, Preventative Maintenance (PM). Hospital Policy-and Procedure: ECUS021.

EC.04.01.01 The hospital collects information to monitor conditions in the environment.

EC.04.01.01 EP 1 The hospital establishes a process for continually monitoring; internally reparting, and investigating: Medical or laboratory equipment
management problems, failures, and use errors. Note 1: Al the incidents and issues listed above may be reported to staffin quality assessment, improvement, or
other functions. A summary of such incidents may aiso be shared with the person designated to coordingte safety management activities:

Note 2: Review of incident reports often require that legel processes be followed to preserve confidentiality. Opportunities to improve care, treatment, or
services, or to prevent similar incidents, are not lost as a result of following the legal process. TRIMEDX Note: TRIMEDX staff will work with the hospital staff to
investigate medical/laboratory equipment management problems, failures, and use errars. The TRIMEDX manager will work with the-Quality and

TMX-F-0012

REV.2

_.uu.wm 10 e APt e P R 5 A e

Regulatory Compliance Department at TRIMEDX when responding to a medical/laboratory equipment management problem, failure, and use efror. TRIMEDX
Policies and -Procedures: Equipment Repairs, AEM and Default Maintenance Program Assignmerit, PM Schedule Assignment (at Device Level), Request for PM
Schedule Change.. Hospital Policy and Procedure: LBA 200 General Laboratory.

EC.04.01.01 EP 10 Based on its process{es), the hospital reports and investigates the following: Medical/laboratory equipment management prablems, failures,
and use errors. TRIMEDX Note: TRIMEDX staff will work with the hospitat staff to investigate medical/laboratory equipment management problems, failures,
and use errors. The TRIMEDX manager will work with the Quality and Regulatory Department at TRIMEDX when responding to a medical/laboratory equipment
managemerit problem, failure, and use error. TRIMEDX Policies and Procedures: Equipment Repairs, AEM and Default Maintenance Pragram Assignment, PM
Schedule Assignment {at Device Level), Request for PM Schedule Change. Hospital Policy and Praocedure: LBA200 General taboratory.

EC.04.01.01 EP 15 Every 12 months, the hospital evaluates each environment of care management plan, including a review of the plan’s objectives, scope,
performances, and-effectiveness. TRIMEDX Note: The manager of the MEMP is responsible for evaluating the-equipment management plan effectiveness and
providing an annual program summary tothe EC/Safety Committee. TRIMEDX Policy and Procedures: Medical Equipment Management Plan

EC.04.01.03 The hospital analyzes identified environment of care issues.

EC.04.01.03 EP 2 The hospital uses the results of data analysis-to identify opportunities to.resolve environmental safety issues. TRIMEDX Note: The manager of
the MEMP will perform an annual assessmerit of the TRIMEDX program and a trending analysis of ali equipment. Any issues or areas of imprévement will be
identified and shared with the hospital staff. TRIMEDX Policy and Procedures: Request for PM Schedule Change, Medical Equipment management Plan.
Hospital Policy and Procedure: ECSF003, ECSF004.

EC.02.01.05 The hospital improves its environment of care.

EC.04.01.05 EP 1 The hospital takes action on the identified opportunities to resolve environmental safety issues. TRIMEDX Note: TRIMEDX staff will work with
the hospital staff to investigate medical/laboratory equipment management prablems, failures, and use errors. The TRIMEDX manager will work with the Quality
and Regutatory Compliance Department at TRIMEDX when responding to a medical/laboratory equipment management problem, failure, and use

error, TRIMEDX Policy and Procedures: Request for PM Schedule Change, Medical Equipmient management Plan.

Hospital Policy and Procedure: ECSF(04, ECSF008.

1C.02.02.01 The hospital reduces the risk of infections associated with medical equipment, devices, and supplies:
IC.02.02.01 EP 1, EP 2, EP 3, EP 4 The hospital implements infection prevention and control activities when doing the following: Cleaning and performing low-

level disinfection of medical equipment, devices, and supplies, Performing intermediate and high-level disinfection ard sterilization of medical equipment,
devices and supplies, Disposing of medical equipmient, devices, and supplies, Storing-medical equipment, devices, and supplies. Note: Sterilization is used for

TMX-F-0012

om—— 1&“» 11 s


items such as implants and surgical instruments. High-level disinfection may also be used if sterilization is not possible, as is the case with flexible endoscopes.
TRIMEDX Note: Scope Maintenance Equipment users are responsible for storage, high-level disinfection and reprocessing of flexible and rigid endoscopes.
TRIMEDX is responsible for the maintenance and documentation of endoscopes. Sterilization and reprocessing are reviewed and maintained by the Surgical
Services department. Out of range results are documented and reported to the Infection Control for evaluation and action. A copy of the inventory is
maintained by Clinical Engineering. Hospital Policy and Procedure: SYE001 Disinfection, High Level.

NPSG.06.01.01 Goal 6: Reduce the harm associated with clinical alarm systems. Improve the safety of clinical alarms.

NPSG.06.01.01 EP 2 Identify the most important alarm signals to manage based on the following: Input from the medical staff and clinical departments, Risk to
patients if the alarm signal is not attended to or if it malfunctions, Whether specific alarm signals are needed or unnecessarily contribute to alarm noise and
alarm fatigue, Potential for patient harm based on internal incident history, Published best practices and guidelines. TRIMEDX Policy and Procedures: TRIMEDX
CMMS Database (RSQ). Hospital Policy and Procedure: NPC150 Cli ical Alarm Management.

H. EVALUATION OF PLAN (EC.04.01.03, EP 2)

On an annual basis, the Clinical Engineering Manager evaluates the objectives, scope, effectiveness, and performance of the Medical Equipment
Management Plan. Any changes in objectives will be addressed in the Annual Assessment and incorporated into the updated MEMP plan.

The EC Committee receives regular reports of the program activities on a quarterly basis. The program manager collaborates with the EC
Committee and other appropriate associates to convey and address medical equipment issues and concerns. [ r

is Tuire

The Annual Assessment objectives are developed through interactions with the EC Committee and hospital administration. These objectives will
address the primary operational initiatives for mi ing the risk associated with the use of medical equipment.

The Annual Assessment is a 12 Month summary compiled by the Clinical Engineering Manager and presented to the EC Committee and Safety
Officer annually for approval.

I. PERFORMANCE INDICATORS (EC.04.01.05, EP 1)
(Hospital EC Committee reports

ires measure of

\\\\\\\ —— wNNm 12 & = . ——

T —.VN“@ Hw U ES—— R VS PR e

