AA-GO-001 
Page 1 of 1 
 
PURPOSE 
 
The Our Lady of the Lake Grants Office (Grants Office) serves to provide a uniform method of applying 
for and managing grants, as well as to oversee compliance with local, state and federal and private 
foundation regulations. Additional policies reflect the "rules" governing the components of grant funding. 
Procedures represent an implementation of policy and should evolve over time as new tools emerge and 
new processes are designed in recognition of the changing funding environment. 
 
POLICY 
 
OLOL Grants Office  
 
The Grants Office coordinates the identification, solicitation and administration of federal, state and 
private grants for the hospital.  Additionally, the Grants Office works to cultivate relationships with 
organizations and businesses for the purposes of advancing the mission of the institution. The office is 
tasked with assisting departments with grants-related documents, questions or concerns, and serving as a 
liaison to local, state and federal agencies to ensure grants are in compliance. 
 
The Grants Office was established under the Division of Academic Affairs to streamline grants awarded 
to the institution. The process involves documenting all grant awards in which OLOL is named grantee, 
creating and maintaining a comprehensive database of grant award information, distributing pertinent 
information to grant stakeholders, recipients and sub-recipients, ensuring that grants are compliant based 
on programmatic, financial and legal authorities, and serving as a resource to OLOL grant managing 
agencies or departments.  
 
Grants Administration 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. is the official grantee and the Chief Executive Officer is the official 
authorized signatory for all grants, regardless of the division or department managing the grant program. 
 
Grants Office staff and any sub-grantees are responsible for fulfilling all aspects of the grant contract 
including administrative, programmatic, and financial components while adhering to all governing 
authorities that legally bind OLOL to the Grantor through a grant agreement. 
 
On a broad scale, the Grants Office oversees all grant programs wherein OLOL is named grantee, 
working in concert with division and/or department grant staff and assisting in the management and 
compliance of such grants. 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Academic Affairs Section: Grants Office 
Title: OLOL Grants Office Policy Reference #: AA/GO/001 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: August 8, 2013 Last Review Date: 06/13/2019 
Last Revision Date:  