AA-OR-012 
Page 1 of 10 
PURPOSE 
To protect the rights of patients who receive investigational devices under an Investigational Device 
Exemption (IDE); to ensure proper billing for investigational devices and related services, consistent 
with Medicare National Coverage Decisions and rules of private payers; and to describe the process for 
the receipt, storage, distribution, reconciliation, return, or authorized destruction of an investigational 
device used in a clinical research study.   
RESPONSIBILITY 
A physician who wishes to use an investigational device is considered to be an investigator, and as such, 
is responsible for protecting the rights, safety and welfare of subjects.  The investigator must conduct the 
investigation in accordance with the signed agreement with the sponsor, the investigational plan, the 
IDE regulations and other applicable Food & Drug Administration (FDA) regulations, and any 
conditions of approval imposed by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) and the FDA.   
This policy applies to all personnel involved in an investigational device clinical research study, to 
include inventorying, storing, distributing, arranging for the return or destruction of an investigational 
new device, study oversight and operations, or billing in connection with an investigational device 
clinical research study.   
SCOPE 
Describes the steps followed to obtain endorsement of an investigational device clinical research study, 
the steps followed to evaluate the risks imposed on research participants, the steps followed from the 
time the investigational device is received on site until it is used during a clinical research study, 
returned to the sponsor, or destroyed onsite at the sponsor’s request, as well as the guidelines established 
for investigational device and related services billing.   
BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
For the protection of human subjects, the FDA classifies investigational devices as posing either 
Significant Risk (SR) or Non-Significant Risk (NSR).  
A SR device is defined as a device:  
1. Intended as an implant and presents a potential for serious risk to the health, safety or welfare 
of a participant.  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Academic Affairs Section: Office of Research 
Title: Investigational Device Exemptions (IDEs) 
Policy Reference #: AA/OR/012 
Supersedes #: 
03/06 OrgClin/CR/006: 
Billing for Investigational 
Devices and Related 
Services   
Date of Origination: February 1, 2012 Last Review Date: May 21, 2020 
Last Revision Date: May 21, 2020 AA-OR-012 
Page 2 of 10 
2. Purported or represented to be for use in supporting or sustaining human life and presents a 
potential for serious risk to the health, safety or welfare of a participant.  
3. For use of substantial importance in diagnosing, curing, mitigating, or treating disease, or 
otherwise preventing impairment of human health and presents a potential for serious risk to 
the health, safety or welfare of a participant; or  
4. Which otherwise presents a potential for serious risk to the health, safety or welfare of a 
participant.   
A NSR device study is one in which the device(s) being used does not meet the criteria for significant 
risk device, as described above.     
The FDA classifies investigational devices into two categories:  Category A (experimental) or Category 
B (non-experimental/investigational).  Once the FDA grants an IDE, the device may be used in clinical 
trials as part of the pre-market approval process.  When the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
(CMS) is notified that a particular IDE has been determined to be a Category B device, it is reviewed, 
and a coverage decision is made.   
Investigational Devices which are classified as Category A devices, by the FDA, are not covered by the 
Medicare Program.  Medicare coverage of services related to the provision of Category A devices is as 
follows:   
1. Services related to the provision of Category A devices where the clinical trial does not 
diagnose, monitor or treat an immediately life-threatening disease or condition are not 
covered by and must not be billed to the Medicare Program.   
2. Services related to the provision of Category A devices where the clinical trial diagnoses, 
monitors or treats an immediately life-threatening disease or condition are covered by and 
may be billed to the Medicare Program when all the following conditions have been met:   
a. Approval has been granted by Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center’s 
(OLOL’s) designated IRB.  
b. Services are furnished to a subject who is participating in an FDA-approved clinical 
trial; and  
c. Proper notification has been submitted to OLOL’s Medicare Fiscal Intermediary (FI) 
and approval has been received from the Medicare FI.   
Investigational devices which are classified as Category B devices by the FDA, and services related to 
the provision of such devices, are only covered by and may be billed to Medicare if the devices are 
medically necessary for the subject to whom they are rendered and have been:   
1. Approved by OLOL’s designated IRB.  
2. Granted an FDA-approved IDE and Category B status.  AA-OR-012 
Page 3 of 10 
3. Furnished to a subject who is participating in an FDA-approved clinical trial; and  
4. Proper notification has been submitted to OLOL’s Medicare FI, and approval has been 
received from the Medicare FI.   
Category B investigational devices and the services related to the provision of such devices that do not 
meet the above requirements are not covered by and may not be billed to the Medicare Program.   
Medicare will cover services related to a condition or complication that arises as a result of the use of a 
non-covered Category A or Category B device.   
OLOL may accept an investigational device from a manufacturer or research sponsor at no charge for 
use in a clinical trial.  However, in such cases, the facility must not charge the subject or Medicare for 
the device.  When the facility receives a device at no charge, the facility may bill Medicare for services 
related to the provision of the device as long as the device meets all other Medicare coverage 
requirements.   
DEFINITIONS 
1. Category A Device:  An innovative/experimental device for which “absolute risk” of the device 
type has not been established (that is, initial questions of safety and effectiveness have not been 
resolved and the FDA is unsure whether the device type can be safe and effective).  There is no 
Medicare coverage, under any circumstances, for a Category A device; however, in certain 
situations, Medicare will cover the cost of services related to the use of a Category A device.   
2. Category B Device:  A device for which the underlying questions of safety and effectiveness of 
that device type have been resolved by the FDA, or it is known that the device type can be safe 
and effective because, for example, other manufacturers have obtained FDA approval for that 
device type.   
Medical Device:  The FDA defines a medical device as an instrument, apparatus, implement, 
machine, contrivance, implant, in vitro reagent, or other similar or related article, including a 
component part or accessory which is: recognized in the official National Formulary, or the 
United States Pharmacopoeia, or any supplement to them.  
Intended for the use in the diagnosis of disease or other conditions, or in the cure, mitigation, 
treatment, or prevention of disease, in man or other animals, or  
Intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of man or other animals, and which 
does not achieve its primary intended purposes through chemical action within or on the body of 
man or other animals and which is not dependent upon being metabolized for the achievement of 
any of its primary intended purposes.  
3. Immediately Life-Threatening Disease or Condition:  A stage of a disease in which there is a 
reasonable likelihood that death will occur within a matter of months or in which premature 
death is likely without early treatment.  The FDA has expanded the criteria of “life-threatening 
condition” to include serious conditions such as sight-threatening and limb-threatening 
conditions as well as other situations involving risk of irreversible morbidity.   
4. Investigational Device:  Includes any device (approved or unapproved by the FDA) being used 
in a clinical investigation or research using one or more subjects to determine the safety and/or 
effectiveness of a device for a specific application or intended use.   AA-OR-012 
Page 4 of 10 
5. Investigational Device Exemption (IDE):  An application which, when approved by the FDA, 
permits an investigational device (Category A or B) which would otherwise be subject to 
marketing clearance, to be shipped lawfully for the purpose of conducting a clinical trial in 
accordance with federal regulations.   
6. 510(k) or PMN:  A Premarket Notification (PMN or 510(k)) to determine “substantial 
equivalence.”  Device manufacturers submit a PMN or 510(k) application to the FDA when they 
intend to introduce a device into commercial distribution for the first time, or reintroduce a 
device that will be significantly changed or modified to the extent that its safety or effectiveness 
could be affected.  Such change or modification could relate to the design, material, chemical 
composition, energy source, manufacturing process, or intended use.  The FDA then determines 
whether the device is equivalent to a device already approved, or whether a further study or 
evaluation is required, including the need for an IDE.   
7. Related Services (Services Related To):  All services furnished in preparation for the use of an 
investigational device, services furnished contemporaneously with and necessary to the use of an 
investigational device, and services furnished as necessary aftercare that are incident to recovery 
from the use of the device.  For example, a surgical procedure to implant an investigational hip 
implant is considered a related service.  
 
PROCEDURES 
Sponsors of the study are responsible for making the initial risk determination and presenting it 
to the IRB. Name of device (trade name, common/usual name and classification number). Unless 
the FDA has already made a risk determination for the study, the IRB must review the sponsor’s 
SR or NSR determination for every investigational medical device and modify the determination 
if the IRB disagrees with the sponsor. If the FDA has already made the determination SR or NSR 
determination for the study, the agency’s determination is final. The FDA is available to help the 
IRB when making its risk determination.  
The determination of risk should be included in submission documents to the Office of Research 
in order to conduct the feasibility review.  
The Office of Research is responsible for notifying the Medicare FI prior to submitting claims 
for Category B devices and related services, as well as covered services related to the provision 
of Category A devices.  A letter must be sent to the Medicare FI, accompanied by the required 
documentation.  The study may not start enrollment until notification of approval from the 
Medicare FI has been received.   
When a new study subject is enrolled in a study, it is the responsibility of the PI to send the New 
Subject Enrollment Form to the Office of Research (See Research Feasibility policy).   
Office of Research staff must identify any specific instructions from their Medicare FI and notify 
Patient Financial Services of any FI interpretations which vary from the interpretations of this 
policy.  Specific documentation from the FI related to the variance(s) must be obtained and 
provided to Patient Financial Services and Revenue Management.   
EXPANDED ACCESS TO UNAPPROVED DEVICES AA-OR-012 
Page 5 of 10 
There are four categories of expanded access to unapproved devices (See Appendix A):   
1. Emergency use of investigational devices;  
2. Compassionate use of investigational devices;   
3. Treatment use of investigational devices; and  
4. Continued access to investigational devices.   
OLOL recognizes that occasionally the need will arise to use an investigational device in one of the 
capacities listed above.  The use of an investigational device under these circumstances is regulated by 
21 CFR Part 812, as well as the FDA’s “Guidance for the Emergency Use of Unapproved Medical 
Devices.”  
Emergency Use of Investigational Devices  
The FDA recognizes that emergencies arise where an unapproved device may offer the only possible 
life-saving alternative, but an IDE for the devices does not exist, or the proposed use is not approved 
under an existing IDE, or the physician or institution is not approved under the IDE.  Using its 
enforcement discretion, the FDA has not objected if a physician chooses to use an unapproved device in 
such an emergency, provided that the physician later justifies to the FDA that an emergency existed.   
Each of the following conditions must exist to justify emergency use of an unapproved medical device:   
1. The patient is in a life-threatening condition that needs immediate treatment;  
2. No generally acceptable alternative for treating the patient is available; and  
3. Because of the immediate need to use the device, there is no time to use existing procedures to 
get FDA approval for the use.   
The FDA expects the physician to determine whether these criteria have been met, to assess the potential 
for benefits from the unapproved use of the device, and to have substantial reason to believe that 
benefits will exist.  The physician may not conclude that an “emergency” exists in advance of the time 
when treatment may be needed based solely on the expectation that IDE approval procedures may 
require more time than is available.  Physicians should be aware that the FDA expects them to exercise 
reasonable foresight with respect to potential emergencies and to make appropriate arrangements under 
the IDE procedures far enough in advance to avoid creating a situation in which such arrangements are 
impracticable.   
The FDA expects physicians to follow as many subject protection procedures as possible.  These 
include:   
1. Obtaining an independent assessment by an uninvolved physician;  
2. Obtaining informed consent from the patient or a legal representative;  
3. Notifying the OLOL Office of Research;  AA-OR-012 
Page 6 of 10 
4. Notifying the Institutional Review Board (IRB); and  
5. Obtaining authorization from the IDE holder if an approved IDE for the device exists.   
After the emergency use occurs, the treating physician is responsible for ensuring that certain follow-up 
procedures occur.  If an IDE exists for the device, the physician should provide the IDE sponsor with 
sufficient patient follow-up information to allow the sponsor to comply with the reporting requirements 
of the IDE regulation.  If no IDE exists, the physician should submit a follow-up report on the use of the 
device to the FDA.  This report should contain a summary of the conditions constituting the emergency, 
patient protection measures that were followed, and patient outcome information.   
Compassionate Use of Investigational Devices Intended for Serious Diseases 
Unlike emergency use of an unapproved device, prior FDA approval is needed before compassionate 
use occurs.  A physician intending to use an investigational device under the compassionate use rules 
must work with the IDE holder/sponsor to obtain this approval.  The physician must provide the 
following information:   
1. A description of the patient’s condition and the circumstances necessitating treatment;  
2. A discussion of why alternative therapies are unsatisfactory and why the probable risk of 
using the investigational device is no greater than the probable risk from the disease or 
condition;  
3. An identification of any deviations in the approved clinical protocol that may be needed in 
order to treat the patient; and  
4. The patient protection measures that will be followed (as described in the previous section 
“Emergency Use of Unapproved Medical Devices”).   
If the FDA approves this use of the investigational device, the attending physician should devise an 
appropriate schedule for monitoring the patient, taking into consideration the investigational nature of 
the device and the specific needs of the patient.  The patient should be monitored to detect any possible 
problems arising from the use of the device.  The IDE holder/sponsor must submit this information to 
the FDA.   
If any problems occurred as a result of device use, these should be reported as soon as possible to both 
the FDA through the sponsor, and to OLOL’s designated IRB.   
Treatment Use of Investigational Devices 
These procedures are intended to facilitate the availability of promising new therapeutic and diagnostic 
devices to desperately ill patients as early in the device development process as possible (i.e., before 
general marketing begins, and to obtain additional data on the device’s safety and effectiveness).  These 
procedures apply to patients with serious or immediately life-threatening diseases or conditions for 
which no comparable or satisfactory alternative device exists.   
Treatment use of an investigational device will be considered when:   AA-OR-012 
Page 7 of 10 
1. The device is intended to treat or diagnose a serious or immediately life-threatening disease 
or condition;  
2. There is no comparable or satisfactory alternative device available to treat or diagnose the 
disease or condition in the intended patient population;  
3. The device is under investigation in a controlled clinical trial for the same use under an 
approved IDE, or all clinical trials have been completed; and  
4. The sponsor of the controlled clinical trial is pursuing marketing approval/clearance of the 
investigational device with due diligence.   
The sponsor is responsible for submitting the application for treatment use to the FDA.   
A licensed practitioner who receives an investigational device for treatment use under a treatment IDE is 
an “investigator” under the IDE and is responsible for meeting all applicable investigator responsibilities 
under 21CFR Parts 50, 56 and 812.   
Continued Access to Investigational Devices 
The sponsor of a clinical investigation is permitted to continue to enroll subjects while a marketing 
application is being prepared by the sponsor and/or reviewed by the agency if there is:   
1. A public health need for the device; or  
2. Preliminary evidence that the device is likely to be effective and no significant safety concerns 
have been identified for the proposed indication.   
The continued enrollment of subjects in an investigation while a marketing application is being prepared 
by the sponsor and/or reviewed by the FDA is known as an “extended investigation.”  Extended 
investigations permit patients and/or physicians continued access to the devices while also allowing the 
collection of additional safety and effectiveness data to support the marketing application or to address 
new questions regarding the investigational device.   
The sponsor is responsible for submitting the request for an extended investigation to the FDA.   
REFERENCES 
US Department of Health and Human Services (2013).  Code of Federal Regulations: 21 CFR Part 50, 
Protection of Human Subjects.  Available from: 
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=50  
US Department of Health and Human Services (2013).  Code of Federal Regulations: 21 CFR Part 54, 
Financial Disclosure by Clinical Investigators. 
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=54  
US Department of Health and Human Services (2011).  Code of Federal Regulations: 21 CFR Part 56, 
Institutional Review Boards.  Available from: 
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=56   AA-OR-012 
Page 8 of 10 
US Department of Health and Human Services (2013).  Code of Federal Regulations: 21 CFR Part 312, 
Investigational New Drug Application.  Available from:  
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=312  
US Department of Health and Human Services (2013).  Code of Federal Regulations: 21 CFR Part 812, 
Investigational Device Exemptions.  Available from:   
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfCFR/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=812  
US Department of Health and Human Services (2014).  Guidance on IDE Policies and Procedures: 50 
FR 42866. Available from: 
http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/ucm080202.h
tm AA-OR-012 
Page 9 of 10 
Expanded Access Mechanisms for Unapproved Devices (Appendix A)  
Expanded 
Access 
Mechanism  
Regulatory 
Authority 
Criteria for Use  When 
Can It 
Be 
Used? 
Number of 
Patients to be 
Treated  
FDA 
Approval 
Needed? 
How is FDA Approval Obtained?  Patient Protection 
Measures 
Emergency 
Use 
"Guidance for 
the Emergency 
Use of 
Unapproved 
Medical 
Devices" 
50 FR 42866 
21 CFR 
812.35(a)  
1. Life-threatening 
condition‡;  
2. No alternative; 
and 
3. No time to 
obtain 
FDA approval.  
Before 
or after 
initiation     
of 
clinical 
trial 
 
Limited to one 
patient 
No; 
submit 
report to 
FDA 
following 
device 
use  
Not applicable 1. Independent 
assessment by 
uninvolved doctor; 
2. IRB chairperson's 
concurrence; 
3. Institutional 
clearance; and 
4. Informed consent  
Compassio
nate Use 
21 CFR 
812.35(a)  
1. Serious 
disease or 
condition; and 
2. No alternative.  
During 
clinical   
trial  
Individual 
patient or 
small groups 
of patients  
Yes IDE supplement with: 
1. Explanation of circumstances constituting 
need for the device; 
2. Reasons alternatives not acceptable; 
3. Deviations from protocol, if any; and 
4. Patient protection measures.  
1. Independent 
assessment by 
uninvolved doctor; 
2. IRB chairperson's 
concurrence; 
3. Institutional 
clearance; and 
4. Informed consent.  
Treatment 
IDE 
21 CFR 812.36  1. Life-threatening 
or serious 
disease; 
2. No alternative; 
3. Controlled 
clinical trial; and 
4. Sponsor 
pursuing 
marketing 
During 
clinical  
trial  
Wide access; 
depends on 
patient/ 
physician need 
 
Yes Treatment IDE supplement with: 
1. Intended Use, protocol, and patient 
selection criteria; 
2. Rationale for treatment use; 
3. Methods used to evaluate device use and 
minimize risks; 
4. Monitoring plan; 
5. Summary of S&E data 
6. Instructions for use and device labeling; 
1. IRB approval and 
2. Informed consent.  AA-OR-012 
Page 10 of 10 
approval.  7. Commitment to patient protection; 
8. Investigator agreement; and 
9. Price, if will be sold.  
Continued 
Access 
"Continued 
Access to 
Investigational 
Devices During 
PMA 
Preparation 
and Review" 
 
ODE Blue Book 
IDE 
Memorandum 
#D96-1  
1. Public health 
need; or  
2. Preliminary 
evidence that 
device will be 
effective and  
no significant 
safety concerns.  
After      
end of 
clinical  
trial 
Same rate of 
enrollment as 
study  
Yes IDE supplement with: 
1. Justification for extended study; 
2. Summary of S & E data and risks posed by 
the device; 
3. Proposed enrollment rate; 
4. Clinical protocol; and 
5. Progress towards marketing approval.  
1. IRB approval and 
2. Informed consent.  
 
 