AA-OR-016 
Page 1 of 5 
POLICY   
The Office of Research is committed to establish effective processes to ensure that all services for a study 
are billed properly. It is the responsibility of the investigators and the Office of Research staff to ensure 
that billing for all clinical research studies occurs only as appropriate and in compliance with relevant 
laws, regulations and contractual obligations. .  
PURPOSE 
The purpose of the policy is to ensure that any research-related billing is coded and charged based on 
actual services rendered; allowable by regulations governing medical billing practices; and consistent with 
the informed consent signed by the research subject.  
DEFINITIONS 
Category A Device: Experimental device where the underlying questions of safety and effectiveness of 
the device have not been resolved. 
(https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coverage/IDE/Downloads/MM8921.pdf) 
Category B Device: Non-experimental/investigational device where the underlying questions of safety 
and effectiveness of the device have been resolved. 
(https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coverage/IDE/Downloads/MM8921.pdf)  
Clinical Research: Research that either directly involves a particular person or group of people or uses 
materials from humans, such as blood, tissues or other samples   that can be linked to a particular living 
person (https://www.nichd.nih.gov/health/clinicalresearch/Pages/index.aspx) 
Clinical Trial: A research study in which one or more human subjects are prospectively assigned to one 
or more interventions (which may include placebo or other control) to evaluate the effects of those 
interventions on health-related biomedical or behavioral outcomes (https://grants.nih.gov/policy/clinical-
trials/definition.htm) 
Human Subject: Is defined 45 CFR 46.102 as a living individual about whom an investigator (whether 
professional or student) conducting research obtains (https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-
policy/regulations/45-cfr-46/index.html) 
1) Data through intervention with the individual or 
2) Identifiable private information.  
Investigational Device Exemption (IDE): An IDE allows the investigational device to be used in a 
clinical study in order to collect safety and effectiveness data required to support a Pre-market Approval 
(PMA) application or a Pre-market Notification [510(k)] submission to FDA. Clinical studies are most 
often conducted to support a PMA. All clinical evaluations of investigational devices, unless exempt, 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Academic Affairs Section: Office of Research 
Title: Research Billing Compliance  
Policy Reference #: AA/OR/016 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 12, 2012 Last Review Date: April 21, 2018 
Last Revision Date: April 21, 2018 AA-OR-016 
Page 2 of 5 
must have an approved IDE before the study is initiated. 
Investigational New Drugs (IND)/ Investigational Biologics: A new drug or biologic that is used in a 
clinical investigation. The term investigational biologic also includes a biological product that is used in 
vitro for diagnostic purposes. 
Local Coverage Determination (LCD): Specific payment decisions made by a regional Medicare 
Administrative Contractor (MAC) for their assigned states or a region of the country. Approval from the 
local MAC is required to bill for services related to the use of Category B devices.  
Medicare Advantage: A program in which individuals who are eligible for Medicare elect to receive 
Medicare benefits through a plan issued by a private insurance company rather than through Medicare 
Part A and Medicare Part B. It is also known as Medicare Part C and Medicare + Choice. 
Medicare Administrative Contractor (MAC): A private company that has a contract with Medicare to 
process claims submitted for services under Medicare Parts A and B (for example, bills from hospitals). 
Formerly these functions were performed by Medicare Fiscal Intermediaries and Medicare Carriers. 
Medicare Costs Analysis (MCA): A process of determining and documenting what procedures, items 
and tests in a protocol are standard of care or strictly related to research. Such an analysis, when 
completed prior to the study start and formally documented, can provide a more accurate assessment of 
study costs for budgeting purposes; avoid submission of incorrect claims (protecting an institution from 
violations of the False Claims Act); identify non-covered study costs; and assist in the accurate coding of 
covered charges on billing claims.  
National Clinical Trial (NCT) Number: A unique identification code given to each clinical study 
registered on Clinicaltrials.gov.  
National Coverage Determination (NCD): A decision issued by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services to allow Medicare to cover the routine costs of qualifying clinical trials, as well as reasonable 
and necessary items and services used to diagnose and treat complications arising from participation in 
the clinical trial. The National Coverage Determination related to clinical trials can be found in Section 
310 of the Medicare National Coverage Determination Manual 
(http://www.cms.gov/manuals/downloads/ncd103c1_Part4.pdf). 
Protocol: A study plan on which a particular clinical trial is based. The plan is carefully designed to 
safeguard the health of the participants as well as to answer specific research questions. A protocol 
describes what types of people may participate in the trial; the schedule of tests, procedures, medications, 
and dosages; and the length of the study. 
 
Standard of Care: Treatment regimen or medical management based on generally accepted principles of 
medical care. 
 
Determination of Party Responsible for Payment of Procedures, Items or Tests 
A. General Rules AA-OR-016 
Page 3 of 5 
Medicare covers routine costs of qualifying clinical trials as well as the reasonable and necessary 
items and services used to diagnose and treat complications arising from participation in all 
clinical trials. The NCD related to clinical trials and found in Section 310 of the Medicare 
National Coverage Determination Manual outlines the requirements for Medicare coverage of 
routine costs and the qualification process for clinical trials (https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-
and-Guidance/Guidance/Manuals/downloads/ncd103c1_Part4.pdf) 
 
A Medicare Costs Analysis (MCA) is required for all clinical research trials unless it is determined 
that the trial is exempt. The purpose of the MCA is to determine which procedures, items or tests 
in a protocol are standard of care or strictly research related.  
 
Clinical procedures, items or tests that are purely experimental (i.e., not considered medically 
necessary, safe or effective) cannot be billed to insurance or to the patient; rather, they are to be 
paid by the sponsor of the clinical trial.  
 
Clinical trial agreements should identify or describe the procedures, items or tests of the Study 
which are to be reimbursed by the sponsor.  
 
Neither the patient nor the third party payer may be billed for procedures, items or tests  
a) that are not standard of care,  
b) that the sponsor has indicated it will pay for,  
c) that are promised as free of charge in the patient’s informed consent document, or 
d) that are drugs/devices provided free of charge by the sponsor.  
 
Procedures, items or tests furnished to participants in a clinical trial that represent standard of care 
treatment are generally billable to third party insurers if the sponsor does not agree to reimburse 
Our Lady of the Lake for those procedures, items or tests. 
 
The clinical trial agreement should address payment for research-related injuries.  
 
B. Medicare (Other than Device Trials) 
Medicare may only be billed for costs permitted under the National Coverage Determination 
(NCD).  
 
When a research subject is enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan such as MVP Gold or Medicare 
Blue Choice, the outpatient services that are related to the clinical trial should be submitted to the 
Medicare Part A/Part B Medicare Administrative Contractor (“MAC”), National Government 
Services (NGS). Outpatient services that are unrelated to the clinical trial should be submitted to 
the Medicare Advantage plan.  
 
Claims submitted to Medicare pursuant to the NCD should contain the appropriate coding 
modifiers, diagnosis code and NCT# related to clinical trial claims. The determination that an item 
or service is reasonable and necessary is a medical decision that must be made by the Principal 
Investigator and must be documented in the patient’s medical chart.  
 AA-OR-016 
Page 4 of 5 
C. Medicare (Device Trials) 
Regarding investigational devices, Medicare may be billed for certain costs associated with non-
experimental/non-investigational device trials if the device is used in an FDA-approved clinical 
trial and its application is reasonable and medically necessary. Claims submitted to Medicare for 
covered devices must include information about the device under study, as well as applicable 
coding modifiers, diagnosis code and NCT#. Participants cannot be enrolled in a device trial until 
a MAC provides a price coverage determination. 
 
FDA Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) approvals classify devices as either Category A or 
Category B devices. The classification of the device affects the ability to bill Medicare. Services 
related to the use of a non-covered device may not be billed to Medicare.  
 
i. Category A devices may not be billed to Medicare, though routine costs associated with 
the device may be billable if the MAC determines the device is used in the trial for the 
diagnosis, monitoring and treatment of an immediately life-threatening disease or 
condition.  
 
ii. Category B devices may be billed to Medicare if those devices are considered reasonable 
and necessary and if all other applicable Medicare coverage requirements are met, 
including approval of the MAC. The process for obtaining approval from the MAC is to 
submit the following information: study name, general device information (e.g. IDE 
number), protocol information (e.g. description of the device), practitioner name and 
facilities where the service will be provided.   
 
 
 
PROCEDURE 
1. The Office of Research will review research projects in terms of reimbursement by the sponsor and by 
third parties (Medicare, etc.).  Evaluation will be done by conducting a Medicare Cost Analysis 
(MCA) either by the Office of Research or by a contracted third party vendor. The MCA will 
determine the following: 
a. Whether the trial is considered a qualifying or non-qualifying trial under the Medicare NCD. 
b. For device trials, the category of device and the IDE number 
c. Separation of allowable costs 
 
2. To plan for correct billing for clinical trials, the Office of Research will work with Revenue 
Management, Health Information Management, Patient Financial Services and Our Lady of the Lake 
Physician Group Staff to do the following: 
 
a. Request the addition of necessary items to the charge master to facilitate billing and provide 
transparency.  
b. Request a research study cost center for the management of research-related revenue and 
expenses. 
c. Utilize a study specific research guarantor account to manage research-related charges. AA-OR-016 
Page 5 of 5 
d. Identification of specific items to be billed to third party payers and to be invoiced to the sponsor. 
e. Provide the appropriate coding modifiers, diagnosis code and NCT# to be included on the claims 
of research subjects as it relates to their participation in a clinical trial.   
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2015).  
 Medicare coverage related to investigational device exemption (IDE) studies. Available from: 
 https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coverage/IDE/ 
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2014). 
Mandatory reporting of an eight digit clinical trial number on claims: CR8401. Available from: 
http://www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-Education/Medicare-Learning-Network-
MLN/MLNMattersArticles/downloads/MM8401.pdf 
US Department of Health and Human Services. (2014). Medical devices:  Guidance on IDE policies and 
procedures.  Available from: 
http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/ucm080
202.htm 
US Department of Health and Human Services. (n.d.).  Welcome to the Medicare coverage database. 
Available from: http://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/overview-and-quick-
search.aspx?ncd_id=310.1&ncd_version=2&basket=ncd:310.1:2:Routine+Costs+in+Clinical+Tria
ls.  
National Coverage Determination (NCD) for Routine Costs in Clinical Trials (310.1). (2007) Available 
from: https://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/details/ncd-
details.aspx?NCDId=1&ncdver=2&bc=BAABAAAAAAAA&. 
 
 