AA-OR-006 
Page 1 of 6 
 
PURPOSE: The purpose of this policy is to establish the conditions under which protected health 
information (PHI) may be used or disclosed for human subjects research under the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule. 
 
SCOPE: This policy applies to investigators, key personnel, and research staff. 
 
POLICY 
All research conducted at OLOL will comply with the HIPAA regulations, as required by 45 CFR 
164 Subpart E (Privacy of Individually Identifiable Health Information), to assure protection of 
participants’ PHI. 
 
PROCEDURE 
In the course of conducting research, investigators may obtain, create, access, use, and/or disclose 
individually identifiable health information. Under the Privacy Rule, investigators are permitted to 
use and disclose PHI for research with individual authorization, or without individual 
authorization, under limited circumstances set forth in and defined in this policy. 
 
1. Use of Health Information with Subject Authorization 
An investigator or designee must obtain the written authorization from the research subject or 
legally authorized representative (LAR) to use and/or disclose PHI for research purposes, 
except as otherwise allowed by this policy. The authorization may be separate from or may be 
combined with the informed consent document to participate in research.  The actual uses and 
disclosures made by the research personnel must be consistent to what is stated in the 
authorization that is signed by the subject or LAR.  
 
Core Elements required in a HIPAA Consent: A valid HIPAA authorization must contain all 
of the following elements, as required by 45 CFR 164.508(c)(1): 
1. A description of the information to be used or disclosed in a specific and meaningful 
manner; 
2. The name or other specific identification of the person(s), or class of persons, authorized to 
make the requested use or disclosure; 
3. The name(s) or other specific identification of the person(s), or class of persons, who may 
use the PHI or to whom the covered entity may make the requested disclosure; 
4. Description of each purpose of the requested use or disclosure. This element must be study 
specific, not for future unspecified research. 
5. An expiration date, an expiration event, or a statement that the authorization does not 
expire as it relates to the individual or the purpose of the use or disclosure; and 
6. Signature of the individual (or LAR) and date. If the authorization is signed by a personal 
representative of the individual, include a description of such representative’s authority to 
act for the individual. 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Academic Affairs Section: Office of Research 
Title: HIPAA and Research 
Policy Reference #: AA/OR/006 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 1, 2012 Last Review Date: February 19, 2024 
Last Revision Date: February 22, 2018  AA-OR-006 
Page 2 of 6 
 
In addition to the core elements, the HIPAA authorization must contain the following 
statements: 
1. A statement of the individual’s right to revoke the authorization in writing and the 
exceptions to the right to revoke, together with a description of how the individual may 
revoke the authorization; 
2. A notice of the covered entity's ability or inability to condition treatment, payment, 
enrollment, or eligibility for benefits on the Authorization and, if applicable, consequences 
of refusing to sign the authorization; and 
3. A statement that the information used or disclosed following or according to the 
authorization may be subject to re-disclosure by the recipient and no longer be protected 
by the Privacy Rule. 
 
The authorization must be written in lay language easily understood by the research 
participant. Any research protocol which involves more than minimal risk treatment for a 
participant to be enrolled will require an authorization. Refusal to sign an authorization will 
exclude the participant from the study.  The subject must be provided with a copy of the signed 
authorization, unless otherwise required by the study’s IRB of record. 
 
2. Use of Health Information without Subject Authorization or with Alteration of 
Authorization 
The Privacy Rule allows researchers to use and/or disclose PHI without written authorization 
or with an alteration of authorization from the subject or LAR under the four circumstances 
described below. 
a. Use or Disclosure of PHI with Waiver or Alteration of Authorization 
Investigators may obtain approval from the study’s IRB of record (the “IRB”) for a 
complete or partial waiver or an alteration of the HIPAA authorization. A complete 
waiver occurs when the IRB determines that no authorization is required for a 
researcher to use and/or disclose PHI for a particular research study. A partial 
waiver of authorization occurs when the IRB determines that an authorization is not 
needed for some research activities associated with a research protocol. An 
alteration of the HIPAA authorization requirement occurs when the IRB approves a 
request to alter one or more of the required HIPAA elements. For example, an 
alteration may be granted permitting verbal authorization instead of written 
authorization. 
 
b. Preparatory to Research  
The preparatory to research provision permits the investigator to use and/or 
disclose PHI for purposes preparatory to research, such as the development of 
research questions; the determination of study feasibility (in terms of the available 
number and eligibility of potential study participants); the development of eligibility 
(inclusion and exclusion) criteria; and the determination of eligibility for study 
participation of individual potential participants. Activities considered preparatory 
to research do not require an individual’s authorization, a waiver of authorization, 
or a data use agreement. 
 AA-OR-006 
Page 3 of 6 
A researcher who uses or discloses PHI for activities involved in preparing for 
research must make an oral or written statement that (1) the PHI use or disclosure 
is solely to review PHI as necessary to prepare a research protocol or for similar 
purposes preparatory to research, (2) the PHI will not be removed from Our Lady of 
the Lake during a preparatory to research activity, and (3) the PHI for which use or 
access is requested is necessary for the research.  Disclosure of PHI for activities 
preparatory to research must be in accordance with Compliance Policy COR-301 
entitled Disclosures of Protected Health Information to Other Entities. 
 
c. Research on Protected Health Information of Decedents: To use or disclose PHI 
of the deceased for research, investigators are not required to obtain HIPAA 
authorization from the personal representative or LAR, a waiver or an alteration of 
the authorization, or a DUA. Investigators must certify in writing or orally that the 
use and/or disclosure of the information is solely for research on the health 
information of decedents, and the PHI is necessary for the research purposes. If 
requested, the investigators must provide to OLOL documentation of the deaths of 
the individuals whose PHI is requested. 
 
d. Disclosing Data Using a Limited Data Set: Individual PHI may be disclosed by an 
OLOL investigator or OLOL data custodian to a researcher who has no relationship 
with the subject by developing a Limited Data Set and executing a Data Use 
Agreement (AA-OR-014), which must be reviewed by the Office of Research and 
approved by Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC). 
 
Use of PHI Tracking of Access for Research: The Privacy Rule requires record-keeping to track 
disclosure (but not use) of any identifiable information made without an authorization. Disclosure 
means the release, transfer, access to, or divulging of information in any manner to someone 
outside the entity holding the information.  Documentation must be maintained by the Principal 
Investigator whenever PHI is disclosed for the following purposes: 
• Under an IRB approved waiver of authorization 
• For purposes preparatory to research 
• For decedents’ information 
 
The following items must be tracked and made available to the subject upon request for a 
minimum of 6 years after the disclosure of PHI: 
• Date of the disclosure; 
• Name of person/entity or the study involved in receiving the PHI; 
• Description of what PHI was disclosed; 
• Brief statement regarding the purpose of the disclosure 
 
De-identified Health Information:  Use or disclosure of de-identified data that meets the de-
identification standard and implementation specifications in 45 CFR 164.514(a)-(b) is not subject 
to the HIPAA Privacy Rule requirements. De-identified data is generally defined under the Privacy 
Rule as information which does not identify the individual and where there is no reasonable basis 
to believe the individual can be identified from the information. 
 
PHI may be de-identified using one of the following two methods: AA-OR-006 
Page 4 of 6 
• Method 1: Health information is de-identified if a set of specific identifiers is deleted 
before the information is released by the covered entity to the researcher. These identifiers 
include the following: 
1. Names 
2. Address (including all geographic subdivisions smaller than a state, including street 
address, city, county, precinct, zip code, and their equivalent geo-codes, except for 
the initial three digits of most zip codes) 
3. All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual, 
including birth date, admission date, discharge date, and date of death. All ages over 
89 and all elements of dates (including year) indicative of age over 89, except that 
ages over 89 may be aggregated into a single category of “age 90 or older” 
4. Telephone number 
5. Fax number 
6. E-mail address 
7. Social security number 
8. Medical record number 
9. Health plan beneficiary number 
10. Account number 
11. Certificate/license number 
12. Vehicle serial number 
13.  Universal Resource Locators (URLs) 
14. Device Identifiers and serial numbers 
15. Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers 
16. Biometric indicators such as fingerprints or voiceprints 
17. Full-face photographic images and any comparable images 
18. Any other uniquely identifying number, characteristic, or code. 
 
In addition, the covered entity or the researcher must not have reasonable basis to believe 
the information could be used alone, or in combination with other information, to identify 
an individual. 
 
• Method 2: The second method of de-identifying under HIPAA allows a person with 
appropriate knowledge and experience to apply generally acceptable statistical and 
scientific principles and methods for rendering information not individually identifiable to 
make and document a determination that there is a very small risk the information could 
be used by others to identify a subject from the information.  
 
 
Additional Disclosures: The Privacy Rule permits, but does not require, the disclosure of PHI for 
specified public policy purposes, such as: to report communicable diseases, child abuse or neglect; 
to report adverse events involving investigational articles; or for tracking individuals for 
notification of recall, repair or replacement of investigational or approved devices. With a few 
exceptions, the Hospital or investigator may choose to limit its right to disclose information 
created for a research study which includes treatment to purposes narrower than those permitted 
by the rule, in accordance with the individual or institution’s professional standards. 
 
REFERENCES AA-OR-006 
Page 5 of 6 
Centers for Disease Control (2013).  HIPAA privacy rule and public health: Special topics, research. 
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/special/research/  
US Department of Health and Human Services. HIPAA Privacy Rule: Information for Researchers. 
https://privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov/ 
US Department of Health and Human Services. (2009). Title 45 Code of Federal Regulations, part 
160 and 164.  Available from: 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/45cfr46.html  
U.S. Government Printing Office (2014). Electronic code of Federal regulations: Subpart E—Privacy of 
individually identifiable health information. Available from: 
http://ecfr.gpoaccess.gov/cgi/t/text/text-
idx?c=ecfr&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title45/45cfr164_main_02.tpl AA-OR-006 
Page 6 of 6 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Review Preparatory to Research 
 
Date: PI Name: 
Project Title: 
Reviews Preparatory to Research – Complete this section at conceptualization of project when designing a research study, 
preparing a research protocol, or assessing the feasibility of conducting a study before reviewing patient charts. This form is necessary if 
the investigator is accessing PHI. If the feasibility can be determined without the investigator accessing PHI (i.e. #of patients and # of 
patients with a specific diagnosis) this form is not necessary. Submit to the Office of Research. 
Check all that apply. 
1. Is use or disclosure being sought solely to review protected health information as necessary to prepare a research protocol or for similar 
purposes preparatory to research?     Yes       No 
2. Will protected health information (patient-identifiable) be removed from Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center by the 
researcher during the review?      Yes      No 
3. Is the protected health information for which use or access is being sought necessary for the research purposes?  Yes      No 
 
 Name   Account numbers 
 Geographical information smaller than sate ( i.e.            
city, zip code) 
 Certificate or license numbers 
 Elements of dates including birth date, admission date, 
date of death, and all ages ≥ 89 years of age 
 Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers including license 
plate 
 Telephone numbers  Device identifiers and serial numbers 
 Fax numbers  Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs) 
 Electronic mail address  Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers 
 Social Security Number  Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints  
 Medical record numbers  Full face photographic images and comparable images  
 Health plan beneficiary numbers   Any other unique identifying number, characteristic or 
code  
4. Identify the source of the data. 
5. Explain the purpose of the data collection or database created. 
6. Describe who will have access to the information or database. 
7. Describe where the identifiers (master subject key that links patients to the de-identified data) will be kept and the details of the secure 
location.  
8. Explain the plan to destroy the identifiers (the master subject key) at the earliest opportunity consistent with the conduct of the research 
once data entry and analyses are completed. Please note any health or research justification for retaining the identifiers as well as 
explanation if retention is required by law.  
 
Sign: Date:  
  