AA-OR-22 
Page 1 of 8 
 
PURPOSE: Establish the process for dealing administratively with allegations of research misconduct 
at Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL). This policy complies with the Public Health Service (PHS) Polices on 
Research Misconduct, 42 CFR Part 93  and outlines the procedures to be followed in reporting, 
assessing, inquiring into, and investigating allegations of research misconduct.  
 
RESPONSIBILITY: This policy applies to all individuals who are involved in the conduct research at 
OLOL, whether the research is funded or unfunded. This document applies to allegations of research 
misconduct (fabrication, falsification, or plagiarism) in proposing, performing, or reviewing research, or 
in reporting research results for an individual who, at the time of the alleged research misconduct, was 
employed by, was an agent of, or was affiliated by contract or agreement with OLOL. This includes 
scientists, trainees, technicians, students, fellows, residents, and guest researchers. OLOL has an 
obligation to deal promptly with allegations or evidence of research misconduct.  
 
This statement of policy and procedures does not apply to authorship or collaboration disputes and 
applies only to allegations of research misconduct that occurred within six years of the date the 
institution or HHS received the allegation, subject to the subsequent use, health or safety of the public, 
and grandfather exceptions in 42 CFR § 93.105(b). 
 
This statement of policy and procedures does not apply to allegations or complaints that do not fall 
within the definition of research set forth below or to matters that fall exclusively under other policies, 
including violations of conflict of interest policies or violations of Institutional Review Boards.  
 
DEFINITIONS:   
 
Allegation means a disclosure of possible research misconduct through any means of communication 
directly to a Deciding Official.  
 
Complainant means a person who in good faith makes an allegation of research misconduct. 
 
Deciding Official under this policy the Deciding Official includes the Chief Academic Officer or in the 
event the Chief Academic Officer is directly involved in the research, the Chief Executive Officer. . 
 
Evidence means any document or data in any medium (including but not limited to electronic and digital 
files), tangible item, or testimony offered or obtained during a research misconduct proceeding that 
tends to prove or disprove the existence of alleged fact.  
 
Fabrication is making up data or results and recording or reporting them. 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Academic Affairs Section: Office of Research 
Title: Research Misconduct 
Policy Reference #: AA/OR/023 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: June 2015 Last Review Date: February 22, 2018 
Last Revision Date: February 22, 2018 AA-OR-22 
Page 2 of 8 
Falsification is manipulating research materials, equipment, or processes, or changing or omitting data 
or results such that the research is not accurately represented in research records or reports. 
 
Inquiry means information-gathering and preliminary fact-finding to determine whether an allegation or 
apparent instance of scientific misconduct warrants an investigation.  
 
Investigation means the formal development of a factual record and the examination of that record 
leading to a decision not to make a finding of research misconduct or to a recommendation for a finding 
of research misconduct which may include a recommendation for other appropriate actions, including 
administrative actions. 
 
Office of Research Integrity or ORI means the office to which the HHS Secretary has delegated 
responsibility for addressing research integrity and misconduct issues related to PHS supported 
activities. 
 
Plagiarism is the appropriation of another person’s ideas, processes, results, or words without giving 
appropriate credit.  
 
Public Health Service or PHS means the unit within the Department of Health and Human Services that 
includes the Office of Public Health and Science and the following Operating Divisions: Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Food and Drug Administration, Health Resources and Services 
Administration, Indian Health Service, National Institutes of Health, and the Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health Services Administration, and the offices of the Regional Health Administrators. 
 
PHS support means PHS funding, or applications or proposals for biomedical or behavioral research, 
biomedical or behavioral research training, or activities related to that research or training, that may be 
provided through: Funding for PHS intramural research; PHS grants, cooperative agreements, or 
contracts or subgrants or subcontracts under those PHS funding instruments; or salary or other payments 
under PHS grants, cooperative agreements or contracts. 
 
Research record means any data, document, computer file, computer diskette or thumb drive, or any 
other written or non-written account or object that reasonably may be expected to provide evidence or 
information regarding the proposed, conducted, or reported research that constitutes the subject of an 
allegation of scientific misconduct. A research record includes, but is not limited to, grant or contract 
applications, whether funded or unfunded; grant or contract progress and other reports; laboratory 
notebooks; notes; correspondence; videos; photographs; X-ray film; slides; biological materials; 
computer files and printouts; manuscripts and publications; equipment use logs; laboratory procurement 
records; animal facility records; human and animal subject protocols; consent forms; medical charts; and 
patient research files. 
 
 
Research Misconduct or Misconduct in Research means fabrication, falsification, plagiarism, or other 
practices that seriously deviate from those that are commonly accepted within the scientific community AA-OR-22 
Page 3 of 8 
for proposing, conducting, or reporting research. It does not include honest error or honest differences in 
interpretations or judgments of data. Research misconduct includes the destruction of, absence of, or 
accused person’s failure to provide research records accurately documenting the questioned research. 
 
Respondent means the person against whom an allegation of research misconduct is directed or who is 
the subject of a research misconduct proceeding. 
 
POLICY:  
Institutional Policy 
1. OLOL Institutional members who are involved in research and/or PHS funding shall receive 
an Endorsement Letter which will include a copy of the Research Misconduct Policy to be 
reviewed by the investigator prior to beginning a study. It is the Principle Investigator’s 
responsibility to educate other study staff on the Research Misconduct Policy. 
2. Each of the following must be met to support a finding of research misconduct: 
a. There has been a significant departure from the accepted practices of the scientific 
community. 
b. Misconduct was committed intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly. 
c. The allegation has been proven by a preponderance of the evidence. 
3. All inquiries and investigations will be based on the presumption of innocence until proven 
otherwise. 
4. OLOL shall take all reasonable steps to ensure an impartial and unbiased research  
       misconduct proceeding to the maximum extent practicable.  
5. Selection of those conducting the inquiry or investigation will be based on the scientific 
expertise that is pertinent to the matter and, prior to selection, selection shall be screened for 
any unresolved personal, professional, or financial conflicts of interest with the respondent, 
complainant, potential witnesses, or others involved in the matter.  
6. Any such conflict in which a reasonable person would consider to demonstrate potential bias 
shall disqualify the individual from participation in the proceedings. 
7. Those who bring allegations in good faith will be protected from retaliation or recrimination.  
See System policy, Comp 08 003 for Duty to Report and Non-Retaliation. 
8. The Office of Research will make all reasonable and practical efforts to protect or restore the 
reputation of persons alleged to have engaged in research misconduct, but against whom no 
findings are made.   
 
Confidentiality 
1. To the extent allowed by law, the identity of respondents and complainants will be 
maintained securely and confidentially and shall not disclose any identifying information, 
except to:  
a. Those who need to know in order to carry out a thorough, competent, objective and fair 
research misconduct proceeding. 
b. ORI as it conducts its review of the research misconduct proceeding and any subsequent 
proceedings in cases of PHS-funded research. 
2. To the extent allowed by law, any information obtained during the research misconduct  AA-OR-22 
Page 4 of 8 
proceeding that might identify the subjects of research shall be maintained securely and 
confidentially and shall not be disclosed, except to those who need to know in order to carry 
out the research misconduct proceeding.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Reporting and Assessing Allegations of Research Misconduct 
1. Allegations may be raised by anyone who believes that research misconduct has been 
committed. Allegations may be raised either orally or in writing.  
2. If the Office of Research is not the original recipient of the allegations, the individual who 
received the allegations shall immediately inform the Office of Research. 
3. The Office of Research shall inform the Deciding Official of all allegations of research 
misconduct. 
4. Allegations of research misconduct will be handled by the Deciding Official in consultation 
with the Office of Corporate Compliance and under the advisement of legal counsel when 
necessary. 
5. Promptly after receiving an allegation of research misconduct, the Deciding Official  shall 
assess the allegation to determine if:  
a. It meets the definition of research misconduct as specified in 42 CFR Section 93.103.  
b. It involves either the PHS supported research, applications for PHS research support, 
or research records as specified in 42 CFR Section 93.102. 
c. The allegation is sufficiently credible and specific so that potential evidence of 
research misconduct may be identified.  
6. The assessment should be concluded within a week, if possible. 
 
B. Inquiry into Allegations of Research Misconduct 
1. The inquiry should begin immediately after the Deciding Official determines that an inquiry 
should be undertaken. The purpose of the inquiry is to make a preliminary evaluation of the 
available evidence and the testimony of the complainant(s), the respondent(s), and key 
witnesses to determine whether there is sufficient evidence of possible research misconduct 
to warrant a full investigation. 
2. The Deciding Official will notify the respondent’s employer that an inquiry into research 
misconduct is being conducted. If the respondent is a student, resident physician, or other 
trainee and the misconduct involved their role as a trainee working on research, the Deciding 
official will notify the trainee’s program of the inquiry.   
3. If it is determined that an inquiry is warranted, the Deciding Official  shall:   
a. Make a good faith effort to notify in writing the presumed respondent. If the inquiry 
subsequently identifies additional respondents, the institution must notify them. 
b. To the extent possible the Deciding official will obtain custody of all the research 
records needed to conduct the proceeding and maintain in secure manner. 
c. Gather and review the evidence. 
d. Decide if an allegation warrants an investigation.  
e. Prepare a draft inquiry report.  
f. Provide the respondent a copy of the draft inquiry report, a copy of 42 CFR 93 (if the 
misconduct involves PHS), and a copy of this policy, and given a 10 day opportunity AA-OR-22 
Page 5 of 8 
to comment on the report. 
g. Provide the complainant(s) an opportunity to review any summaries of interviews 
with him/her and be given a chance to comment. 
4. The Deciding official will complete the inquiry within 60 calendar days of its initiation, 
unless the circumstances warrant a longer period. If the inquiry takes longer than 60 days to 
complete, the Deciding Official shall document in writing the reasons for the delay in the 
inquiry record.  
5. The inquiry report shall contain the following information:  
a. The name and position of the respondent(s). 
b. A description of the allegations of research misconduct. 
c. The PHS support involved, including, for example, grant numbers, grant applications, 
contracts, and publications listing PHS support. 
d. The basis for recommending that the alleged actions warrant an investigation. 
e. Any comments on the report by the respondent or the complainant. 
f. The names and titles of the members of the inquiry committee, a list of the research 
records reviewed, summaries of any interviews, and a statement as to whether any 
other actions should be taken if an investigation is not recommended. 
6. If the Deciding Official decides that an investigation is warranted, and the research in 
question is PHS funded, the Deciding Official will provide the Office of Research Integrity 
with the Deciding Official’s s decision and a copy of the final inquiry report within 30 days 
of the final decision.  
a. ORI does not need to be notified if the committee decides there is insufficient 
evidence to warrant an investigation. 
b. If PHS does not have funding jurisdiction, ORI does not need to be notified, 
regardless of the committee’s decision. 
c. If the respondent admits to misconduct during the inquiry, and the Deciding Official 
decides that no further investigation is warranted, ORI must be notified of this 
decision (provided PHS has funding jurisdiction) and why the institution believes that 
no further investigation is needed. If ORI agrees, the case shall be closed. 
7. If the Deciding Official decides that an investigation is not warranted, the Deciding Official 
shall secure and maintain for seven years sufficiently detailed documentation of the inquiry. 
8. If the inquiry results in a determination that a full investigation is warranted, the responsible 
party shall begin the investigation within 30 calendar days of that determination and, on or 
before the date on which the investigation begins, send the inquiry report and the written 
determination to the ORI (if the research is under PHS jurisdiction).     
 
C. Investigation 
1. The respondent must be notified in writing of the allegations before the investigation begins.  
Written notice must be provided of any new allegations within a reasonable time frame of 
deciding to pursue allegations not addressed during the inquiry or in the initial notice of the 
investigation. 
2. The Deciding Official shall appoint an Investigation Committee. The Investigation 
Committee should consist of individuals who do not have unresolved personal, professional, 
or financial conflicts of interest with those named in the investigation, and should include AA-OR-22 
Page 6 of 8 
individuals with the appropriate scientific expertise to evaluate the evidence and issues 
related to the allegation. The Investigation Committee shall obtain custody of and sequester 
all research records and evidence that were not previously sequestered during the inquiry. 
3. The Investigation Committee shall complete the investigation within 120 calendar days of the 
date on which it began, including conducting the investigation, preparing the report of 
findings, providing the draft report for comment, and sending the final report to ORI (if 
necessary).  If it becomes apparent that the Investigation Committee cannot complete the 
investigation within that period, the Investigation Committee shall promptly request an 
extension in writing from ORI if the investigation relates to research funded by PHS.  
4. In conducting all investigations, the Investigation Committee shall:  
a. Use diligent efforts to ensure that the investigation is thorough and sufficiently 
documented and includes examination of all research records and evidence relevant to 
reaching a decision on the merits of the allegations. 
b. Interview each respondent, complainant, and any other available person who has been 
reasonably identified as having information regarding any relevant aspects of the 
investigation, including witnesses identified by the respondent, and record or 
transcribe each interview, provide the recording or transcript to the interviewee for 
correction, and include the recording or transcript in the record of investigation.  
c. Pursue diligently all significant issues and leads discovered that are determined 
relevant to the investigation, including any evidence of additional instances of 
possible research misconduct, and continue the investigation to completion.  
d. Otherwise comply with the requirements for conducting an investigation as specified 
in 42 CFR Section 93.310. 
5. The Investigation Committee must prepare a written draft report of the investigation that: 
a. Describes and documents PHS support, if any. 
b. Describes the specific allegations of research misconduct considered in the 
investigation. 
c. Includes this policy and procedures document.  
d. Identifies and summarizes the research records and evidence reviewed, and identifies 
any evidence taken into custody but not reviewed. 
e. Includes a statement of findings for each allegation of research misconduct identified 
during the investigation.  
6. Each statement of findings must:  
a. Identify whether the research misconduct was falsification, fabrication, or plagiarism, 
and whether it was committed intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly.  
b. Summarize the facts and analysis that support the conclusion and consider the merits 
of any reasonable explanation by the respondent(s), including any effort by the 
respondent(s) to establish that he or she did not engage in research misconduct 
because of honest error or difference of opinion.  
c. Identify whether any publications need to be corrected or retracted. 
d. Identify the person(s) responsible for the misconduct. 
e. Identify the specific PHS support, if any.  
f. List any current support or known applications or proposals for support that the 
respondent(s) has pending. AA-OR-22 
Page 7 of 8 
7. The Investigation Committee must provide the respondent with a copy of the draft 
investigation report and supervised access to the evidence on which the report is based.  
Comments from respondent must be submitted within 30 days of the date on which the 
respondent received the draft investigational report. 
8. The Investigation Committee must provide the complainant a copy of the relevant portions of 
the report.  Comments from complainant must be submitted within 30 days of the date on 
which the complainant received the relevant portion. 
 
D. Findings 
1. The Investigation Committee shall prepare final institutional investigation report in writing 
and must address all components as specified 42 CFR Section 93.313.     
2.  The Investigation Committee shall maintain and provide to ORI upon request all relevant 
research records and records of the research misconduct proceeding, including results of all 
interviews and the transcripts or recordings of such interviews, if the investigation relates to 
research funded by PHS.   
a. The institution must give ORI the following for PHS-funded research: 
i. Investigation Report with all attachments 
ii. Final Institutional action 
iii. Findings 
iv. Institutional Administrative Actions 
3. The respondent(s) has 20 days after receiving the final determination on the case to appeal 
the decisions to the Deciding Official in writing. The Deciding Official will have 120 days to 
reach a decision on the appeal. 
a. If there is an appeal in a case involving PHS funding jurisdiction, the report on the 
investigation and the report of the outcome of the appeal shall be submitted to ORI 
within 120 days after the appeal is made by the respondent, unless the institution 
requests and receives an extension from ORI. 
4. Records will be maintained in a secure manner for 7 years after completion of the 
proceedings or the completion of any PHS proceeding involving the research misconduct 
allegation under subparts D and E, whichever is later. 
 
E. Other Considerations 
1. If the respondent leaves the institution at any time during the research misconduct 
proceedings, the proceedings shall continue.  
2. OLOL shall notify ORI immediately if there is any reason to believe that any of the 
following conditions exist: 
a. health or safety of the public is at risk, including an immediate need to protect human 
or animal subjects; 
b. HHS resources or interests are threatened; 
c. research activities should be suspended; 
d. there is a reasonable indication of violations of civil or criminal law; 
e. federal action is required to protect the interests of those involved in the research 
misconduct proceeding; AA-OR-22 
Page 8 of 8 
f. research misconduct proceeding may be made public prematurely, so that HHS may 
take appropriate steps to safeguard evidence and protect the rights of those involved; 
g. Research community or public should be informed. 
 
F. Disciplinary Action 
1. After the final decision on the case has been made, the Deciding Official  is responsible for 
determining whether law enforcement agencies, professional societies, professional licensing 
boards, editors of journals, collaborators of the respondent, or other relevant parties should be 
notified of the outcome of the case. 
2. Other disciplinary action may include: 
a. Requiring the respondent to complete Research Misconduct training through the CITI 
program prior to engaging in any future research. 
b. Suspending the research in which the respondent is currently participating. 
c. Barring the respondent from conducting or participating in research at OLOL. 
d. Withdrawing approval of funding or contracts. 
e. Notifying journals or other funding sources of the research misconduct determination.   
 
REFERENCE 
U.S. Government Publishing Office (Current as of May 26th 2015).  Part 93 Public Health Services 
Policies on Research Misconduct.  Retrieved from http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-
idx?tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title42/42cfr93_main_02.tpl 
 
U.S. Government Publishing Office (Current as of October 1st 2012). Part 689 Research Misconduct. 
Retrieved from 
https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?collectionCode=CFR&searchPath=Title+45%2FS
ubtitle+B%2FChapter+Vi%2FPart+689&granuleId=CFR-2012-title45-vol3-part689&packageId=CFR-
2012-title45-
vol3&oldPath=Title+45%2FSubtitle+B%2FChapter+Vi%2FPart+689&fromPageDetails=true&collapse
=false&ycord=2556 