POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Access 
Services/Business 
Office 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:    
Subject:  Accepting Payments by Telephone Section:    
Date of Origination:  January 2016 Supersedes: n/a 
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed:  Jan 23, 2018 
 
 Serial Code:    
 
PURPOSE: 
 
To define the process for accepting check or credit card payments over the phone for services 
received or scheduled services at OLOL; ensuring compliance with the Electronic Fund Transfer 
Act (EFTA); 15 U.S.C § 1693 et seq – implemented via Federal Reserve Regulation E – 12 CFR 
§ 1005.10(b).   
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
• Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA) regulates automated clearinghouse (ACH) systems 
and telephone billing payment plans. 
• Regulation E provides a basic framework that establishes the rights, liabilities, and 
responsibilities of participants in electronic fund transfer systems such as automated teller 
machine transfers, telephone bill payment services, point-of-sale (POS) terminal transfers 
in stores, and preauthorized transfers from or to a consumer’s account. 
• Electronic fund transfer (EFT) generally refers to a transaction initiated through an 
electronic terminal, telephone, computer, or magnetic tape that instructs a financial 
institution either to credit or to debit a consumer’s asset account. 
 
POLICY: 
 
Patient payments may be accepted over the telephone.  Such payments include credit, debit and 
check-by-phone transactions.  The facility will comply with provisions of the EFTA when 
accepting these payments over the telephone. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
• All Patient Access and Business Office employees will be in-serviced on the  FirstData® 
procedures for processing patient payments by telephone. 
• Patient Access and Business Office staff must include the following scripting when 
initiating a one-time patient payment by phone: o “Mr. /Mrs. /Ms. _________ you are authorizing Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center to use information from your check/debit card (include 
account/routing numbers) to make a one-time electronic fund transfer from your 
account in the amount of $________ for payment of services received on (date of 
service) or for upcoming services to be performed on (date of service).  Indicate 
your agreement by stating yes.”   
• The Patient Access or Business Office personnel will document the patient’s consent in 
the patient account notes, as proof of authorization for the one-time transaction by the 
patient. 
• When establishing a patient payment plan for services rendered or scheduled, an initial 
payment is required to establish the payment plan.  Recurring payments or payment plans 
can be authorized by telephone with the added language: 
o The amount of the recurring transaction; 
o The timing (including start date), number, and/or frequency of the electronic fund 
transfers, or other similar reference to the patient’s account; 
o A telephone number for patient inquiries that is answered during normal business 
hours; and 
o The date of the patient’s oral authorization. 
• Should the patient request confirmation of the payment arrangement in writing, an 
authorization form outlining the arrangements should be provided; to include amount, 
date(s) of future transaction, and length of agreement.     
• The signed agreement will be scanned into the patient’s financial record. 
 