 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Operational Policies Section: Departmental Orientation 
200 Competence 
Title: Professional Competence 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/DO/201 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: Feb 1, 2001 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 5, 2024 
Last Date Revised: April 5, 2023 
 
PURPOSE:  
This policy ensures that professional competence of all employees rendering patient care be established in the   
Acute Care Physical Medicine/Rehabilitation Department 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
 
POLICY:  
It is the policy of the Acute Care Physical Medicine Department that every employee is evaluated for 
competence of their job duties. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
1. Establishment of Clinical Competence – Clinical competence of professional and appropriate support staff 
will be established at time of hire and renewed annually thereafter by evidence of any or all of the following: 
a. Current professional license as appropriate. 
b. Attendance at the hospital’s general orientation. 
c. Completion of the department’s orientation checklist (per orientation policy) and the professional 
clinical competency tool (including self assessment and assessment by supervisor or peer); 
d. Employee participation in an annual formal performance evaluation. 
e. Annual participation in all mandatory education programs, including safety programs, infection 
control, CPR, etc. as specified in the hospital’s policy 
f. Annual review of clinical competence as documented by completion of assigned Healthstream 
modules: 
(1) Ongoing competency assessment will be completed by all disciplines 
(2) All skills competencies that require physical demonstration will be documented in 
Healthstream by designated preceptors. 
(3) All clinical competencies will be recorded and maintained through Healthstream. 
2. Documentation of Clinical Competency 
Documentation of clinical competency will be partially maintained in the departmental employee folders 
and partially maintained in the employee’s electronic personnel Healthstream file. 
 
REFERENCES: 
None 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
See employee files for completed documents. 