 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Clinical Policies Section: Interdisciplinary Services 
200 Occupational Therapy 
Title:      Splinting 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/IS/216 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: April 1, 2010 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 5, 2024 
Last Date Revised: March 22, 2023 
 
PURPOSE:  
This policy ensures that therapists are instructed in proper splinting to prevent or correct deformities,  
increase ROM, and protect surgical repairs for patients in Acute Care Physical Medicine. 
 
DEFINITIONS:  
None 
 
POLICY:  
 
It is the policy of the Acute Care Physical Medicine Department that occupational therapists fabricate  
splints for patients in Acute Care. In order to fabricate a splint, a specific order must be received from  
the physician or midlevel provider.  If an OT consult is received and the therapist feels that a splint is 
beneficial, one may be fabricated.  In all other instances, the physician must be contacted.  
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Diagnoses Appropriate for Splinting 
a. CVA 
b. Head injured 
c. Tendon surgeries 
d. Fractures 
e. Cellulitis 
f. Other neurological disorders 
g. Joint replacements 
 
2. Types of Splints Available 
a. Static foot drop splint  
b. Static hand splints (i.e., resting hand, wrist cock-up, etc….) 
c. Dynamic foot drop splint 
d. Dynamic hand/finger splints (i.e., fabricated according to diagnoses) 
e. Other types specially fabricated according to injury and function required. 
 
3. Procedure 
a. Following appropriate physician’s order received splint will be fabricated 
observing all proper mechanics for bony prominence and angles of pull.  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
b. The patient and family will be educated on splint wearing, care 
instructions, and precautions. 
c. For an unresponsive patient or patient that is unable to participate in 
education regarding splint plan of care, the occupational therapist will 
perform daily splint checks to monitor the skin and make any necessary 
changes. 
d. In addition, for an unresponsive patient or patient that is unable to 
participate in education regarding splint plan of care, the nursing staff will 
be educated in proper splint application, wear schedule, and monitoring as 
per each patient’s individual plan of care. 
 
REFERENCES: 
    
None 
 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
None 
 