 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 7 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Clinical Policies Section: Interdisciplinary Services 
300 Speech Therapy 
Title:     Ice Chip/Water Protocol 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/IS/305 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: Feb 1, 2001 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 19, 2024 
Last Date Revised: March 19, 2024 
 
PURPOSE:  
To provide guidelines for the use of water/ice chips as a “water protocol” or “ice chip protocol” for patients on 
thickened liquids or those patients who are NPO in Acute Care Physical Medicine. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
 
POLICY:  
 
It is the policy of the Acute Physical Medicine Department’s Speech Pathology Division to provide guidelines for  
the use of water/ice chips as protocol for patients on thickened liquids or those patients who are NPO.   
Current research shows that water is neutral and aspiration of even moderate amounts is innocuous to the lungs.  
The human body constitutes about 60% water.  Small amounts of water given intermittently are unlikely to be any 
more harmful than the patient’s own saliva.  Should small amounts of water be taken into the lungs, it is quickly 
absorbed into the body pool.  Unlike other liquids, water has a neutral pH and is free of bacteria and other 
contaminants.  Free water also contributes to hydration for many patients.  (Campbell-Taylor, ASHA, Fall 1998). 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Speech pathologist recommends “Frazier Free Water Protocol” (stated as “water protocol” in 
GMR) and/or ice chip protocol in progress note and proposed to the MD via Electronic Medical 
Record (EMR). 
2. MD orders “water protocol” and/or “ice chip protocol” in EMR. 
3. Speech pathologist or RN educates patient/family about protocol.  
4. Chest x-ray should be monitored.  
 
 
REFERENCES: 
None 
 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
 
Panther, K. "The Frazier Free Water Protocol"(2005), Swallowing and Swallowing Disorders, March 2005,  
pp. 4-9.   Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 6 of 7 
 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 7 of 7 
 