 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Clinical Policies Section: Interdisciplinary Services 
200 Occupational Therapy 
Title:     Occupational Therapy Scope of Service 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/IS/202 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: Feb 1, 2001 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 5, 2024 
Last Date Revised: March 22, 2023 
 
PURPOSE:  
This policy outlines the Occupational Therapy Scope of Service of the Acute Care Physical Medicine  
Department regarding patient care. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
 
POLICY:  
 
The Physical Medicine/Rehabilitation department provides occupational therapy services through the skilled  
expertise of occupational therapist and certified occupational therapy assistants.  Supportive personnel such as  
trained aides, transporters, and clerical staff work together with the therapists under the direction of the  
individuals responsible for delivery of patient care to assist patients in reaching their highest functional potential. 
 
The Occupational Therapy Division provides services to inpatients.   Occupational therapists evaluate  
neuromotor, developmental sensory, cognitive, perceptual, and self care deficits.  This evaluation provides the  
basis for selecting the appropriate therapeutic procedure to facilitate independence in activities of daily living.   
Physical Medicine/Rehabilitation professionals use interdisciplinary approach to patient care.  Together they  
work to achieve a unified goal; assisting the patient to reach his/her highest possible potential.  This will also  
include family/patient education, instruction in self-treatment and living with a physical disability in preparation  
for discharge. 
 
The services provided by occupational therapy follows the concept in the Physical Medicine/Rehabilitation  
policy titled “Scope of Services,” concepts include:  
a referral by a licensed physician or appropriate licensed mid-level provider, assessment/evaluation  
of functional status, development of treatment plan with physician and patient/family input, a time frame for  
achievement, documentation of progress, patient/family education, discharge planning and follow up care. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
None 
 
REFERENCES: 
None 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
None 