 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Clinical Policies Section: Interdisciplinary Services 
100 Physical Therapy 
Title:     Physical Therapy Scope of Service 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/IS/102 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: Feb 1, 2001 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 5, 2024 
Last Date Revised: April 5, 2022 
 
PURPOSE:  
This policy outlines the physical therapy scope of service of the Acute Care Physical Medicine Department  
regarding patient care. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
 
POLICY:  
 
It is the policy of the physical therapy discipline to treat patients with neuromuscular, musculo-skeletal  
and sensorimotor impairments according to the standards adopted by the American Physical Therapy  
Association, the Louisiana State Board of Physical Therapy Examiners, JCAHO, and CARF while  
upholding the mission and philosophy of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center. 
 
The Physical Medicine/Rehabilitation department provides physical therapy services through the skilled  
expertise of physical therapist and licensed physical therapist assistants.  Supportive personnel such as  
trained aides, transporters and clerical staff work together with the therapist under direction of the  
individuals responsible for delivery of patient care to assist patients in reaching their highest functional  
potential. 
   
The physical therapy discipline provides services to all consulted inpatients. 
 
Physical therapists evaluate neuromuscular, musculo-skeletal, sensorimotor and related cardiovascular  
and respiratory functions of the patient.  This evaluation provides the basis for selecting the appropriate  
therapeutic procedures such as: exercises for increasing strength, endurance, coordination, and range of  
motion, stimuli to facilitate motor activity and learning, instruction in the use of assistive devises and the  
application of physical agents such as heat and cold, sound or water to relieve pain or alter physiological  
status. 
 
Physical Medicine professionals use an interdisciplinary approach to patient care.  Together they  
work to achieve a unified goal; assisting the patient to reach his/her highest possible functional potential.  
This will also include family/patient education, instruction in self-treatment and living with a physical  
disability in preparation for discharge. 
 
 
The services provided by physical therapy follow the following concepts: 
 
1. A referral by a licensed physician or midlevel provider.  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
2. An assessment/evaluation of functional status. 
3. Development of a treatment plan with physician and patient/family input. 
4. A time frame for achievement. 
5. Documentation of progress. 
6. Patient/family education. 
7. Discharge planning. 
8. Follow-up care. 
 
 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
None 
 
  
REFERENCES: 
None 
 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
None 