 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Clinical Policies Section: Interdisciplinary Services 
300 Speech Therapy 
Title:     Speech Therapy FEES 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/IS/306 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: April 1, 2013 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 19, 2024 
Last Date Revised: March 31, 2023 
 
PURPOSE:  
To define the Fiberoptic Endoscopic Evaluation of Swallowing (FEES) procedure and the qualifications for 
performing the procedure. 
 
In order to ensure excellence in patient care and in the training of the speech pathologist, specific criteria 
establishing clinical competence in FEES are herein outlined.  The criteria adopted meet national and local 
standards as recommended by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals. 
 
In the FEES procedure, a fiberoptic laryngoscope is passed transnasally to the hypopharynx, where the larynx and 
surrounding structures are viewed.  Laryngeal airway protection is assessed, and food and liquid boluses are given 
to the patient so that the integrity of the oropharyngeal swallow can be determined.  Information obtained from 
this examination includes observation of the anatomy involved in the oropharyngeal stage of swallowing, 
observation of the movement of critical structures within the hypopharynx and larynx, observation of secretions, 
direct assessment of swallowing function for food/liquid, and response to therapeutic maneuvers and interventions 
to improve the swallow (Technical Report).  
 
Recommendations from this exam include a judgment regarding safety of oral feeding, appropriate diet, posture to 
assume when eating, behavioral compensatory strategies to use when swallowing, need for behavioral therapy, 
and need for other examinations.  The protocol to be used for the FEES, (Langmore, 1993), is found following 
this policy. 
 
This examination is not intended to replace the standard otolaryngological evaluation of the structural integrity of 
the hypopharynx/larynx.  The procedure will be either by the SLP alone, or collaboratively with a 
physician/NP/experienced endoscopist.   If the SLP performs the evaluation alone, care should be taken to use this 
examination only in settings where medical personnel are available to ensure patient safety (Position Statement). 
Speech Pathologists are not qualified to diagnose mucosal or structural abnormalities which may indicate 
pathology but should describe abnormal findings.   
 
POLICY: 
It is the policy of the Speech-Language Pathology division to ensure that personnel performing the FEES 
procedure are trained appropriately and follow the standards for competency defined by the American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association and the Louisiana Board of Examiners for Speech Pathology and Audiology. 
  2 
 
In order to begin formal training in FEES and to perform clinical assessments of swallowing via 
FEES, the candidate must satisfy the following requirements: 
1. Education:  The applicant shall hold, as a minimum, the master’s degree in Speech-
Language Pathology, with courses in anatomy, physiology, and neurology of the 
vocal tract.  A course in dysphagia is required. Lab practicum with dissection of the 
head and neck is highly desirable.   
2. Clinical Training: The candidate shall have completed the Clinical Fellowship Year 
and be in receipt of the Certificate of Clinical Competence awarded by the American 
Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 
3. Preliminary Dysphagia Training:  Clinical experience in dysphagia using 
traditional procedures such as the clinical examination and the videofluoroscopy 
procedure.  The applicant shall have performed and interpreted at least 25 
fluoroscopy examinations independently. 
4. Specific FEES Training: 
a. Successful completion of a seminar or workshop in the methodology and use 
of fiberoptic endoscopy as a technique for investigating swallowing function, 
equivalent to those taught by Dr. Susan Langmore.  A minimum of 10 hours 
training is recommended. 
b. Successful performances and interpretation of a minimum of 25 FEES 
procedures.  Twenty FEES exams can be completed on individuals with 
normal swallow, or on patients needing a laryngoscopy exam for other 
reasons. The remaining 5 exams must be completed on patients with 
dysphagia to evaluate their swallowing function.  The 
physician/NP/experienced endoscopist must be physically present for these 5 
exams.  This person can be a speech pathologist who holds clinical privileges 
to perform FEES or he/she can be an otolaryngologist, other physician, or NP 
who is privileged to perform flexible nasendoscopy. 
c. Demonstration of knowledge of the medical contraindications and possible 
adverse reactions to this procedure. Demonstration of knowledge of 
impending signs of patient distress and knowledge of appropriate action to 
take if a complication should occur. 
d. Successful completion of a certified CPR course. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. The speech pathologist obtains an order from the physician for “SLP Fiberoptic Endoscopic Evaluation of 
Swallowing (FEES)”. 
2. The speech pathologist contacts the participating physician/NP/experienced endoscopist to determine if the 
physician is to participate in the study if required. 
3. SLP will utilize new sterile disposable scope for procedure. 
4. The speech pathologist and physician (if attending) work as a team performing the procedure and assessing 
structural integrity and swallowing function.  The speech pathologist is responsible for writing the swallowing 
assessment report.  If physician/NP/experienced endoscopist is present, documentation relative to structural 
integrity and diagnosed abnormalities are to be reported. If not present, then SLP to refer for further testing. 
5. Should the scope contact any unsterile source/surface other than the patient, prior to or during the procedure, 
the procedure will be terminated, and the scope will be disposed of.  
6. Upon completion of the procedures, the speech pathologist is responsible for disinfecting the equipment using 
hospital approved cleaning products and disposing of used scope.   3 
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (1992).  Instrumental Diagnostic Procedures for Swallowing.  
ASHA, 34 (March, Suppl. 7) pp. 25-33. 
 
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (2005). The Role of the Speech-Language Pathologist in the 
Performance and Interpretation of Endoscopic Evaluation of Swallowing: Position Statement [Position 
Statement]. Available from www.asha.org/policy.  
 
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (2005). The Role of the Speech-Language Pathologist in the 
Performance and Interpretation of Endoscopic Evaluation of Swallowing: Technical Report [Technical Report]. 
Available from www.asha.org/policy . 
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (2005). The Role of the Speech-Language Pathologist in the 
Performance and Interpretation of Endoscopic Evaluation of Swallowing: Position Statement [Position 
Statement]. Available from www.asha.org/policy  
 
 
 
 
 