 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Operational Policies Section: Program Overview 
100 Overview of Services 
Title: Gym Operations 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/PO/102 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: Feb 1, 2001 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 6, 2024 
Last Date Revised: March 22, 2023 
 
PURPOSE:  
This policy outlines the responsibilities of the Therapist for the Therapy Treatment Gym Operations. 
 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
 
 
POLICY:  
It is the policy of the Acute Care Physical Medicine Department that a therapist assigned to a Therapy 
Gym is responsible for the following responsibilities. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
1. Perform chart review and assess patients’ appropriateness for the gym setting. 
2. Reassign patients to the bedside setting if the patient meets any of the following criteria;  
• Patient is on contact precautions 
• Patient is PEC, suicide precautions, or has 24-hour sitter requirement 
• Patient is a prisoner 
• Patient has behavioral or psychological issues that may be exacerbated by a gym setting 
3. Communicate with support personnel a list of gym patients, 2-ID information, and any known 
precautions. 
 
Therapy Support Personnel Responsibilities 
 
1. Obtain patient information and precautions from gym therapists. 
2. Transport patients to the gym setting after: 
• Obtaining a ticket to ride 
• Performing 2 ID with patient 
• Meeting with patient’s nurse, discussing patient handoff, and getting nursing signature on ticket 
to ride 
• Draping patient appropriately for transport to the gym 
• Signing patient out in the unit’s transport log 
3. Transport patients back to their room at the direction of treating therapists; 
• Using the original ticket to ride, perform handoff with unit nurse and obtain their signature on the  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
ticket 
• Communicate any messages from gym therapists to nursing staff 
• Ensure that patient is safe, comfortable, and all needs met 
4. Responsible for cleaning area and equipment after each patient use. 
5. Assist gym therapists with any needs during treatment sessions 
6. Responsible for helping in other treatment areas when finished. 
 
  
 
 
REFERENCES: 
None 
 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
None 
 