 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Operational Policies Section: Program Overview 
200 The Program 
Title:  Plan of Care 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/PO/201 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: September 1, 1994 Last Date 
Reviewed: 
March 6, 2024 
 
Last Date Revised: April 13, 2022 
 
PURPOSE:  
This policy is to ensure that a plan of care is developed and implemented based on the initial assessment 
findings. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
 
POLICY:  
It is the policy of the Acute Care Physical Medicine Department that each therapist develops an 
interdisciplinary plan of care for each patient based on the initial assessment findings which identify 
problems, deficits, and needs. Progress is then evaluated based on the deficits noted, response to 
treatment given, and progress toward the goals established at the time of evaluation. The plan of care is 
periodically modified based on the progress toward the goals of treatment.  
 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE PLAN OF CARE 
The data collected in the initial assessment will be utilized to establish the plan for care 
for the patient.   
 
INTERDISCIPLINARY TREATMENT APPROACH 
The Department of Physical Medicine contributes to the interdisciplinary treatment approach in the 
following ways: 
 participates in hospital wide Interdisciplinary Team (IDT) meetings 
    participates in scheduled discharge planning or patient care meetings. 
 communicates essential information about patient care to the appropriate individuals using approved 
facility mechanisms of communication (EMR documentation, verbal communication, meetings, etc.) 
 
DEPARTMENT SPECIFIC PLAN OF CARE 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 3 
       Each service will develop a plan of care that includes: 
 a list of the noted problems, deficits or dysfunctions 
 interventions to address the problems, deficits or dysfunctions 
 time-linked and discipline specific goals that specify specific levels of progress expected 
 the patient’s personal goals for treatment 
 precautions to be followed during treatment 
 potential discharge needs for education, equipment, placement 
 
PATIENT AND FAMILY INVOLVEMENT IN THE PLAN OF CARE 
 
The identified deficits and strategies for improvement will be discussed with the patient or guardian and 
the family as appropriate.  The patient and family are encouraged to participate not only in the planning 
for care, but in the care program outlined to the extent that this is appropriate and beneficial. 
 
In the case of minors, the parent, siblings and peer group may be involved in the care planning and 
treatment process. 
 
The patient and family will be informed of: 
 risks and possible benefits of treatment 
 cooperative efforts required from the patient and/or family to achieve the desired goals 
 alternative treatment available when they choose not to follow the plan established 
 the consequences of not participating in therapy 
 
PATIENT NEEDS NOT ADDRESSED  
 
When a patient need is identified that is not addressed in the plan of care, the evaluating therapist will 
document the reason this need is not being addressed.  Potential reasons for not addressing an identified 
deficit are: 
 deficit is low priority and is not likely to be addressed in the time frames of this admission 
 deficit is longstanding and has not responded to prior treatment 
    assessment indicates that the deficit is not likely to be improved with treatment  
 Deficit is not likely to be improved with resources available at this facility and                         
patient/family has been informed of where services may be provided 
 barriers to goal achievement make it unlikely that progress can be made 
 patient’s medical condition precludes addressing the deficit at this time 
 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Each discipline is responsible for the implementation of the department specific plan of care, for 
measuring progress toward goals and for communicating progress and patient needs to the team. 
 
MODIFICATIONS 
 
Modifications in the department specific treatment plans will be made based on reassessment of the 
patient as warranted and related to the following elements: 
 progress toward goals 
  failure to make progress  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 3 
 unusual response to treatment 
 failure to participate 
 other significant data 
 
 
Modifications will be coordinated with other members of the treatment team to assure a coordinated effort 
toward patient treatment is achieved. Modifications to the plan will be documented in electronic record. 
 
DISCONTINUATION OF THE TREATMENT PLAN 
 
The plan of care will be discontinued, and the patient discharged when one or more of the following 
occur: 
 
 The patient has been discharged from the facility.  
 The patient achieves the goals of therapy. 
 The patient refuses to continue therapy. 
  The patient is transferred to a higher level of care and there are no orders to continue therapy. 
  The patient is not making progress, and there is no further benefit to continued treatment. 
  The patient is regressing, and collaborative team efforts recommend discharge from service. 
  The physician discontinues treatment.        
   DISCHARGE PLANNING 
 
Planning for patient discharge begins when the patient enters the treatment program.  As part of the initial 
assessment and plan of care progress, goals for discharge will be established and patient needs related to 
that discharge will be identified and addressed.  The patient will be informed of the plan for discharge and 
participate in determining the needs to be addressed for a successful discharge. 
 
 
   
 
REFERENCES: 
None 
 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
None 
 