 1 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Srvs. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center    
Subject:  Diversion of Emergency Services Transport Section:  Administrative 
Date of Origination:  November 18, 1993 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed: 
September 9, 2024May 23, 2024 
 
May 23September 9,, 2024 
Serial Code:  ADM-02 
  
PURPOSE:  
To establish guidelines to govern the process for determining and implementing diversion status.   
 
Our Lady of the La ke Regional Medical Center  (OLOLRMC/OLOLCH) is part of a non -divert 
community; therefore, it is unlikely that diversion will be required.  Only in the event of extreme or 
catastrophic circumstances will OLOLRMC /OLOLCH require diversion. Divert Status does not affect 
ambulatory walk-ins.  
DEFINITIONS:  
 
Capability: the ability of the hospital to accommodate the health care needs of the individual presenting 
to the facility for evaluation or treatment based on available physical space, equipment, supplies, 
services (medical, nursing and ancillary), and staffing, and on the level of care that hospital personnel 
can provide within the training scope of their professional licenses. 
Capacity: means the ability of Our Lady of the Lake to accommodate a patient requesting examination 
or treatment and includes numbers and availability of beds, equipment, qualified staff and past practices 
of accommodating patients in excess of occupancy limits.  
Diversion: the diversion of an ambulance to OLOLRMC or OLOLCH  hospital from the field to an 
alternate receiving facility due to lack of critical resources. 
Saturation of Trauma /Stroke Services: is defined as the point when our resources have exceeded 
capability or capacity ; therefore, acceptance of another patient with a life -threatening illness or injury 
would severely compromise patient care and safety. 
 
LERN: Louisiana Emergency Response Network procedures will be utilized in the consideration of 
service (capability/capacity) guidelines in the pre-arrival routing of trauma/stroke patients.    
 
 
A. Field to Hospital Divert:   2 
1. The process of diversion is meant to be a short -term event to allow the needed resources for 
time sensitive illnesses to become available. (Example: required back -up surgeon in surgery, 
failure of facility resources).  
2. The determination to go on divert will be made through discussion with the House 
Manager/Supervisor and the Administrator on -call (AOC) , including representative of the 
service not available.  
3. Diversion will be reassessed at regular intervals by the House Manager /Supervisor and 
discussed with service not available and the AOC to determine continuation of divert status. 
4. When diversion status is in effect, the appropriate agencies/stakeholders will be notified by 
the House Manager/Supervisor: The notification will indicate whether the diversion applies 
to the Adult ECU, Pediatric ECU, or both: 
a. Emergency Care Unit (ECU) physician  
            b. Critical Care Medicine Service (CCMS)/Pediatric Critical Care Unit (PICU) 
c. Trauma Medical Director or designee (Trauma Surgeon on call) 
d. Consulting providers – Neurosurgery and/or Interventional Radiology 
e.  LERN 
5. Diversion of transfer patients from other facilities will be determined by the ECU physician 
using capability and capacity determinations in collaboration with the House 
Manager/Supervisor and Patient Access Center. 
6. The House Manager/Supervisor will communicate the change in status to the ECU physician, 
LERN, AOC, Trauma physician and CCMS/PICU. 
B. Trauma Divert:  
1. In the event a decision is required regarding diversion of trauma patients, the following 
personnel shall collaborate and decide the most appropriate course of action: 
a. Trauma Medical Director or Designee (Trauma Surgeon on call)  
 
b. ECU Physician 
 
c. Administrator On-Call (AOC) 
 
d. House Manager/Supervisor 
  3 
2. Only the Trauma Medical Director or designeedesignee (Trauma Surgeon on call)  has the 
authority to declare saturation of the trauma services that will place the hospital on 
ambulance divert.  
3. Once the decision is made to go on Trauma diversion, the Trauma Medical Director or 
designeedesignee (Trauma Surgeon on call)  will collaborate/notify the  House 
Manager/Supervisor.  
4. Only the Trauma Medical Director or designee  (Trauma Surgeon on call)  can deactivate the 
diversion of ambulance patients from the field. 
Patients are triaged to Our Lady of the Lake RMC based on its Level I trauma certification  and to Our 
Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital based on its Level II pediatrics trauma certification  in accordance 
with Louisiana Emergency Response Network.  OLOLRMC/OLOLCH have entered into a participating 
agreement with The Louisiana Emergency Response Network (LERN), for trauma call management 
C. Stroke Divert:  
1. In the event a decision is required regarding diversion of stroke patients, the following 
personnel shall collaborate and decide the most appropriate course of action: 
a. Consulting Physicians – Neurosurgery and/or Interventional Radiology 
 
b. ECU Physician  
 
c. Critical Care Medicine Service or Designee 
 
d. Administrator On-Call (AOC) 
 
e. House Manager/Supervisor 
 
2. Administration and/or the House Manager/Supervisor in collaboration with the medical team 
has the authority to declare saturation of stroke services that will place the hospital on 
ambulance/secondary transfer divert.  
3. Once the decision is made to go on Stroke diversion, the consulting physicians or designee 
will collaborate/notify the House Manager/Supervisor 
4. Only administration and/or the House Manager /Supervisor in collaboration with the medical 
team can deactivate the diversion of ambulance patients from the field. 
 
Patients are triaged to Our Lady of the Lake based on its Primary Stroke Center Certification with  
Endovascular Capability (PSC-E) in accordance with Louisiana Emergency Response Network.  
OLOLRMC has entered into a participating agreement with The Louisiana Emergency Response 
Network (LERN), for stroke center designation.  Select advanced stroke/neurosurgery interventional  4 
procedures can only be rendered at OLOLRMC for our region. 
The House Managers coordinate and document per Patient Care Services protocol.  
D. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS: 
 
1. OLOLRMC/OLOLCH delivers certain types of specialty care services that are not available 
in other institutions in Louisiana Region. When OLOL RMC/OLOLCH is functioning at full 
capacity in accordance with normal accommodation processes, extraordinary efforts may be 
made to accommodate patients with specific critical illnesses for which appropriate treatment 
is not available at other  facilities within the region, and OLOLRMC /OLOLCH has the 
appropriate capability to provide treatment and any delay in treatment is likely to result in 
death or significant disability. 
2. Patients in need of trauma services who have been triaged to OLOLRMC/OLOLCH based on 
its respective Level trauma certification in accordance with the Louisiana Emergency 
Response Network. 
3. Patients in need of stroke services who have been triaged to OLOLRMC based on its PSC-E 
designation in accordance with the Louisiana Emergency Response Network. 
4. Although OLOLRMC /OLOLCH is part of a no -divert community, it is also a community 
policy that if all hospital Emergency Departments are on divert, then NO hospital is on divert 
and patients will be received by the appropriate facility on a rotational basis. 
 
 
 