 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Srvs. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center    
Subject:  Valuables/Clothing: Disposition of  
 Section:  Administrative 
Date of Origination:  January 1, 1987 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed: 
October 5, 2017 
September 5, 2023 
Serial Code:  ADM-22 
  
PURPOSE: 
To assure proper disposition of patient's valuables and clothing. 
POLICY: 
1. Clothing shall be removed to facilitate patient assessment.  The patien t's clothing shall be kept with 
them or given to patient's family.  If the patient is admitted, the clothing will accompany them to the 
receiving unit or sent home with family.  The d isposition of removed clothing shall be documented 
in the ED record. 
2. When the patient's condition warrants immediate disrobing, the clothing may be cut.  All pockets, 
shoes, etc. will be inventoried.  If valuables are found, they should be secured for safekeeping as per 
hospital policy.  The nurse will then document the cutting, removal, and disposition of clothing in 
the ED record. 
3. If the patient is involved in a police investigation, all clothing removed should be done so in 
accordance with the request of the investigating officer.  This should be reflected in the ED record 
with a description of the removed items, law enforcement agency name, the officer's name and 
badge number.  Any item given to a representative of law enforcement will have an accompanying 
chain of evidence/custody release form completed by the nurse.  Refer to Disposition of Material 
Evidence in ED policy manual. 
4. All valuables, money or jewelry, removed shall be secured , per policy, in appropriate designated 
area.  The patient and/or family may retrieve these with the proper r eceipt. On campus processing 
includes nurse and security checks to secure property. 
5. Any unclaimed clothing items are bagged, labeled with patient's name if known, and a security 
release form is completed.  These items are given to a security officer. 
 
 