POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Access Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:    
Subject:  Admitting Non-Staff Physicians Outpatient Section:    
Date of Origination:     April 29, 2014 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: APRIL 2014 
April 2014, February 2015, Jan 2018     
 
PURPOSE: 
To define the role of the Patient Access Department in registering patients requiring outpatient 
tests or procedures that have been ordered by practitioners who are not members of the 
OLOLRMC’s Medical-Dental Staff. To ensure that all Non-Staff Physicians are checked for NPI 
numbers, OIG/GSA/OFAC SDN exclusions, and to ensure they have a valid Medical License. 
 
POLICY: 
If, at the time of patient registration, the ordering physician is not registered in the health information 
registration system, the Patient Access Representative (PAR) will contact the ordering practitioner’s 
office and request the information listed on the Physician Outpatient Ordering Data Sheet.  Upon receipt 
of the information, the PAR will submit the information to Medical Staff Services.  The patient will not 
be allowed to proceed with his/her outpatient test or procedure until Medical Staff Services has given 
clearance for the patient to proceed.  Medical Staff will confirm that the ordering physician (1) has a 
current medical license, (2) is not listed on any governmental exclusions list, and (3) has a valid NPI 
number. 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Upon arrival of patient, Access Staff will request a Physicians order on all outpatient tests. 
2. Access staff will check Medical Staff Office Application (MSO found on Lake Link Homepage) 
for the Physician contact information. 
3. If Physician cannot be located or does not have privileges, the Access Associate will contact 
Medical Staff Services at (225)765-8871. 
4. The Access Associate will gather as much information as possible from the Physician order and 
will contact the Physician office for any additional data required. 
5. The Access Staff will complete the Practitioner Outpatient Ordering Data Sheet and fax it with 
orders attached to Medical Staff Services at (225)765-8546. 
6. Access staff will scan the Practitioner Outpatient Ordering Data Sheet to Image Now. 
7. Medical Staff Services will gather any further information and perform applicable checks on the 
MD’s. 
8. The Medical Staff Services will add the Physician into the Medical Staff Office Application 
(MSO found on Lake Link Homepage) and HBOC, and they will submit a ticket for IT to add it 
to Cerner. 
9. Access Services will communicate with Medical Staff to determine if/when the patient is cleared 
to proceed with his/her test/procedure. 
Approved by 
 
  
Ann Marie Montanio, System Director of Patient Access 