 
Rate the Ethics Consultant(s) on: 
 
Excellent 
 
Very Good 
 
Good 
 
Fair 
 
Poor 
 
Don't Know 
 
Making you feel at ease       
 
Respecting your opinions       
 
Being an expert in ethics       
 
Giving you useful information       
 
Explaining things well       
 
Clarifying decisions that had to be made       
Clarifying who is the right person to 
make the decision(s) 
      
 
Describing possible options       
Clearing up any disagreements       
Being easy to get in touch with       
Being timely enough to meet your needs       
Providing a helpful service       
Overall, my experience with the Ethics 
Consultation Service was: 
      
 
 
 
 
 Our Lady of the Lake Hospital Clinical Ethics Consultation Service 
Evaluation Page 
 
Recently, you spoke with someone from the Ethics Consultation Service. The job of the service is to help patients, families, and staff 
work through difficult patient care decisions by listening to what everyone thinks and helping people decide the best thing to do. In order 
to help improve the Ethics Consultation Service, we ask that you take a few minutes to complete this form.  Your replies are 
anonymous.  We will not disclose your identity.  We will not contact you unless you request or permit it.  You may complete this Page 
digitally, save it as a Word document entitled “OLOLRMC Ethics Evaluation Page”, and return it as an attachment to an email.  Send the 
email to _____.  You may manually complete a printed copy of the Page, and send it by campus mail or U.S. mail to ________  
 
DIRECTIONS:  For each of the following statements, please place an “X” in the box that best describes your most recent 
experience with the Ethics Consultation Service. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Did the consultation service make any recommendations?                                                Yes           No                Don't Know 
If yes were the recommendations generally followed?                                                       Yes           No                Don't Know 
Do you have any comments or suggestions for the Ethics Consultation Service?             Yes           No                Don't Know 
 