 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual:  Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title: Policy Development and Review 
Procedure Section: Administrative -General 
Date of 
Origination: June 2017 Policy 
Reference #:   BAG  009 
Last Revised 
Date:  Supersedes #:  
   Last Review 
Date: May 20, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide a process for developing, approving and reviewing policies within Mental and Behavioral 
Health. Collaboration and accountability are ensured in keeping with OLOLRMC standards. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
MBH will review all policies at every 2 years, those directly affecting patient care and those that 
indirectly affect patient care, but which may have secondary consequences for clinical outcomes will be 
reviewed annually. 
 
POLICY: 
All policies will be developed in approved hospital format and presented to MBH Operational 
Leadership for final approval. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Policies are presented to a committee of representatives from Division Administration 
representing various disciplines. Individuals are added as needed. 
2. A draft of the new/revised policy is developed according to accepted format and forwarded to the 
department head. 
a. Proposals for new policies are first presented to the Operational Leadership committee by the 
department head with justification to include at least the inadequacy of current hospital 
policy or no existing policy to address the issue(s) or a regulatory requirement. 
b. The policy and procedure committee will develop a draft with collaboration from requesting 
department. 
c. Once approved by policy and procedure committee it will be submitted to Operational 
Leadership for final approval and notification of hospital Policy and Procedure through MBH 
representative. 
3. MBH policy and procedure committee will meet regularly following a schedule insuring review 
of all policies at least annually. 
4. The Medical Director and Senior Director of Nursing are notified of any changes in clinical 
practice resulting from policy review and/or development. 
5. MBH staff are notified of all revisions and/or new policies. Staff are educated regarding changes 
in clinical practice as needed. 
 
 
REFERENCE: OLOLRMC policy OrgOps/GN/013 Policy Development and Approval 