 
 
1 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center          
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title:  Search - Patients Belongings, Room, 
Contraband  
Section: Administrative - General 
Date of 
Origination: 
October 1990 Policy 
Reference#: 
BAG 003 
Last Date 
Revised: 
August 18, 2022 Supersedes #: B/N/A/009, B/N/C/006, 
B/N/C/007, B/A/G/003 
  Last Review 
Date: 
May 20, 2024 
   
 POLICY:      
Inpatient Admission: A head-to-toe skin assessment and contraband search by two nurses is required on each patient 
upon inpatient admission.  
 
Emergency Mental and Behavioral Health Unit (EMBH) Intake: A skin assessment to check for skin 
abnormalities including signs of trauma such as: bruising, contusions, cuts, abrasions, and a complete security 
contraband search by two team members to include one RN is required on each patient upon intake to the EMBH 
unit. All skin abnormalities and/or signs of trauma shall be documented and assessed and treated by a medical 
provider when needed. During the skin assessment and security check, a patient should be dressed into green 
paper scrubs and slip resistant socks.  
 
Staff should always protect the privacy and dignity of the patient and complete the search thoroughly and quickly.   
 
Patients are informed upon inpatient admission and/or EMBH intake that the use or possession of contraband is 
not allowed. 
A thorough search of all belongings will be done in the presence of the patient whenever possible. Confiscation of 
any potentially dangerous items is essential. For inpatient admission- All personal belongings are inventoried, and 
articles not allowed on the unit should be sent home as soon as possible or locked in a secure location until the patient 
is discharged. For EMBH intake- patients are not allowed to be in possession of their own clothing or any other 
personal belongings at any time. Personal belongings are secured in an opaque sealed bag and secured at a designated 
secure area on the unit. A belongings sheet will be completed, and a chain of custody will be completed upon patient 
transfer or discharge.  
 
The patient(s) will be notified that his/her room and/or belongings may be searched anytime during their stay for 
due cause. 
 
 
 
PROCEDURE INPATIENT MBH: 
 
Patients & Belongings- Inpatient Admission: 
1. The patient’s skin assessment and contraband search will occur in a private room in the presence of two (2) 
nurses. This will be done quickly and efficiently by asking the patient to remove all clothing. The patient is to 
be draped with a sheet or other hospital provided garment.  The skin will be assessed for bruising, scars, 
rashes, tattoos, and abnormalities. While conducting the 2 RN skin assessment, the nurses will also  
 
2 
complete a thorough search for contraband on the patient being certain to check between toes, under and/or 
around breasts and scrotum, between any skin folds and hair. Additionally, the patient’s clothing will be 
carefully and thoroughly checked for contraband. Once checked, the clothes will be returned to the patient if 
appropriate. 
2. The patient’s belongings will be searched for contraband at admission and when family/friends bring items to 
the patient throughout their stay. If the patient is unable to be present during the search, two (2) staff members 
will conduct the search and document findings on the designated form.  
3.  Team members will use the handheld metal detector as an additional security check.  
 
Patients & Belongings- EMBH Intake: 
1- The patient’s skin assessment and contraband search will occur in a private room in the presence of two team 
members, one of which shall be an RN. This will be done quickly and efficiently by asking the patient to 
remove all clothing. The skin will be assessed for any abnormalities and signs of trauma such as bruising, 
contusions, cuts, abrasions. While conducting the two-team member skin assessment, the nurse will also 
complete a thorough search for contraband on the patient being certain to check between toes, under and/or 
around breasts and scrotum, between any skin folds and hair. The patient will dress in green scrubs when the 
skin assessment is complete. The patient’s clothing, once removed, will be checked for contraband, 
inventoried, and secured.  
2- Team members will use the handheld metal detector as an additional security check.  
 
Inpatient and EMBH: Body cavity searches can only be conducted with a documented justification and a 
physician order.  
 
Inpatient Room Search: 
Environmental Rounds will be conducted daily by staff as designated by the RN. During this time, each 
patient room will be searched for contraband and/or other environmental hazards. Work orders will be 
input by staff conducting environmental rounds for items managed by plant services.  
 
The patient's physician is notified if there is concern that a patient may have contraband in his/her possession after 
the initial assessment. A physician’s order is obtained for a search of the patient’ when contraband has been 
reported or is suspected. If the patient refuses to comply with the search, the patient is to be placed on a 1:1 and in 
green paper scrubs until he/she can be searched thoroughly. 
 
Personal belonging searches during a room search are conducted as follows: 
• Two (2) staff members conduct the search. 
• Articles are to be removed only when a witness is present. 
• The patient is to be notified of the removal of any articles unless orders are received to the 
contrary from the patient's physician.  
• Documentation includes the date and time, articles removed, and disposition of the articles, and  
       who conducted the search. 
 
Inpatient: Contraband / Sharps:  
All items, belongings and clothing are checked carefully at the time of admission and when families/friends bring 
items. 
 
Inpatient and EMBH: Contraband is defined as any article or substance whose possession or use is prohibited by 
the program or physician order; anything brought in without permission. These include, but are not limited to: 
 
• Purses, backpacks, briefcases, etc. • Glass items, except for eyeglasses 
• Cigarettes, lighters, matches or any tobacco 
products 
• Metal cans, aerosol cans and breakable hard 
plastic items 
• Outside food or drink • Shaving lotion, polish remover  
 
3 
• Medications or vitamins from home  
• Large amounts of cash or valuables • Firearms or ammunition 
• Electronic equipment such as: cell phones, 
Blackberries, I-pods, cameras (including 
camera phones), video recorders, CD/DVD 
players, radios, etc. 
• Shorts, tank tops, strapless shirts, shirts or 
pants that expose stomach or underclothing and 
clothing advertising alcohol, drugs or gambling 
• Drugs, alcohol, or mood-altering substances of 
any description 
• Alcohol-based products such as certain 
mouthwashes, disinfectants, shaving lotion, 
polish remover, or liquid paper. 
• Rope, chains, corded items, large jewelry 
(except for wedding band & watch), belts, 
shoestrings, or drawstrings    
• Curling irons, blow dryers and other things 
with cords 
• Knives or any item that can be used as a 
weapon, such as ice picks, screwdrivers, 
scissors, hair picks, nail files or clippers 
• Personal linens such as pillows, blankets, 
quilts, and stuffed animals 
• Other sharp items, such as needles, hooks, pins, 
toothpicks, paper clips, staples, pencils, pens, 
wire notebooks, etc. 
• Razor blades, straight razors, double edge and 
safety razors. 
 
 
Any contraband removed is handled in the following manner: 
 
Inpatient: Legal contraband, including home medications, will be sent home with the patient’s family, if possible. 
If family is unavailable or unwilling, items will be locked up in a designated secured area and returned to the 
patient or family upon discharge if appropriate.   
 
EMBH: Legal contraband, including home medications will be secured in an opaque bag with a completed 
belongings inventory. 
 
 
Inpatient and EMBH: Daily grooming items will be safeguarded by the nursing staff in containers individually 
marked for each patient and are available to the patient during scheduled times. Any patient found to be handling 
an unauthorized article or substance should be evaluated for appropriateness for the treatment setting. Patients are 
supervised by staff while using items such as razors, scissors, and corded items. 
 
Inpatient and EMBH: If Illegal drugs and drug paraphernalia are discovered, Security and the House Manager will 
be notified. The assigned LEO will instruct team members on the proper disposal of the item or will confiscate the 
item for disposal himself. Finding of illegal drugs, drug paraphernalia, who notified, and disposition/mode of 
destruction shall be documented.  
 
The attending physician is notified of all contraband. 
 
Inpatient and EMBH: DOCUMENTATION: 
A. Progress note is to include: 
1. Reason for conducting the search. 
2. Description of substance/object found and its disposition 
3. Observation of patient’s behavior and condition if there is suspected ingestion 
4. A safety event is completed  
 
 
 
 
REFERENCE:  
  
 Joint Commission Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals 2016: 
EC.02.01.01 EP3  
 
4 
 
 OLOLRMC Emergency Services Policy MH-04: OPC/PEC Patient Belongings and 
Contraband 
   
OLOLRMC Nursing Patient Care Policy NPC144: Suicide Prevention and Observation 
of the High-Risk Behavioral Patient in the Non-Mental Health/Non-Emergency 
Department Areas 