 1 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center                      
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title:  Confidentiality Code System Section: Patient Care 
Date of 
Origination:     
September 1989 Policy 
Reference #: 
BPC 004 
Last Revised 
Date: 
August 2018 Supersedes #: B/A/G/011 
  Last Review 
Date: 
April 2024 
  
POLICY: 
At the time of admission or prior to the patient will provide an identification number to be used to ensure their 
confidentiality and security during hospitalization. A parent or guardian admitting a minor will provide the 
identification number. The patient is responsible for giving the identification number to family, friends, and/or 
significant others. The identification number must be given to staff by family, friends and/or significant others 
when they call, visit or bring personal items to the patient after they are admitted. The staff is required to verify 
the patient, parent or guardian has signed a Release of Information, before any information is given to any family 
members or friends. If there is no signed Release of Information on the patient’s chart, the staff can only verify 
that a patient is present on the unit but is not able to disclose any information. Verification of the patient’s 
presence cannot be given without the patient’s identification number on record. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. The patient identifies the four-digit identification number.  
2. At the time of admission, a staff member will review and complete the Identification Number Agreement 
Form with the patient. The patient, parent/guardian and staff witness are required to sign and date the 
Identification Number Form. The Identification Number Agreement becomes part of the patient's medical 
record. 
3. If the patient is unable or unwilling to sign the Identification Number Agreement at the time of admission, 
a notation is required as to the reason for deferring the completion of the form.   The form is signed, dated 
and timed by a staff member. 
4. Staff is responsible for following up during the course of treatment with any patient who was unable to 
sign the Identification Number Agreement at the time of admission. 
5.          A patient has the right to change his/her Identification Number at any time during their hospitalization. 
The patient should make their request known to a member of the staff; and then a new Identification 
Agreement Form must be completed with patient and staff signatures, dated and timed. 
6. Visitors will be logged in on the patient’s Visitor Confidentiality sheet each visit. There is a separate sheet  2 
for each patient which becomes a part of the permanent medical record. 
7. All visitors will be required to show picture identification before being allowed to visit. 
REFERENCE:   
   
OrgOps/ET/001: Confidentiality.  
Louisiana Statute, Title 28: Mental Health Law, Part VI: Enumerations of Rights Guaranteed. 
Joint Commission Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals, 2019: RI.01.01.01; EP 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 
10, 28 
DHH Standards for Payment: Patient Rights (5) 