 
 
1 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center                       
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title: Time Out Section: Patient Care  
Date of 
Origination:      
October 1990 Policy 
Reference #: 
BPC 010 
Last Revised 
Date: 
November 2019 Supersedes #: B/N/C/010, BPN 013 
  Last Review 
Date: 
June 27, 2024 
 
 
POLICY: 
 
Time out may only be used as part of a written, individualized treatment plan and employed when less restrictive 
measures are inadequate. 
DEFINITION: 
 
Time out is an unlocked space, room or other area, designed for the purpose of removing the patient temporarily from 
the therapeutic community and reducing external stimuli. Goals for time out include an opportunity to appropriately 
express feelings, establish coping mechanism and provide 1:1 staff interaction for exploration of alternatives for 
unacceptable behaviors. 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. The use of Time out is a nursing intervention that should be documented. 
2. Time out occurs in an unlocked room/space. 
3. A seclusion room may be used by allowing the door to remain ajar. The door is not locked.  
4. The patient is educated about the reason(s) necessitating the use of time out.  
5. The patient’s age and cognitive functioning are considered.  
6. The patient is observed and supervised by a staff member every fifteen (15) minutes while in time out. This 
observation and supervision is documented. 
7. The period of placement alone in a room or other designated area shall not exceed thirty (30) minutes.  
8. The period of placement alone in a room or other area shall not exceed a total of three (3) hours in any 
twenty-four (24) hour period. 
  
a. Should the placement alone in a room or other area exceed a total of three (3) hours in any 
twenty-four (24) hour time period, the confinement is considered seclusion. Staff is then required 
to follow the procedures governing the use of restraint/seclusion. Refer to hospital “Restraint and 
Seclusion” Policy. 
 
9.  The date, time, and duration of time out is documented. The outcome of its use is documented as well. 
10. The use of intimidation, force, or threat is prohibited in utilizing Time Out. 
 
 
REFERENCE: Louisiana Revised Statutes, Title 28, Mental Health Part VI Rights of Persons Suffering 
from Mental Illness and Substance Abuse 
Joint Commission Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals, 2016: PC.01.03.03 
   OLOL: OrgClin-036: Restraint and/or Seclusion and Safe Patient Behavior Management 