 
 
1 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center                      
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title: Code Blue (Cardiac Arrest, Medical 
Emergency) in Mental and Behavioral Health 
areas not located on the main hospital campus 
Section: Patient Care 
Date of 
Origination:        
April 1994 Policy 
Reference #: 
BPC 013 
Last Revised 
Date: 
December 2017 Supersedes #: Code 14 
Addendum, 
B/N/C004 
  Last Review 
Date: 
June 27, 2024 
  
POLICY: 
CPR and/or emergency first aid is initiated as necessary in Mental and Behavioral Health areas not located 
on the main hospital campus. 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Emergency help is summoned by dialing 911 and overhead paging Code Blue. 
2. CPR and/or emergency aid is initiated and maintained until EMS assumes care and/or the patient is 
transferred using emergency supplies and/or equipment as appropriate to the patient’s condition. An 
AED, oxygen and an emergency kit are available on each nursing unit in the TAU building.  
3. The Charge Nurse or designee assigns a person to: 
 a. Monitor the other patients on the unit and assign them to a safe area. 
 b. Open and attend the unit doors. 
 c. Notify ancillary/support personnel. 
 d. Notify receptionist to expect emergency personnel. 
 e. Assist with answering phones. 
 f. Notify the attending psychiatrist and attending medical physician. 
 g. Contact the patient’s family or significant other. 
 h. Notify Emergency Room of transfer 
4. The nurse and/or qualified unit staff 
 a. Initiates CPR. 
             b. Have emergency kit, oxygen, AED, and cardiac board brought to patient’s room/location, 
and connect leads/pads to patient.              
             c. Remain with the patient to provide pertinent patient information/history to any physician 
responding and emergency personnel.  
 
2 
 d. Notify attending physician of events. 
 e. Have patient’s chart and hospital rolling laptop if available, brought to the room/location. 
            f.           Record resuscitation events. 
            g. Notify family. 
 h. MBH Staff will notify emergency room regarding legal status of patient 
3. All events will be documented in the medical record. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References: 
OLOLRMC policy OrgClin-003 Code Blue/Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 
OLOLRMC policy OC-053 Medical Emergencies at off-site locations 
The Joint Commission 2016 Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals: PC.02.01.11, EP 1 - 4 