1 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Srvs. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   
Subject:  Treatment of Victims of Sexual Assault/Abuse Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  October 2000 Supersedes:  
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed: 
August 19, 2024 
January 9, 2025 
Serial Code:  CAR-05 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to provide guidelines for the compassionate treatment of victims of sexual 
assault/abuse in accordance with the Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services 
(ERDs).  The particular needs of victims of sexual assault/abuse are reflected in the policy, which is 
designed to accomplish four things:  
1. To offer the psychological support and counseling that the patient needs to work through the trauma 
of sexual assault/abuse and its aftermath. 
2. To provide medical care for injuries that might have occurred. 
3. To gather forensic evidence to be used if the assailant is apprehended and prosecuted. 
4. To provide treatment to prevent venereal disease and information that morally may be used to  
defend against possible conception as a result of the assault. 
POLICY: 
A. “Compassionate and understanding care should be given to a person who is the victim of sexual 
assault/abuse.  Healthcare providers should cooperate with law enforcement officials and offer 
the person psychological and spiritual support , as well as  accurate medical information .  A 
female who has been raped should be able to defend herself against a potential conception from 
the sexual assault.  If, after appropriate testing, there is no evidence that conception has occurred 
already, the patient must be offered  medications that would prevent ovulation, sperm 
capacitation, or fertilization. If patient chooses to receive  the medication, administration will be 
completed in the emergency department upon order of the emergency provider. It is not 
permissible; however, to initiate or to recommend treatments that have as their purpose or direct 
effect the removal, destruction, or interference with the implantation of a fertilized ovum”. 
(Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, Directive #36). 
B. The patient shall be recognized as autonomous and supported in the decision -making process 
regarding their care. The patient or their surrogate decision maker should be carefully informed 
as to treatment options available. Individuals, who are victims of sexual assault, retain the 
freedom to accept or refuse any interventions and or information that is offered.  Coercion in 
favor of any treatment should be avoided.    2 
 
C. In all instances, the patient's rights and responsibilities as decision -maker will be respected by 
carefully providing the patient with necessary information and the opportunity to make deliberate 
decisions.  The legal guardian may represent a patient who is a minor, is unconscious or 
otherwise unable to understand and speak for herself.  This person(s) shall be given all the 
information that the patient would normally be given.   
D. No information should be given to the news media concerning the nature of the alleged assault or 
the particulars surrounding the case. 
E. The individual's total well -being is the primary consideration in treating sexual assault/abuse            
patients. This means providing care in each case without discrimination: 
 
1. All patients presenting for treatment as a victim of sexual assault, molestation/abuse , carnal 
knowledge, or crime against nature , will be triaged and promptly placed in a private     
examination room to provide privacy and confidentiality for the patient.  
 
2. Adults are defined as 18 years of age and older.  Pediatrics is defined as 17 years of age and                   
younger. 
 
3. Education and counseling for the emotional trauma sustained in the assault should be 
provided. 
 
a. Pastoral Services may provide religious and spiritual support which can help to 
reduce the harm suffered.   
 
b.  Sexual Trauma Awareness Response Center (STAR) should be called to provide 
patient advocacy. 
 
c. For all pediatric patients , the Child Advocacy Center (CAC) will be notified using 
faxed referral. 
 
4.  Respect for the dignity of the person and protection of privacy by shielding the patient, as far 
as possible from unnecessary exposure and embarrassment, is of utmost importance. 
 
5. RN should notify admissions of patient being seen for sexually oriented criminal offense to     
trigger CMV code for billing. No sexual assault victim will be directly billed for medical 
assessment and evidence collection.  
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
NON-REPORTED SEXUAL ASSAULT 
1. When an adult sexual assault victim presents to the Emergency Department and does not wish to 
report the incident to the police, we do not report the assault to law enforcement.  
 
2. An adult sexual assault victim can request evidence collection. Evidence will be transferred to 
law enforcement with jurisdiction in the parish that the crime occurred  or to the East Baton 
Rouge Parish Coroner’s Office . The patient will be informed of length of time for which 
specimen is preserved. If unknown jurisdiction , evidence will be transferred to the East Baton 
Rouge Parish Coroner’s Office .  Livingston ED will coordinate with Jefferson Parish Coroner 
Office through Region 9 as appropriate.  
 
REPORTED SEXUAL ASSAULT: 
1. With the consent of the patient, proper legal procedures for collection of evidence, reporting, and 
documentation for criminal prosecution will be completed. 
 
2. If the adult victim desires the sexual assault to be reported, or in the case of a pediatric  patient, 
contact the East Baton Rouge Sheriff’s O ffice at 225-389-5000, with the street address and city that 
the victimization occurred. The East Baton Rouge Sheriff’s Office will direct to the appropriate law 
enforcement agency. Livingston ED will report to the appropriate law enforcement agency. 
a. Contact SANE nurse via Coroner’s Office at (225) 389 -3047 and law enforcement for all 
Pediatric patients age 17 and under. An adult sexual assault victim presenting to Emergency 
Department may refuse to report incident to the police and we do not report the assault to law 
enforcement. Livingston ED will contact the Jefferson Parish  Coroner Office at ( 504)365-
9199 as appropriate.   
b. RN should contact the Sexual Trauma Awareness and Response  Center (STAR) to act as a 
patient liaison during the reporting and evidence collection process at 225 -383-7273, 24 
hours a day, 7 days a week. If unable to reach, can call back up number (225) 978 -2721.  
Livingston ED will work through Jefferson Parish SANE nurse for STAR support. Child Life 
can be utilized to assist with the collection of evidence for the pediatric patient population.                
c. The SANE nurse collecting evidence or responsible law enforcement agency shall take 
custody of the sealed sexual assault kit and any other evidence upon signature in the “Chain 
of Custody Evidence Log”.  
d. All evidence shall remain in the custody of a designated Emergency Department Registered 
Nurse until given to responsible law enforcement agent or locked in the evidence refrigerator 
and chain of custody log to be completed . Livingston ED evidence collected by the Jefferson 4 
 
Parish Coroner SANE nur se will remain with the coroner representative until given to the 
responsible law enforcement agency.  
e. Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center ’s Pediatric Emergency D epartment is the 
Region 2 Coroner’s designated preferred location for performing a forensic and medical 
examination on children, both female and male.  
f. Acute pediatric forensic exams are performed on all children  12 years of age and younger 
and pre menarchal who are sexually victimized within  96 hours of last known contact with 
perpetrator.  
g. Acute pediatric forensic exams are performed on all children 12 years of age  and older and 
post menarchal who are sexually victimized within 120 hours of last known contact with 
perpetrator. 
h. The appropriate law enforcement agency , Department of Child and Family Services , and 
SANE (coroner  office) should always be contacted to report the sexual victimization of a 
child. 
PROCEDURE FOR COLLECTION OF EVIDENCE: 
 
1. A routine emergency department medical record should be utilized. 
 
a. The registered nurse should clearly document the sexual assault kit number in the electronic 
medical record. 
 
b.  The file number assigned by the responsible law enforcement agency should be documented 
in the electronic medical record  with date, time, method of notification, and name of official 
receiving notification. 
 
c. In an adult victim, the patient's request to report the incident to law enforcement must be 
documented in the emergency department record. 
 
d. The Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kits are available in the Pediatric Emergency 
Departments at Our Lady of the Lake ( OLOL). These kits are provided by the East Baton 
Rouge Parish Coroner’s Office. If additional kits are required, contact the Coroner’s Office at 
(225) 389 -3047. Adult evidence collection kits are provided by SANE nurse at time of 
collection.  
 
2. Outside the pediatric sexual assault evidence kit there are four documents. 
a. Coroner’s Authorization for Release of Protected Information. 
i. Original copy should be placed in regular envelope sealed with Crime Lab written on   
envelope and placed in clear bag attached outside evidence recovery kit.  
ii. Make 3 copies from original, one placed with chart to be scanned into electronic 
medical record, one placed in East Baton Rouge Parish Coroner’s envelope to be put                            5 
 
outside of kit, and one placed in regular envelope sealed with law enforcement 
written on the envelope. This envelope should also remai n outside of the kit. No 
patient identification except kit number should be placed on outside of envelopes or 
evidence kit.  
 
b. East Baton Rouge Parish Safe Kit Log. 
i. Completed form should be faxed to (225) 389-3447. 
ii. After faxing, place on chart to be scanned into electronic medical record.  
 
c. Child Advocacy Center (CAC) information sheet should be provided to patient or caretaker.  
 
d. Sheet of stickers with the kit number on them to be used to label all collected evidence. 
 
3. Outside adult sexual assault evidence kit there are ten documents.  
 
a. Evidence Custody/Transfer form. 
 
b. Authorization for release of information, property of East Baton Rouge Parish Coroner’s 
Office.  
i. Original copy should be placed in regular envelope sealed with Crime Lab written on 
envelope. Do not place any paperwork in evidence recovery kit.  
ii. Make 3 copies from original, one placed with chart to be scanned into electronic   
medical record, one placed in East Baton Rouge Parish Coroner’s envelope to be put 
outside of kit, and one placed in regular envelope sealed with law enforcement        
written on the envelope. This envelope should also remain outside of the kit. No patient 
identification except kit number should be placed on outside of envelopes or evidence 
kit.  
 
c. 1 sheet of stickers with kit number on them to be used to label all collected evidence.  
 
d. LA Crimes victim’s application. 
 
e. Sexual Assault examination form. 
 
f. Patient Contact Sheet. 
 
g. Adult sexual assault victim medication guide. 
 
h. Sexual Trauma Awareness Response Center (STAR) card. 
 
i. Sexual Trauma Awareness Response Center (STAR) brochure. 
 6 
 
4. The forensic examiner will follow the guidelines outlined in the Sexual Assault Evidence  Recovery 
Kit Instructions.  
 
a. All specimens placed in the kit will be labeled with the kit number utilizing the provided 
stickers, including the date/initials of the forensic examiner.  
 
b. Use DNA blood stain card and oral swabs in kit to obtain patient reference specimens, must be 
clearly marked “reference” so crime lab personnel will not treat the swab as evidentiary and test 
for offender DNA.  
 
c. A minimum of two evidentiary swabs should be collected from each affected area including 
those identified with an alternate light source.  Assure each swab is placed in its own separate 
box. 
 
d. All evidence collected should be dried before placing in the kit. Carefully fold any clothes   
stained with body fluids and place in outer clothing bag or undergarment bag. Document where 
staining is present on clothing item. Document on outer clothing bag the content of the bag (ex. 
blue shirt, yellow socks). 
  
e. Obtain order from physician for required lab specimens:  
i. Urine pregnancy test (UPT) 
ii. RPR-Syphilis 
iii. HIV 1&2 antibodies 
iv. Hepatitis Panel 
v. Wet Prep – use Culture Swab Plus 
vi. Urinalysis (UA) 
vii. Urine Culture (cx) 
viii. If ordered:  Gonorrhea (GC) culture use e-swab 
ix. If ordered, GenProbe use endocervical/ male urethral swab, can use Urine Gen -
Probe for  children who will not tolerate swabs used in the exam or require no 
cervical specimen collection. 
x. Chlamydia (call Micro for required M4 culture media) 
xi. For HIV post-exposure prophylaxis, obtain additional serum specimens as ordered 
by the physician. Utilize appropriate lab specimen collection tube.  
xii. Send lab specimens to Our Lady of the Lake laboratory. 
 
f. Once the evidence is collected and the kit is sealed, the attending physician must sign the outside 
of the kit across the evidence tape to verify that he or she collected or oversaw collection of the 
evidentiary kit and to maintain integrity of the evidence . If SANE nurse collects evidence , same 
process will be followed.  
 
 7 
 
5. The Emergency Department nursing assessment/ documentation should include: 
 
a. Any injuries, neurologic status, patient complaints or concerns, pertinent medical and 
surgical history, menarche, allergies, and current medications.   
 
b. It is appropriate for the registered nurse and or physician to document in quotations 
what the victim states occurred during the victimization.  
 
c. The patient's last normal menstrual period, last consensual coitus (if applicable). 
 
d. If the patient has bathed, douched, urinated, defecated, or changed clothes since the 
incident.  
e. It is also important to note the mental state and the overall general appearance of the 
patient, paying attention to clothing, noting any tears or debris in the hair or clothing.  
 
6. Adult discharge documentation should include referral to the Sexual Trauma Awareness and                                                                                                
Response Center (STAR), and the Battere d Women’s Shelter if indicated. Ensure hospital 
consent for release of information is obtained and includes appropriate law enforcement, 
STAR, and the Coroner’s Office. 
 
7. Pediatric discharge documentation should include: 
a. Follow-up medical treatment per primary care physician, if no primary care physician 
assigned, designate medical follow-up with Pediatric Academic Clinic. 
b. Ensure hospital consent for release of information is obtained and includes Child 
Advocacy, appropriate law enforcement, and Sexual Trauma Awareness and 
Response Center (STAR) and Coroner’s Office. 
c. Patient will be referred to Child Advocacy Center for forensic interview, coordination 
of investigation, prosecution, and treatment including counseling services. Fax copy 
of pediatric forensic referral and patient face sheet to Child Advocacy Center. 
d. In the pediatric patient, mandatory notification to the Department of Children and 
Family Services must be completed.  
 
8. All post assault victims who are symptomatic, Tanner Stage 2 or greater, should receive 
empiric prophylactic antibiotic treatment for sexually transmitted diseases.  
 
9. For any evidence not obtained through the coroner’s office and SANE nurse , contact 
appropriate law enforcement to promptly retrieve evidence kit. Chain of custody for evidence 
will be maintained. Refer to policies CAR-04 and OrgOps/GN/026 
 8 
 
10. All patients presenting to ED for treatment as a victim of sexual assault, molestation/abuse,  
carnal knowledge or crime against nature will have medical screening  exam completed  per 
EMTALA. I f transfer is required from off sites , ambulance mode of transportation to  
appropriate facility is preferred. All children age 12 and under will be transferred to OLOL 
Pediatric Emergency Department. 
 
CONTRACEPTION: Pregnancy resulting from sexual assault will be a concern for female patients who 
are post menarche. With the consent of the female patient who is post menarche, an hCG pregnancy test 
will be administered to determine if the patient is pregnant.  
 
1. If the hCG test is positive, this indicates that the victim was pregnant prior to the sexual   
assault. This should be carefully explained to the victim. The patient should then be referred 
to a physician or healthcare practitioner for follow-up relating to the pregnancy. 
 
2. If the hCG test is negative , this indicates that the victim was not pregnant prior to the sexual 
assault.  Information regarding options to reduce the possibility of conception and the 
availability of post-coital contraception, Levonorgestrel (Plan B), that can prevent ovulation, 
sperm capacitation, or fertilization will be provided to the patient.   The patient should be 
informed that medication is available for administration in the emergency department and is 
most effective within 72 hours of the sexual assault.     
 
3. If the patient refuses to take the hCG test  or refuses the medication Plan B , information 
regarding options to reduce the possibility of conception and the availability of post -coital 
contraception, Levonorgestrel (Plan B), that can prevent ovulation, sperm capacitation, or 
fertilization will be provided to the patient.   The patient should be informed that Plan B is 
available via retail pharmacies in Louisiana as an over-the-counter medication and is most 
effective within 72 hours of the sexual assault.   The patient should then be referred to a 
physician or healthcare practitioner for follow -up. The health care provider will document 
accordingly in the medical record.  
 
4. If information concerning conception or post -coital contraceptives is not offered in 
accordance with this policy because t he treating physician or health care provider finds it 
morally objectionable, the treating physician or healthcare provider must inform the patient 
of the option to have another physician or healthcare provider in the Emergency Department 
provide information. For off-site Emergency Departments with a single provider, telephone 
or virtual options should be considered.  
 
 
REFERENCES: 
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops:  Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health 
Care Services (Sixth Edition).  9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Off Campus ED 
North ED:  
All patients presenting to OLOL NBR ED for treatment as a victim of sexual assault, molestation/abuse, 
carnal knowledge, or crime against nature will have a medical screening exam completed as per 
EMTALA. If the victim desires the sexual assault to be reported, is mentally incapacitated, or a pediatric 
patient (17 years of age and younger) immediately call law enforcement (225-389-5000) and DCFS 
(888-524-3578). All children age 12 and under with the assault occurring within 120 hours should be 
transferred to OLOL Children’s Hospital ER for forensic exam (preferably by ambulance). Care of 
pediatric patients should be discussed between the NBR ED provider and OLOL Children’s ED provider 
to determine best course of action. When refusal to report to Law Enforcement is expressed by the adult 
patient, STAR resources should be contacted for support services.  
 10 
 
11 
 
Livingston ED: 
 
All patients presenting to OLOL Livingston Emergency Department for treatment as a victim of sexual 
assault, molestation/abuse, carnal knowledge, or crime against nature will have a medical screening 
exam completed as per EMTALA. If the victim desires the sexual assault to be reported, or in the case 
of a pediatric patient, contact the Livingston Parish Sheriff’s Office at 225-686-2241, with the street 
address and city that the victimization occurred. The Livingston Parish Sheriff’s Office will direct to the 
appropriate law enforcement agency. Contact the Jefferson Parish Coroner’s Office at (504) 365-9199 
for SANE nurse on all patients ages 13-17 years and adult victims.  
All children age 12 and under will be transferred to OLOL Pediatric Emergency Department. 
Emergency Room physicians use their discretion when deciding if it would be more appropriate to send 
pediatric patient to the Baton Rouge campus, whether it is for medical reasons or when an adolescent 
would be better served in a pediatric environment. 
Evidence will be transferred to law enforcement with jurisdiction in the parish that the crime occurred or 
to the Livingston Parish Coroner’s office. The SANE nurse collecting evidence or responsible law 
enforcement agency shall take custody of the sealed sexual assault kit and any other evidence upon 
signature in the “Chain of Custody Evidence Log”. Kits are provided by the Jefferson Parish Coroner’s 
Office or may be kept in the ED. The patient will be informed of length of time for which specimen is 
preserved. If unknown jurisdiction, evidence will be transferred to the Livingston Parish Coroner’s 
Office. All evidence will be preserved for 1 year. 
 
Region 9 SANE nurses will coordinate with appropriate region for STAR referrals. LIV ED nursing 
team may provide the patient with the STAR # for follow up.   
 
Region 9 SANE nurses and/or Appropriate Law Enforcement will notify the appropriate  
Child Advocacy Center (CAC) in Region 9 for referral and appropriate follow up. 
 12 
 
OLOL Livingston Campus Sexual Assault Algorithm 
13 
 
Ascension ED:  
 
All patients presenting to OLOL Ascension Emergency Department for treatment as a victim of sexual assault, 
molestation/abuse, carnal knowledge, or crime against nature will have a medical screening exam completed as 
per EMTALA. If the victim desires the sexual assault to be reported, or in the case of a pediatric patient, 
contact the Ascension Parish Sheriff’s Office at 225-621-8300, with the street address and city that the 
victimization occurred. The Ascension Parish Sheriff’s Office will direct to the appropriate law enforcement 
agency.  
All children aged 12 and under will be transferred to OLOL Pediatric Emergency Department. The Emergency 
Room physicians use their discretion when deciding if it would be more appropriate to send a pediatric patient 
to the Baton Rouge campus, whether it is for medical reasons or when an adolescent would be better served in 
a pediatric environment. Region 2 SANE will perform forensic exams. 14 
 
OLOL Ascension Campus Sexual Assault Algorithm 
15 
 
RMC Campus Sexual Assault Algorithm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
                         Children’s Hospital Pediatric Sexual Assault Algorithm    
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
 
 Children’s Hospital Pediatric Sexual Assault Algorithm (continued) 
 
 