CH-ECLS-012 7506 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Blood Bank Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Blood Bank (7506) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7506 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• An illuminated Exit Sign is located at the door exiting department into the hallway. 
• Adjacent smoke compartments are located through double doors towards hall by patient 
elevators and through double doors entering hall outside kitchen area. CH-ECLS-012 7506 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• Any available team member will clear the hallway of any item blocking exit 
• Any available team member will ensure the doors are closed 
• Any available team member moves patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety”   
• Any available team member assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities   
• Department Leadership or Designee ensures all employees are accounted for 
• Department Leadership or Designee ensures each room is empty 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The closest Fire Extinguisher is directly outside the hall by the door entering the Pre-Admit area. 
• The closest Manual Pull Station is located at the main entrance of the hospital. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Histology supplies are in a fire-proof cabinet 
• Blood Bank hall door is badge access only.  Code RED team would have access through the 
main lab. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors toward the Imaging 
departments if needed, exiting the building at PBX or the loading dock gathering in the staff 
parking area. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors toward the kitchen areas. 
• This unit will only have horizontal evacuation. 