CH-ECLS-012 (102-10312-3259) 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Gift Shop/Lake Children’s 
Pharmacy Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Gift Shop/RxOne 
(7582) 
Policy 
Reference #: 
CH-ECLS-012 102-
10312-3259 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date: 1/29/2024 
  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are located: CH-ECLS-012 (102-10312-3259) 
Page 2 of 2 
o at the double doors exiting into the front hallway 
o in the hallway outside the Gift Shop workroom 
o at the doorway entering hall from break room 
  
• The department is split into two separate smoke compartments.  The public area is in one smoke 
compartment with the employee only rooms in a different smoke compartment.   
o Adjacent smoke compartments are located through the retail area double doors turning 
right towards the main reception area or through the double doors in the back hall 
towards the back of the kitchen. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Department is open Monday through Friday from 8:00am to 5:00pm 7:30am to 5:00pm  
•  
• Any available team member clears the hallway of anything blocking path to exit 
• Any available team member closes doors and pharmacy roll down window.  
• Any available team member moves patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Any available team member assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Department leadership ensures all employees are accounted for 
• Department leadership ensures each room is empty 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguishers are located at the double doors exiting the main retail area and in the hallway 
outside the Blood Bank. 
• The nearest Manual pull stations are located at the front entrance of the hospital and at the two 
doors exiting the eating area of the cafeteria. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors towards the public eating 
area. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors towards the main 
reception area. 
• The Gift Shop/RxOne Lake Children’s Pharmacy will only have horizontal evacuation. 
• Employees will muster in the parking lot by the main hospital entrance. 
Formatted: Line spacing:  Multiple 1.03 li, Bulleted + Level:
1 + Aligned at:  0.25" + Indent at:  0.5"