CH-ECLS-012 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Medical Records Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Medical Records  
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012  
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located at entrance to hall behind Financial Counseling offices and at 
Reception desk. 
  CH-ECLS-012 
Page 2 of 2 
• The Adjacent smoke compartment is located through the single door into hall toward Imaging. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
(Health Information Management Hours of Operation: Monday through Friday 8a-4:30pm) 
• Any available staff will be responsible for clearing the hallway of any carts or equipment by 
moving them to the nearest office. 
• Any available staff will closes all doors. 
• Any available staff will be responsible for moving patients and visitors to safety explaining, 
“The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Any available staff will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities. 
• Any available staff will ensure all employees are accounted for. 
• Any available staff will ensure each room is empty. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The closest fire extinguisher is located on the wall next to the Radiology waiting area. 
• The closest manual pull station is located on the wall by Stairwell 3 next to the visitor elevators. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The horizontal evacuation route would be to enter the Imaging area and if needed, exit the 
building via the front doors mustering in the Public Parking Area. 
• This department will only have horizontal evacuation. 