CH-ECLS-012 7544 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policy Manual: Materials Management Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Materials Management 
(7544) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7544 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
First Floor 
o At the doorway onto the dock and the doorway into the hallway CH-ECLS-012 7544 
Page 2 of 3 
Second Floor 
o At the doorway into the back hall of Surgery and at the doorway into the hall across from 
Biomed 
 
• Adjacent smoke compartments are located: 
First Floor 
o Through double doors to hall behind Kitchen 
o Through double doors to hall behind Imaging 
 
Second Floor 
• Through double doors for hall towards the Pharmacy 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• The Equipment Clerk, other clerk and/or designee clears the hallway of any carts or equipment 
by moving them to the equipment storage area.  
• The Supply Chain Coordinator, other clerks and/or designee will close doors and windows in the 
shipping and receiving area. 
• Stock Clerk 3, other clerks and/or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed. 
• The Shipping and Receiving Clerk, other clerk or Designee will move patients and visitors to 
safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety.” 
• All available staff will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Director will ensure all employees are accounted for. 
• The Director, other clerks and/or designee will ensure each room is empty. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire Extinguisher locations: 
First Floor 
o In hall outside department on the right when walking towards Imaging 
Second Floor 
o At double doors before leaving department and in hall along outside wall of department 
 
• Manual Pull Station locations: 
First Floor 
o At the exit by PBX or the exit to the Outdoor Soiled Dock. 
Second Floor 
o At Stairwell 1 by the on call rooms. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• All leaders are to utilize Safety Data Sheets for reference for any combustible products in their 
areas of responsibility 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
First Floor CH-ECLS-012 7544 
Page 3 of 3 
o Primary horizontal evacuation route will be toward the loading dock on the exterior of the 
building per Safety Department-provided maps.  Primary destination will be the nearest 
adjacent parking lot near the employee parking area. 
o Secondary horizontal evacuation route will be to exit toward the front/main exit of the 
hospital or side entrances per Safety Department-provided maps 
 
Second Floor 
o Primary horizontal evacuation route will be toward the hallway between the OR and 
Central Sterile/SPD, proceeding toward the nearest stairwell.  
o Secondary horizontal evacuation route will exit to the same hallway, finding alternate 
stairwells, as applicable. 
o Primary vertical evacuation route will be toward the hallway between the OR and SPD, 
then down the nearest stairwell.  Primary destination will be between the helipad and 
physician parking area. 
 