CH-ECLS-012 7501 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policy Manual: NICU Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for NICU 7501 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7501 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
o At the entrance to Stairwell 7 
o Outside the NICU nurse station CH-ECLS-012 7501 
Page 2 of 3 
o Outside the patient room 4532 in the corridor 
o On each side of the entrance of the NICU 
  
• The Adjacent smoke compartment is located through double doors towards the family waiting 
room or through the UCU double doors toward the Employee elevators. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• The CNA and/or Nurse will move items out of the hall and into the supply room. 
• The CNA and/or Nurse will close all doors on the unit.  
• The charge nurse or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed  
• The bedside nurse or designee will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital 
is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety”  
• The CNA or Nurse will prevent people from using the elevators 
• The Bedside nurse or CNA will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities   
• The Charge nurse or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for.   
• The Charge nurse or designee will ensures all patients are accounted for  
• The Charge nurse or designee will ensure each room is empty.   
• The Charge nurse or designee will confirm Area of Refuge occupants or those needing assistance 
have been evacuated. 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• The medical gas shut off valves are located outside NICU room 4540. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• The isolette or warmer, depending on age of patient, will be used to transport the patients off of 
the unit.   
• Evacuation aprons will be utilized for evacuating stable, non-ventilated patients. These are 
located in the cabinet in the supply room of the NICU. 
• NICU will require extra assistance moving ventilated patients.   
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguishers are located outside the NICU nourishment room. 
• The nearest Manual Pull Station is located outside Stairwell 7. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Oxygen tanks are located in the clean supply room. 
• All patients will need extra assistance being moved if needed. 
• The entire Children’s hospital requires badge access.   
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors entering hall toward the 
Visitor Elevators. CH-ECLS-012 7501 
Page 3 of 3 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is through double doors toward the Visitor Elevators down 
Stairwell 3 into the Public Parking Area. 