CH-ECLS-012 (7515) 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policy Manual: PACU Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for PACU (7515) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 (7515) 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
o At Stairwell 4 
o At double doors entering OR by Soiled Workroom CH-ECLS-012 (7515) 
Page 2 of 3 
o At double doors entering PACU by PACU # 1 
o At double doors entering PACU by PACU # 10 
o Outside PACU # 4 and PACU # 7 
  
• Adjacent smoke compartments are Located: 
o Through the double doors entering the OR area 
o Through the double doors past the patient elevators into the front hall towards the visitor 
elevators 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• CNAs or designee will clear the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving them to the back 
corner by the staff lockers 
• CSRs or designee will close all doors 
• Charge Nurse or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed 
• Nurses working in PACU will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Nurse caring for the patient, or designee, will assist those with Limited English Proficiency 
(LEP) and those with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Nurse Manager or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• Supervisor or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for 
• Manager or designee will ensure entire room is empty. 
• The Charge nurse or designee will confirm Area of Refuge occupants or those needing assistance 
have been evacuated. 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• The medical gas shut off valves are located outside PACU 10 across from Stairwell 4. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• For horizontal evacuations, we will use the stretcher or bed the patient is on. 
• For vertical evacuations, we will use equipment such as stretchers and sheets. Additional sheets 
are located on the linen cart in the Clean Supply room. 
• We anticipate to be partially ambulatory. If assistance is needed, the Manager or designee will 
seek help from the OR. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The closest fire extinguisher is located outside Pre-Op Room 11 across from Pre-Op Room 9. 
 
• The closest manual pull station is located at the entrance to Stairwell 4. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Special patient populations may include intubated patients or non-ambulatory patients due to 
anesthesia, specific surgery, or pain medication.  
 CH-ECLS-012 (7515) 
Page 3 of 3 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is past the patient elevators into the front hallway. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is through double doors close to PACU # 1 entering 
the OR area. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is down stairwell 4 to muster between the Physician and 
Staff Parking Areas. 
• The secondary vertical evacuation route is through the double doors by the patient elevators then 
down Stairwell 3 next to the visitor elevators to muster in center of Public Parking Area. 
 