CH-ECLS-012 (6122) 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policy Manual: Pediatric Intensive Care Unit Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Pediatric Intensive 
Care Unit 6122 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 6122 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date: 2/20/2019 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are located: 
o Outside Patient Rooms 12, 8, 2, 1, 19, and 20 
o At Stairwell 1 CH-ECLS-012 (6122) 
Page 2 of 3 
 
• The Adjacent Smoke Compartment is reached by going through the double doors in the back hall 
between patient room 20 and the PICU Attending Work room or through the double doors in the 
front hall past Patient Room 1. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• Charge nurse or designee will  clear the hallway and move equipment to clean utility area 
• Charge nurse or designee are responsible for closing doors. 
• Charge nurse or designee confirms the automatic fire doors are closed and will reopen when all 
clear. 
• Bedside nurse or designee will insure patients and visitors are moved to safety explaining, “The 
hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety”. 
• CNA and/or designee will prevent people from using elevators. 
• Bedside Nurse or designee assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities   
• Charge nurse or designee ensures all employees are accounted for. 
• Charge nurse or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for 
• Charge nurse or designee will ensure each room is empty.   
• The Charge nurse or designee will confirm Area of Refuge occupants or those needing assistance 
have been evacuated. 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves  
• Med Gas shut off valves are located in the hall between patient rooms 2-3 and patient rooms 18-
19. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Equipment identified as special patient transporting devices during emergency include items 
such as Transport ventilators.  Patient bed, crib or bassinet depending on age of patient and 
wheelchairs may also be used. 
• Equipment such as wheel chairs are stored in clean equipment room located next to  Touch down 
station 2 
• Pediatric Intensive Care Unit will require extra assistance moving intubated ventilated patients.   
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Location of fire-extinguishers:  
o In the back hall outside the Medications room and the Equipment room 
o In the front hall outside the Medications room and the Equipment room 
o At the nurse’s station on the back hall  
o At the nurse’s station on the front hall 
 
• The nearest Manual Pull Station is on the wall of patient room 8 before the Stairwell 1 door. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
Commented [PJ1]: No changes to specific roles 
Commented [PJ2]: All equpment stored in clean equipment 
room 
Commented [PJ3]: No change to need of extra assistance CH-ECLS-012 (6122) 
Page 3 of 3 
• Oxygen tanks, nitric oxide tank are identified  as used/stored combustible products   
• The patient population in the PICU consist of intubated ventilated patients that may or may not 
be pharmacologically paralyzed. 
• The entire Children’s hospital requires badge access.  The PICU unit requires badge access as 
well.  The Charge Nurse or designee will hold the doors open, if needed. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Horizontal evacuation is through the double doors entering the back hall or the double doors 
entering the front hall. 
• Vertical evacuation route is down Stairwell 3 into the Public Parking Area. 
Commented [PJ4]: No changes 