CH-ECLS-012 (7581) 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Resource Center Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Resource Center (7581) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7581 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors, visitors and volunteers are 
to follow the instruction of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• An Illuminated Exit Sign is located at the double doors exiting the department. 
  
• The Adjacent smoke compartments is located through the double doors towards Imaging. CH-ECLS-012 (7581) 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• Any available team member or volunteer will clears the path out of the department   
• Any available team member or volunteer will  move patients and visitors to safety explaining, 
“The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Any available team member or volunteer will assist those with Limited English Proficiency 
(LEP) and those with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Any available team member or volunteer will ensures all employees are accounted for 
• Any available team member or volunteer will ensure each room is empty. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The closest fire extinguisher is on the wall by Radiology waiting. 
• The closest manual pull station is located on the wall outside Stairwell 3. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route will be through the double doors towards Imaging. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route will be to the ED waiting area and, if needed, exiting 
the building to gather in the Public Parking Area. 
• The Resource Center will only have horizontal evacuation. 