CH-ECLS-012 6033 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policy Manual: Surgical Unit Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Surgical Unit (6033) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 6033 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date: 3/4/24 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
o Outside Patient Room 22, 39, and 32 
o Outside the Resident Work Room CH-ECLS-012 6033 
Page 2 of 3 
  
• The Adjacent smoke compartments is located via the double doors passed the Staff Lounge 
toward the PT/ST/OT Gym or via the double doors passed Patient Room 40 toward the Visitor 
Elevators. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• RN’s, CNA and CSR or designee will be responsible for removing equipment from the hallway 
to our Treatment Room. 
•  RN’s, CSR’s and CNA or designee will be responsible for closing all doors and windows. 
• Charge Nurse and /or designee will be responsible for confirming automatic doors closed. 
• Registered Nurse as delegated by Charge Nurse will be responsible for  moving patients and 
visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your 
safety” 
• A team member on the unit delegated by Charge Nurse will monitor the elevator and prevents 
people from using elevator 
• Registered Nurse as delegated by Charge Nurse will assists those with Limited English 
Proficiency (LEP) and those with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Charge Nurse  or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• Charge Nurse or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for 
• Charge Nurse or designee will ensures each room is empty.   
• The Charge nurse or designee will confirm Area of Refuge occupants or those needing assistance 
have been evacuated. 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• The medical gas shut off valves are located outside Patient Room 40 and outside the Staff 
Lounge. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Special items used for transport are wheelchairs during an emergencies.   
• Wheelchairs are stored in the equipment area. 
• There will be a mixture of ambulatory or partial ambulatory based on the age of the patients and 
acuity.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire Extinguishers are located outside the Nourishment Room toward each hallway; outside the 
Soiled Work Room; and within the Data and Electric Rooms. 
• Manual Pull Stations are located on the wall outside Stairwell 7 and outside Stairwell 3. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Medical gas and oxygen is the types of equipment that would need to be turned off 
• Oxygen tanks are stored on the crash cart and the treatment room on the unit. 
• Disable parents and variation with patient age population. 
• Badge needed to access stairwells CH-ECLS-012 6033 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is via the double doors toward the PT/OT/ST Gym or 
toward the Child Playroom. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is through double doors passing the visitor elevators then 
down Stairwell 3 gathering in the Public Parking lot. 
 