CHMP-003 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Children’s Hospital Section/ 
Chapter: Medications/Pharmacy 
Title: Children’s Hospital Patient Controlled 
Analgesia (PCA) 
Policy 
Reference #: CHMP-003 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: June 22, 2009 Review Date: June 2, 2023 
 
Revision Date: November 8, 2024 
    
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure that Patient Controlled Analgesic (PCA) is used in an effective, safe, secure, controlled manner 
and monitored by the registered nurse in the Children’s Hospital. 
 
POLICY: 
A. The physician will determine the appropriateness of Patient Controlled Analgesic therapy for each 
child prior to ordering.  Patient Controlled Analgesia (PCA) allows the patient to self-administer pain 
medication in addition to continuous programmed dosages of narcotics to help alleviate pain.  PCA 
orders must be obtained from the physician, and must specify drug, concentration, and all dosing 
parameters (loading dose-if applicable; basal; PCA dose; lock out interval and one-hour max). 
B. Pediatric Pain PCA order set is recommended for initial PCA order.   
 
I. General Information 
A. PCA is administered through a peripheral or central line. 
B. The physician must order PCA therapy, the analgesic, and the dosage parameters. 
C. Nurse-controlled analgesia (PCA by proxy) is not allowed or any other form of by proxy 
of the PCA.  Neither the patient’s family nor the nurse should push the PCA button except as 
ordered when analgesic infusion therapy is being used in Palliative Care (Refer to policy 
NMA-025: Palliative Care Analgesic Infusion Therapy). 
D. At the initiation of PCA therapy, any sedatives and narcotics active on the electronic 
medical record must be clarified if they are to be continued in conjunction with PCA.  
When possible, these medications should be discontinued or held until PCA is 
discontinued.  
E. With a physician order, the registered nurses may initiate, program, change parameters, change 
cassette or bag, tubing, and administer bolus doses via the PCA pump. 
F. Two nurses must verify orders, programming of pump, bolus doses, any wastes, and volume 
remaining. 
G. If pain is not relieved, two nurses will assess the pump functioning to include proper 
programming, connections, tubing kinked, etc. If pump is functioning properly and pain 
continues, the nurse should notify the physician of persistent pain. 
H. Patients on PCA therapy will be monitored for respiratory depression using Continuous Pulse 
Oximetry and continuous Capnography (ETCO) except while the patient is ambulating. Unless 
otherwise specified by the physician, the low O2 saturation (SpO2) alarm limit shall be set at 
90% for adults and for pediatric patients.  Unless otherwise specified by the physician, the low 
ETCO2 alarm limit shall be set at 30mmHg, and the high alarm limit shall be set at 55mmHg 
for adult and pediatric patients.                                  CHMP-003 
Page 2 of 3 
 
II. Pump Initiation 
The pump will be obtained from clean equipment room on the unit. 
A. The PCA cassette and/or bag will be prepared by the pharmacy., Once the nurse receives the 
narcotic it must be secured at all times.  The narcotic may not be placed in the patient’s 
drawer.  If for any reason the PCA therapy becomes discontinued once the medication has 
been received from pharmacy, the medication must be wasted.   
B. PCA cassettes will be changed every 72-hours  
C. For pump loading, priming, and programming, refer to manufacturer’s users’ manual. 
 
III. Patient Education 
A. Prior to the initiation of the PCA pump therapy, educate the patient and the family regarding 
the purpose and use of the device. 
B. Minimal education requirements include: 
1. Medication type 
2. Dosage 
3. Frequency of use 
4. Use of the patient injection device (bolus cord). 
5. Instruction to the family not to push the injection device. 
6. Information on pump timing between doses. 
C. The nurse initiating the PCA pump will document patient education in the electronic medical 
record. 
 
IV. Documentation 
A. All PCA documentation will be completed in the Electronic Medical Record (EMR). 
B. Initiation of PCA must be documented in the EMR to include the following and be signed by 
the witness. 
a. Pain assessment 
b. PCA Settings 
i. Mode 
ii. PCA Medication 
iii. Concentration 
iv. Continuous Basal Rate (if applicable) 
v. Demand Dose (labeled PCA dose on pump) (if applicable) 
vi. Lockout Interval 
vii. Dose limit 
c. Sedation 
i. Sedation Scale (Level of Consciousness) 
ii. Respiratory Rate 
iii. Oxygen Saturation (SpO2) 
iv. End Tidal CO2 
 
C. Patient assessment including a pain score, sedation scale, respirations, and SpO2 must be 
charted every hour for the first 4 hours of therapy, then every 2 hours.   
D. At each patient assessment, number of given and attempted doses will be documented. 
 
E. When an order is changed, two nurses will make and verify the change on the order and on 
the pump, document the new settings and witness verification of the information in the 
EMR.  Resume assessment and documentation every one-hour for 4 hours then every 2- 
hours. CHMP-003 
Page 3 of 3 
F. At each hand-off of caregivers (shift change, transfer to different unit/area, change of nurse), 
the ongoing and off going nurses must verify the settings and the volume of medication 
remaining, then document in the EMR and co-sign by the witness. 
G. When the cassette or bag is changed, the nurse and witness must verify the new medication 
being hung, the pump settings, and amount wasted.  All PCA settings and volume remaining 
will be charted and cosigned by the witness in the EMR.  The amount of drug wasted will be 
documented and cosigned by the witness in the EMR. 
 
V. Discontinuing Pump  
A. The order to discontinue PCA therapy must be placed by a physician. 
B. The nurse will verify that all history has been recorded, including the current hour’s therapy. 
C. Remove narcotic from the pump. 
D. Document the waste amount and witness in the EMR.  Discard empty cassette and tubing in 
appropriate container. 
E. If there is a discrepancy of more than 10% between the volume remaining in the EMR and 
the actual amount wasted, notify the charge nurse and follow hospital protocol for narcotic 
discrepancy. 
F. Pump must be properly disinfected and returned to clean equipment room.  
 
VI. Patient Undergoing Surgery with Current PCA Pump Therapy 
A. The unit nurse will verify all settings and volume remaining with the pre-op nurse accepting 
the patient and document this verification in the EMR. 
B. Pumps will not be stopped before a patient is received in Pre-op. 
C. The pump will be discontinued by the pre-op nurse, when imminent departure of the patient 
to the OR/ procedure room is established. The ICU nurse will discontinue the pump in a 
similar manner when OR and anesthesia staff are performing a direct transfer to the 
operating room. 
D. The pre-op nurse/ICU nurse shall discontinue the pump, waste the remaining narcotic, and 
document same on the PCA flow sheet in the EMR. The procedural nurse may be asked to 
assist with narcotic volume assessment. 
E. If PCA therapy is restarted, the PACU nurse will restart.  
 
Cross Reference Policy: 
Palliative Care Analgesic Infusion Therapy NMA-025 
Patient Controlled Analgesic NMA-016 
 