CHON-005 
Page 1 of 1 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:   
Subject:  Neutropenic Precautions Section:  Oncology 
Date of Origination:  June 22, 2009 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
April 5, 2013 
April 12, 2024 
Serial Code:  CHON-005 
  
PURPOSE: 
To define neutropenia, provide formula for calculating absolute neutrophil count and to describe the procedure 
necessary to institute neutropenic precautions. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Neutropenia is defined as decreased number of circulating neutrophils; specifically, an absolute neutropenic 
count (ANC) of less than 1,000 cells/mm3.  Neutropenia leaves a patient at risk for potentially life-threatening 
infections, (even from normal flora) that requires extra precautions. 
 
POLICY:  
All neutropenic patients will be cared for following established standards. 
 
1. The ANC is calculated by multiplying the total white blood count by the percentage of neutrophils and 
the percentage of immature neutrophils.  ANC = (% Segs + % Bands) x total WBC(x10). If an 
automated differential is performed, ANC calculations are calculated by using Neutrophil % in place of 
(% Segs+ % Bands). 
2. If inpatient, place a Neutropenic precaution sign on the patient’s door. 
3. Monitor the patient for fever and signs of infection.  Inspect the skin, mucous membranes, catheter sites, 
surgical incisions, and perineal area regularly for evidence of infection. 
4. The patient is not to receive fresh flowers or plants. 
5. A neutropenic diet is ordered, restricting the patient from receiving fresh fruits and vegetables, tea, deli 
meats or fountain drinks.  Food on trays must all be covered.  Cooked food should be warm upon 
receiving it.  Hot food should be thrown out after 1 hour at room temperature. 
6. Temperatures are to be taken a minimum of every 4 hours.  No rectal temperatures. 
7. Meticulous hand washing by all who enter the room is strictly enforced. 
8. No staff members with a transmissible disease or recent live immunization will have contact with 
patient. 
9. Invasive procedures are kept at a minimum.  Ex: suppositories, enemas, and urinary catheterizations. 
10. The patient will be encouraged to perform meticulous personal hygiene.  This will include cleansing the 
perineal area daily and after every bowel movement. 
11. Institute mouth care protocol per physician order. 
12. No visitors with transmissible infections will be allowed to visit the patient. 
13. Provide prompt initiation of ordered antibiotic therapy during episodes of febrile neutropenia. 
  
REFERENCES: 
Herring, R.A, (ED.). (2019) The Pediatric Chemotherapy and Biotherapy Curriculum. (4th ed.).    Glenview, IL: 
Association of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Nurse 