CHTP-01 
Page 1 of 6 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Children’s Hospital  
Subject:  Children’s Hospital Neonatal-Pediatric 
Transport Team 
Section:  Children’s Hospital 
Transport Team 
Date of Origination:  September 25, 2011 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
November 8, 2024 
Serial Code:  CHTP-01 
  
PURPOSE: 
         To delineate the purpose, organization, staff qualifications, training and education of the Neonatal -
Pediatric Transport Team, and establish the roles, authority and accountability of the medical and nursing 
leadership for this team 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Mission 
To provide competent initial assessment and stabilization, at the transfer site, of the critically ill or 
injured neonatal or pediatric patient referred to Our Lady of The Lake Children’s Hospital for a higher 
level of care or subspecialty. To safely manage and transport the critically ill or injured neonatal or 
pediatric patient with the expertise of competent experienced clinicians and state of the art equipment to 
Our Lady of The Lake Children’s Hospital for definitive care not available at the transfer site. 
 
II. Scope of Service 
The Neonatal-Pediatric Transport Team will provide services for neonatal or pediatric patients referred 
to Our Lady of The Lake Children’s Hospital by outlying facilities.  Patients include those from birth 
through the age of 18 years, regardless of weight. Air and Ground transports will use the services of 
Acadian Ambulance for vehicles, drivers and pilots, as per contract with Our Lady of The Lake 
Regional Medical Center. Acadian Ambulance will staff a medic or Emergency Medical Technician 
(EMT) for each transport; however, the Acadian Ambulance staff cannot participate in direct hands-on 
patient care but can help with the setup of equipment, loading and unloading patients and retrieval of 
equipment from transport bags etc. The Neonatal -Pediatric Transport Team will bring their own 
equipment on board the ambulance, helicopter, or fixed -wing aircraft. Patients who would not normally 
be transported by the team would include but are not limited to: patients requiring specialties 
unavailable at Our Lady of The Lake Children’s Hospital, patients requiring extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation (ECMO), return transports and scene calls. A patient not meeting the usual standards may 
be transported at the direction of the Medical Control Physician (MCP). 
 
III. Geographic Area of Service 
The designated geographic area of service is, but not limited to, a 150 -mile radius around Our Lady of 
The Lake Children’s Hospital, encompassing most of Louisiana and portions of Mississippi. 
 
 
IV. Roles/Responsibilities/Accountability/Authority 
A. Medical Director CHTP-01 
Page 2 of 6 
The Medical Director for the Neonatal -Pediatric Transport Team is ultimately responsible for the 
clinical integrity and functioning of the Neonatal -Pediatric Transport Team. The Medical Director 
will oversee development of clinical protocols, roles, relationships between disciplines on the team, 
and liaison with referring hospitals and physicians. 
 
B. Children’s Hospital Vice President of Patient Care Services 
The Children’s Hospital Director of Nursing is administratively responsible for all units of the                                            
Children’s Hospital, including the Neonatal Pediatric Critical Care Transport Team. 
 
C. Medical Control Physician (MCP) 
The MCP will be the Neonatologist, PICU intensivist or the ER physician on shift, depending on the 
accepting physician on shift. The MCP has the authority to accept or deny a referral for transport. 
The MCP is responsible for triaging the initial call and providing direction to the transport team 
throughout the transport via cellular phone. 
 
D. Transport Team Supervisor 
The Transport Team Supervisor is a nurse in a full -time position who provides direction to the 
Transport Team. The coordinator participates in staff hiring and equipment selection, quality 
assurance and data collection, scheduling, and is the first line for concerns of the team. It will be the 
Supervisor’s responsibility to track education and competencies, in partnership with the Children’s 
Hospital Educator. 
 
E. Transport Nurse 
The Transport Nurse will be a free -standing position, under immediate direction of the Transport 
Supervisor. Non -transport time would include assisting with procedures, in -house pediatric 
transports (e.g., Computed Tomography (CT) or Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan), 
responding to traumas in the Pediatric Emergency Room, and acting as a resource for all inpatient 
pediatric units in the Children’s Hospital. The Transport Nurse will be the foundation of the team 
when a call is generated. 
 
F. Transport Respiratory Therapist 
The Transport Respiratory Therapist will have a patient assignment within Our Lady of The Lake 
Children’s Hospital, with the ability to be relieved by the Respiratory Therapy (RT) supervisor or 
another therapist within five minutes without compromising either patient care or the transport. 
 
V. Team Composition 
A. The Neonatal-Pediatric Transport Team is composed of a transport trained Pediatric Registered 
Nurse and Respiratory Therapist.  In the event a Respiratory Therapist is unavailable, the team may 
be comprised of two Registered Nurses. 
B. Additional personnel may accompany the core team as determined by the MCP. 
 
VI. Uniforms 
A. Team members uniforms will consist of navy colored scrub pants and a polo shirt.  Shirts may be 
either long or short sleeved. 
B. The shirt must have the Children’s Hospital logo on the left upper chest and may have the team 
member’s name and/or “Transport Team” on the right. 
C. A pullover half zip fleece jacket with the Children’s Hospital logo may be worn during cold weather.  
D. Team members will be required to wear lace up shoes or boots . For safety reasons, no slip-on shoes 
will be allowed.    CHTP-01 
Page 3 of 6 
E. On helicopter and fixed -wing flights, team members will be required to wear Our Lady of the Lake 
Children’s Hospital flight suits.        
F. Our Lady of The Lake name badges will be worn at all times in accordance with the current Our 
Lady of The Lake policy.  
G. When on transport duty, team members will be required to be in uniform with a neat and    
professional appearance and abide by all other Our Lady of The Lake dress code policies. 
 
VII. Qualifications 
A. The registered nurse applicant for the transport team must have at least 2 years nursing experience 
and is required to have 1 -year of NICU,  PICU or ER experience in all of the se areas and NICU 
competencies. 
B. The respiratory therapist applicant for the transport team must have at least 2 years’ experience        
as a respiratory therapist and is required to have 1 -year pediatric respiratory experience and NICU 
competencies. 
C. Team members must have and maintain a current Louisiana license for their profession. 
 
VIII. Training Requirements 
A. Ongoing pediatric transport specific education 
B. Maintain current Basic Life Support (BLS), Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS), Advanced 
Life Support (ACLS), and Neonatal Resuscitation Program (NRP) credentials 
C. Within 12 months of joining the transport team, all RN team members should acquire a neonatal, 
pediatric, or transport specific certification. (i.e., CPN, CCRN, CFRN, CTRN.) 
D. Team members will maintain clinical competency specific to their job description which may 
include:   
1. Intravenous (IV) placement/Port Access 
2. Capillary Gas/Labs 
3. Arterial Blood Gas 
4. Endotracheal Intubation 
5. Needle Decompression 
6. Intraosseous placement 
7. Umbilical Venous Catheter (UVC) placement 
 
IX. Equipment 
All team members will be able to safely operate, troubleshoot, and maintain transport equipment. 
 
X. Safety 
A. Team members are to use teamwork, good communication, proper body mechanics and Acadian 
Ambulance personnel as required when loading and unloading patients and equipment. 
B. All team members are required to use appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) as needed. 
Standard precautions are to be used at all times. 
C. Mask and proper protection are to be used on patients suspected of having infectious diseases to 
prevent exposure to all affected personnel. 
D. All sharps will be disposed of properly in approved sharps containers. 
E. All equipment will be properly secured in transport vehicle to include oxygen cylinders, transport 
packs, monitors IV pumps, and ventilator. 
F. The transport team will follow all Acadian Ambulance policies regarding safety during transport , 
including refueling, accident, and emergency procedures. CHTP-01 
Page 4 of 6 
G. Should there be a delay in return transport (e.g., weather, traffic, or mechanical breakdown) , the 
team members will work together with the MCP and the Acadian Ambulance staff to reach the best 
possible solution for the patient. 
H. Criteria for using lights and sirens, speed limitations, and security of the transport vehicle while left 
unattended will all be referred to the Acadian Ambulance staff. 
 
 
XI. Human Resources 
A. The transport team will follow all Our Lady of The Lake Regional Medical Center organizational 
policies and procedures related to Human Resources administration. 
B. Scheduling for Transport Team members will be coordinated by the Transport Supervisor and the 
Supervisor in charge of scheduling for the Respiratory Department. 
 
XII. Documentation 
A. Team members will document in the electronic medical record on patient condition throughout 
transport, including initial assessment, any changes in assessment, and regular vital signs. 
B. Team members will also be familiar with written and down -time documentation forms including but 
not limited to: 
1. Transport Intake Log Sheet 
2. Nursing Transport Flow Sheet 
3. Respiratory Transport Flow Sheet  
4. Consent for Treatment 
5. Consent for Transport 
6. Evaluation Form 
 
XIII. Transport Procedure 
A. Initial Call from Referring Hospital 
1. The Patient Access Center  answers the call and obtains basic demographic information, the 
referring facilities facility’s name and call back number in case of accidental disconnection  then 
conferences in the transport nurse. 
2. The transport nurse then conferences in the MCP on a designated transport line for the call to be 
recorded and to minimize calls from facility to facility. 
3. Information is received and the MCP accepts or denies patient. 
4. All initial patient information as well as logistical information, (e.g., referring hospital, referring 
physician, time of call, time team activated, departure and arrival times, accepting physician and 
team members) is to be recorded on the transport intake log sheet for debriefing and data 
collection. 
 
B. Refusal of a Transport 
1. Refusal of a transport can be made by the MCP, transport nurse or respiratory therapist. 
2. Refusals may be made due to lack of medical capabilities/subspecialties, unavailability of beds 
or for safety reasons , such as a combative patient or family member , or due to extreme weather 
which would make it unsafe for the team to travel. 
3. The MCP informs the referring hospital/physician of the refusal and notifies the transport nurse 
so that it can be documented in the transport database. 
4. The Transport team will comply with all Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act 
(COBRA) and Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA) regulations. 
 
 CHTP-01 
Page 5 of 6 
 
 
 
C. Acceptance of a Transport 
1. Upon acceptance of a transport by the MCP , the patient access transfer center will assist in 
admitting the patient into the Our Lady of The Lake system. 
2. Patient is pre -registered through the Patient Access Center . The transport nurse immediately 
notifies the house supervisor, respiratory therapist supervisor on shift and Acadian Ambulance of 
the transport.  
3. The transport nurse and respiratory therapist then assemble the equipment for transport. 
4. The transport nurse will check out the medication bag from the pyxis in station A in the ER. 
5. The transport nurse and therapist will then meet the Acadian Ambulance crew and leave for the 
referring hospital. 
6. The expectation is that the team is mobilized and in route within a 20 -minute timeframe 
beginning at the time the patient is accepted by the MCP. 
7. The transport team will have 2 cellular phones. Phone 1 will be the contact phone which all 
incoming request for transport will be received. This phone will be used continuously and is to 
be given to the House Supervisor when the team leaves on transport. 
8. The House Supervisor will then assume responsibility for any transport request made while the 
team is out on transport. Should a request come in while the team is out, the House Supervisor 
will defer to the MCP as how to proceed. 
9. Phone 2 will be the transport phone and will be taken on transport and used for communication 
during the transport. 
 
D. At the Referring Hospital 
1. Upon arrival, receive report from the attending MD and nurse caring for the patient 
2. Make an initial assessment documenting appropriately in the electronic medical record or on 
transport flow sheet. 
3. The team will stabilize the patient, using transport team protocols, and report patient status to the 
MCP. 
4. The team implements any interventions per the MCP’s orders and updates the MCP with the 
patient’s status as needed. 
5. Obtain a copy of the patient’s chart, x-rays, and discharge summary 
6. Leave follow-up information with referring hospital. 
7. One team member speaks to the patient’s family explaining the transport process, obtains 
consent to transport and treat and gives them written driving directions to Our Lady of The Lake 
Children’s Hospital. In accordance with Acadian Ambulance policy, one parent or guardian will 
be allowed to ride up front in the ambulance on ground transports. Due to space and weight 
limitations, no family members will be allowed on rotor-wing flights. 
8. The patient and equipment are then loaded onto transport stretcher for departure. 
9. Restraint systems (e.g., seatbelts, Pedi -mate harness, Pedi-mate Plus, a convertible car seat or a 
car bed) will be used to properly secure patient to stretcher without compromising patient 
circulation or necessary movement. 
10. Team members will also use proper safety restraints as available when traveling during transport. 
11. For safety reasons and equipment and personnel limitations , the team will only transport one 
patient at a time. If for some reason multiple patients (e.g., twins or siblings) need to be 
transported, they will be triaged by the team members upon arrival to the referring facility and 
the most critical will be transported first. The team will return as soon as possible for the other. 
 CHTP-01 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 
 
E. During the Transport 
1. In route back to Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital , a call is placed to the accepting unit 
and report is given to the accepting nurse including patient condition, anticipated arrival time to 
the unit and any equipment or procedures that will be needed upon arrival. 
2. Monitor patient status and stability. 
3. Continuous cardiorespiratory and pulse oximetry monitoring throughout transport, charting vital 
signs and pulse oximetry readings every 15 minutes. 
4. Perform any emergent procedure that is needed. 
5. Transport medications are to be used per MCP orders, standing orders/protocols and according to 
PALS and NRP guidelines. 
6. Restraints, chemical or physical , are to be used only with an order from the MCP and in 
accordance with Our Lady of The Lake Children’s Hospital guidelines. 
7. Continue documentation of all findings and events. 
8. Notify MCP of changes in patient status. 
9. If the patient should require intubation during transport , the ambulance should pull over and stop 
while intubation is performed. 
10. If the patient’s status deteriorates to the point where advanced life support efforts are required 
and additional help is needed, diverting to the nearest emergency room is to be considered. 
 
F. Upon Arrival at Our Lady of The Lake Children’s Hospital NICU/PICU 
1. Report patient condition to receiving nurse and MCP when appropriate. 
2. Assist with continued stabilization of patient as needed. 
3. The transport nurse will return the transport medication bag to the pharmacy to be stock ed or 
pyxis if not open. 
4. Complete charting in the electronic medical record. 
5. All transport equipment should be cleaned and disinfected, and transport bags are to be restocked 
after each transport. 
6. After all equipment is cleaned, restocked and put away , the respiratory therapist is released to 
return to their hospital duties. 
7. The transport nurse will enter the transport information into the transport data base and follow-up 
log. 
 
 
References: 
 
American Academy of Pediatrics (2015).  Guidelines for Air and Ground Transport of Neonatal and Pediatric Patients (4th 
Ed). 
 