CHVS-002 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Volunteer Services 
Subject:  Tours and Visiting Groups Section:  Volunteer Services 
Date of Origination:  June 22, 2009 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
September 12, 2017 
April 12, 2024 
Serial Code:  CHVS-002 
  
PURPOSE:  
To protect patients and families’ safety, confidentiality, and privacy, while balancing the community’s interest 
in supporting the Children’s Hospital. 
 
POLICY: 
1. The designee at Children’s Hospital must approve tour groups prior to visit. The designee will review 
the guidelines to follow with the individual requesting the tour and ensure appropriate health screening 
occurs prior to visiting the clinical areas of the hospital. The designee will maintain a calendar of 
approved visits complete with name of group, date, arrival time, how many people in the group, and 
group tour guide. The designee must be notified in advance of any media coverage. 
 
2. Tour group sizes will be limited to a maximum of eight people at one time.  No more than three groups 
will be allowed to visit in one day and tour groups will be scheduled at evenly spaced intervals 
throughout the day to minimize disruptions. Tour participants must be at least 15 years of age. 
 
3. Visitors will receive a guest badge upon arrival which must be worn throughout their visit. 
 
4. Visiting tour groups will only be allowed access to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit and the Pediatric 
Emergency Room pending clinical approval from unit directors.  
 
5. Visiting tour groups are generally not allowed in occupied patient rooms.  Access to occupied patient 
rooms will be left to the discretion of the designee.  No visiting group will be allowed access to visit a 
patient in isolation precautions. 
 
6. Any member of the group having signs and symptoms of illness will NOT be allowed to attend the 
scheduled visit. Visitors should not visit if they have a cold, sore throat, cough, vomiting, diarrhea, 
fever, cold sore, skin rash, infected or draining lesions. Visitors exposed to communicable diseases like 
measles, mumps, and chickenpox, within the three weeks prior to scheduled visit are asked to reschedule 
visit to another time when non-communicability is assured. 
 
 
7. Executive Administration of Children’s Hospital reserves the right to determine whether the proposed 
visit is beneficial to and appropriate for the patients and families.  Executive Administration reserves the 
right to cancel a visit before or during the visit if it is determined the group is not appropriate for our 
patient population. 
 
 CHVS-002 
Page 2 of 2 
8. Visitors must adhere to the hospital dress code which prohibits: Logo T-shirts with inappropriate 
slogans, short skirts, tank tops or low-cut tops. Tattoos may be visible, provided that they are not 
obscene, offensive, or violative of another policy, otherwise not supportive of FMOLHS core values. 
(Dress code based in accordance with Policy NPD-006). 
 
9. The designated tour guide shall: 
a. Provide visiting groups with the Children’s Hospital “Guidelines for Visitation” via mail, e-mail 
or fax in advance of scheduled event. 
b. Meet, greet, and accompany visiting group while on the unit.  All visiting groups must be 
escorted by staff, an appropriately trained volunteer or trained group representative.  
c. Provide a verbal orientation surrounding rules of visitation (including hand washing) to visitors 
upon arrival and be responsible for explaining visitor health screening requirements  
 
10. All plans for media must be approved and coordinated by the hospital’s Communications and Marketing 
Department. Photographs, filming or recording of patients, and social media posting are only allowed 
after media relations has been notified and photo consent forms are obtained from the parent or custodial 
guardian of the patient. Any patient information is confidential unless written consent for disclosure of 
information is obtained by the proper hospital representative. 