CHVS-001 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Volunteer Services 
Subject:  Horticulture Therapy Section:  Volunteer Services 
Date of Origination:   Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
April 12, 2024 
Serial Code:  CHVS-001 
  
PURPOSE: 
Horticultural Therapy (HT) is offered to patients in an attempt to normalize the hospital environment, reduce 
stress, and positively influence patients’ emotional state and socialization skills by giving them the opportunity 
to have “hands on” experience with horticulture. This policy will specifically minimize the risk of adverse 
events in patients who are approved for HT.  
 
POLICY:  
Patients from the Children’s Hospital may have an opportunity to participate in HT.  HT sessions will be 
scheduled through the Child Life Department and facilitated as regularly as possible, based on the availability 
of the volunteer master gardeners. 
 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Immunocompromised patient – any oncology patient, solid organ transplant recipient, or other patient receiving 
significant immunosuppressive therapy for treatment of lupus, Crohn’s disease, or other autoimmune disease 
 
Significant Immunosuppressive Therapy – any patient receiving steroids at >1 mg/kg/day for >2 weeks, Imuran 
(azathioprine), cyclosporine, chemotherapy, steroids, Remicade (infliximab) and other medications in the tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors drug classification 
 
Neutropenic patient – patient with an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) <500/mm² 
 
 
Criteria for Patient 
1. Hospitalized children with the following are excluded from participating in the Horticulture Therapy 
(HT) Program (unless otherwise specified by physician order): 
a. Patient is in the contact PLUS (i.e., C. Difficile, Norovirus), contact, droplet, or airborne 
precautions.   
b. Patient or family member/visitor in the patient’s room is immunocompromised. 
c. Patient is neutropenic 
d. Patient of family member/visitor in the patient’s room is allergic to plants or clean soilless mix. 
e. Patient hospitalized for treatment of asthma exacerbation. 
f. Patient is hospitalized for treatment of allergic eczema. 
g. Patient has open sores, burns, skin breakdown on exposed areas of skin. 
h. Patients presenting with fever, vomiting or diarrhea  
 
 CHVS-001 
Page 2 of 3 
2. PROCEDURE: 
1. Eligible patients 
a. Medical team validates that patient meets criteria for participation in HT and order is placed in 
EPIC. 
2. Parent/guardian provides verbal approval for HT for their child Location 
a. HT may occur in the playroom, patient room or other designated location within the hospital. 
3. Products and Supplies 
a. Disposable plastic table cover. 
b. Disposable aprons and gloves. 
c. Products will be pest and chemical-free. 
d. Products will be kept in closed packages when possible and only the amount needed for each 
activity will be used. 
e. Clean soilless mediums free of bacteria and fungi will be used. 
f. Live plants must be grown in clean soilless mediums. 
g. Medium used will be dampened to reduce the amount of airborne particulates.  
h. Used or old medium when no longer in use will be discarded. 
i. Fresh tap water will be used when working with live plants; water may not be stored. 
j. Harvested fruits (i.e., pumpkins or gourds) that have been properly cleaned with soap and water 
prior to the session may be used. 
k. Artificial/silk material that are properly packaged to prevent contamination may be used. 
4. Procedure 
a. Patients, staff, family members and volunteers must wash their hands thoroughly before and after 
each activity/session with soap and water or hand sanitizer.  Hand wipes may be used to clean 
hands depending on the patient’s mobility. 
b. Worktables in playroom or bedside will be covered with a plastic disposable cover and properly 
disposed following the activity. 
c. Patient participants and volunteers engaging in HT must wear disposable aprons. (Removed 
gloves as they interfere with the tactile experience of HT). Items will be properly disposed 
following the activity. 
d. Upon completion of activity all soil containers, pots, saucers, dibbles, scoops and hand tools will 
be rinsed with water and wiped with hospital-supplied disinfectant wipe by HT volunteer.  
e. Work surfaces and activity trays will be wiped to remove any loose dirt particles then wiped with 
hospital supplied disinfectant wipe by HT volunteer.  
f. Watering cans will be emptied following activity and flushed with an approved disinfectant by 
HT volunteer. 
g. Following an HT activity live plant material(s) will remain with the patient.  The plant container 
must be labeled with the date and time of the activity. It will be removed from the hospital upon 
patient discharge or within 7 days whichever occurs sooner. 
h. At 7 days post HT activity, any live plants should be discarded in the regular trash by any 
member of the care team. 
 
 
 
 
 
 CHVS-001 
Page 3 of 3 
REFERENCES: 
Guidelines for Environmental Infection Control in Health-Care Facilities, 2003 
http://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/pdf/guidelines/eic_in_HCF_03.pdf 
 
Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing Transmission of Infectious Agents in Healthcare 
Settings, 2007 
 http://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/pdf/isolation/Isolation2007.pdf 
 
Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities, 2008 
http://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/Disinfection_Sterilization/acknowledg.html 
 
Horticulture Therapy and Infection Control in the Healthcare Environment, Journal of Therapeutic 
Horticulture, 2003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 