ECLS-012 (8090) 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: (Environmental Services) Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for (Environmental 
Services, 102-4429-10313) 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 (4429) 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/10/2017 Review Date: 2/15/2024 
Revision Date: 2/15/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exits are located at the main Environmental Services Office and Stairwell by Elevator E on the 
3rd floor of the Main Hospital 
• Adjacent Smoke Compartment(s) are located at the Children’s Hospital Entrance and Rehab 
Area Entrance. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response ECLS-012 (8090) 
Page 2 of 2 
• The Onsite Operations Manager or designee will clear the hallway by moving items into the 
nearest office 
• The Onsite Operations Manager or designee will close doors. 
• The Onsite Operations Manager or designee will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, 
“The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety”. 
• The Onsite Operations Manager or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for. 
• The Onsite Operations Manager or designee will ensure each room is empty. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Pull stations are located by Stairwell door across from elevator E on the 3rd floor of the main 
hospital 
• Fire extinguisher is located across from elevator E on the 3rd floor of the main hospital  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is located at the Children’s Hospital Entrance. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is located at the Rehab Area Entrance. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is the Stairwell by Elevator E on the 3rd floor of the Main 
Hospital and evacuees will meet in the main lobby on the first floor of the main hospital by 
elevator E. 
 