ECLS-012 (2453) 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Livingston Emergency Dept. Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for  
(Livingston ED –102-2453-10313) 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 (2453) 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 9, 2018 Review Date: February 1, 2024 
Revision Date: February 1, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Livingston ED has 4 exits with illuminated EXIT signs 
o Ambulance entrance/exit (directly outside) 
o Exit door next to room 19 and the body holding room (directly outside) 
o Exit door next to the employee break room (exits into the hallway to Radiology) 
o Exit door next to the male locker room and ED conference room (exits into the 
hallway to Radiology) ECLS-012 (2453) 
Page 2 of 4 
o Exit door next to room 4 (exits into the ED waiting room) 
o Exit door next to triage and access services check out desk (exits into the ED waiting 
room) 
• Adjacent Smoke Compartment(s) are accessed: 
o The Hallway that divides Radiology and Emergency Department using the double 
doors located next to the employee break room and the emergency department 
conference room.   
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• CSR or designee clears the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving them to the equipment 
storage room located next to the employee break room. 
• RNs or designee closes doors and windows 
• Charge RN or designee confirms automatic fire doors closed  
• RNs or designee moves patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an 
emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• RNs or designee assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with sensory or 
mobility disabilities. 
• Charge RN or designee ensures all employees are accounted for 
• Charge RN or designee ensures all patients are accounted for 
• Charge RN or designee ensures each room is empty.   
• RN assigned to rooms where security is sitting one on one with a PEC patient will relieve 
the security guard of watching the patient.  
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off  
• Respiratory Tech or designee will turn off the medical gas.  
• Locations of the medical gas shut off valves: 
1. On the wall across the hallway from the decontamination room.  
2. On the wall in the hallway dividing the ED and Radiology department on the CT 
side.  
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Identify if any special patient transporting devices are on your unit to be used during 
emergencies.  Wheelchairs and Stretchers  
• Identify where they are stored.  Stretchers are kept in patient rooms, Wheelchairs are kept in 
the alcove at the ambulance entrance as well as at the main entrance next to security. 
• Indicate if those in your department are anticipated to be all or partial ambulatory.  Identify if 
assistance evacuating is required. Majority of patients will be ambulatory with a chance 
that there will be a select few patients that will require assistance. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Identify fire-fighting equipment type(s) and location(s) 
• Fire Extinguishers are located  
1. On the right side of the adjacent wall across from the nurses’ station. ECLS-012 (2453) 
Page 3 of 4 
2. On the left wall at the ambulance entrance doors. 
3. On the wall next to the nursing supervisor’s office.  
4. There is 2 in the walls of the hallway that divides the ED and Radiology.  
5. On the right side of the hall way at the exit door next to the body holding 
room.  
• Manual fire pull alarm are located 
1. On the right side of the adjacent wall across from the nurses’ station. 
2. On the left wall at the ambulance entrance doors. 
3. On the hallway wall next to room 4.  
4. On the right side of the hallway at the exit door next to the body holding 
room.  
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Identify any types of equipment that would need to be turned off 
• Ventilators will need to be turned off in the event that there is a patient in the 
Livingston ED on a ventilator at the time of the CODE RED. 
1.  The primary RN who is caring for the ventilated patient will be responsible 
for turning off the ventilator and providing respirations by AMBU-bag.   
• BIPAP Machines will need to be turned off in the even that there is a patient in the 
Livingston ED requiring a BIPAP during CODE RED.  
1. The primary RN who is caring for the patient on BIPAP will be responsible 
for turning off the machine and placing the patient on portable oxygen.  
• Identify any used/stored combustible products 
• Full Oxygen bottles are stored in the clean supply room. 
• Empty Oxygen bottles are stored in the soiled utility room. 
• Identify any types of special patient populations, especially those non-ambulatory. 
• In the Livingston ED we take care of all types of patients and it cannot be predicted 
what type will be present during a CODE RED event. It is likely that there will be 
patient that are non-ambulatory during a CODE RED event. During an event 
where a patient is non-ambulatory the primary nurse who is currently taking care 
of the patient is responsible for assisting the patient to evacuate to safety.  
• PEC patients requiring one on one observation 
1. Mental Health Tech: remain with the patient at all times.  
2. Security Guard: RN who is responsible for the patient will relieve the 
security guard of observation by their self or a designee who is CPI certified 
and will remain with the patient at all times. 
• Identify any secured area that would require a special badge access or door key.  Explain how the 
Code RED Response Team would have access.   
• Locked rooms in the Livingston ED that require badge access include: Medication room, 
clean supply room, dirty and the dirty linen rom (Charge nurse will supply the Code 
Red Response Team with access into the doors requiring badge access.  
• Locked rooms in the Livingston ED that require number code for keypad include: Men’s 
employee locker room, Women’s employee locker room, and the employee break room. 
Charge nurse will supply the Code Red Response team with the keypad code (2-4)/ 
 ECLS-012 (2453) 
Page 4 of 4 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Identify the primary horizontal evacuation route and destination. 
o Evacuate through the doors located next to the employee break room or the ED 
conference room into the Hallway that divides the ED and Radiology Department.  
 
• Identify the secondary horizontal evacuation route and destination 
o Evacuate through exit door next to room 19 or through the ambulance entrance to 
the helipad.  
▪ If this side of the building is in passable please exit through the waiting room 
out of the main entrance located next to the security desk.  
 
• Indicate if your location will only have horizontal evacuation. 
o Livingston ED will only have Horizontal Evacuations 
 