ECLS-012 (3110) 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: OLOL Livingston Imaging Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for OLOL Livingston 
Imaging (102-3110-10313) 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 (3110) 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 19, 2018 Review Date: February 1, 2024 
Revision Date: February 1, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Locations of Illuminated Exits: In Hallways exiting the Imaging Department located near the 
following areas: Managers Office, Control Room, US 2, CT 1 Equipment Room. 
Also located in hallways in front of sub waiting areas and MRI door. 
• Location of Adjacent Smoke Compartment(s): Doors entering front and back hall of Emergency 
Department from Imaging, Doors in Corridors behind and in front of Subway. 
 ECLS-012 (3110) 
Page 2 of 3 
o Smoke Compartments within the Imaging Department are Supply room across from 
future RAD room and dirty linen closet indicated by red tags in upper right corner of 
door frame.  
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
 
• Radiologic Technologist on duty or designee to clear all hallways by moving any additional 
equipment to future Rad Room. 
• Radiologic Technologist on duty or designee closes doors and windows 
• Radiologic Technologist on duty or designee confirms automatic fire doors closed  
• Special Imaging Technologist on duty or designee moves patients and visitors to safety 
explaining, “The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Special Imaging Technologist on duty or designee assists those with Limited English Proficiency 
(LEP) and those with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Special Imaging Technologist on duty, Manager, or designee ensures all employees are 
accounted for 
• Special Imaging Technologist on duty, Manager, or designee ensures all patients are accounted 
for 
• Radiologic Technologist on duty or designee ensures each room is empty.   
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
Radiologic Technologist on duty or designee will notify either Plant Services or Respiratory to turn off 
the medical gas.  
Medical Gas shut off for Imaging is located outside of CT 2 across from back hall of ER. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Wheelchairs and or Stretchers are on your unit to be used during emergencies and should be 
located in US 1 and US 2.  MRI safe stretcher is stored in MRI suite zone 3.   
• LIV Imaging should be all or partial ambulatory.  Possible assistance evacuating may be 
required. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire Extinguishers located outside of restroom of Future Rad room. 
• MRI safe Fire Extinguisher located in MRI Zone 3 
• Nearest Fire pull alarms are located in back hall exiting to physician parking lot or near stairwell 
exiting to employee parking lot 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• MRI Zone 3 is badge access only for Imaging personnel and select personnel that have gone thru 
a screening process and been granted access by Imaging Manager.  No one is to enter the MRI 
Magnet Room (Zone 4) except for trained MRI staff.  MRI staff is to get any patient out of 
room and then clear and lock the room.  
 
 ECLS-012 (3110) 
Page 3 of 3 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary Horizontal evacuation would be to move from imaging department to the ER 
department or ER waiting room. 
• Livingston Imaging will only have horizontal evacuation.  
• In the event of evacuation of building, imaging staff will meet inside employee parking lot at end 
of brick wall.  
 