ECLS-012 (Rehabilitation Center 7096) 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Rehabilitation Center Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Rehabilitation 
Therapy/ Rehab Administration 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 7096 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/09/17 Review Date:  
Revision/ Review 
Date: 7/4/2023 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Follow the illuminated Exit signs to the main front door and back door. 
• Each door exit from the Rehab Gym leads into a different smoke compartment. The front doors 
lead to the smoke compartment containing Rehab Administration/Rehab Nursing Unit and the 
back door leads to the PCU unit smoke compartment.   
 
 ECLS-012 (Rehabilitation Center 7096) 
Page 2 of 3 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
This policy will be followed during normal hours of operation (Monday-Friday 8am-4pm, Saturday 8am-12pm, 
department is closed on Sunday) 
• Physical therapy aides or designee will close doors and windows  
• Physical therapy aides or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed  
• Physical therapy aides or designee will clear equipment out of the way of the exit path 
• Nursing staff and therapy staff or designee will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, 
“The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Activity coordinator or designee will prevent people from using elevator 
• Nursing and therapy staff or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) 
and those with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Supervisor or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• Senior therapists or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for 
• Director / Supervisor or designee will ensure rooms are empty and close doors to indicate rooms 
empty.  Doors will then be marked by chalk to indicate room empty. 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
Medical gas shut off valves are located in the PCU nursing station. The Charge Nurse, Nurse Director, 
Unit Director or Respiratory Therapist will authorize someone to shut off the medical gas valves, if 
indicated.  All staff has been educated on this process. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal evacuations) 
• Any special transportation devices such as the Hoyer Lift are stored in the clean utility room on 
B hall in the rehab unit. Wheelchairs are in each patient room and additional wheelchairs will 
be in the equipment rooms in the rehab gym. Walking aides, such as walkers, canes, crutches 
are in the patient rooms and additional supplies are in the equipment rooms in the rehab gym.  
• All patients in the Rehab Center will need assistance with ambulating, and some patients may be 
non-ambulatory 
(Vertical evacuations) 
• Equipment, such as walkers, sheets, wheelchairs to assist patient down the stairs for vertical 
evacuations  
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Two fire extinguishers are located in the Rehab Gym and one is located in the Rehab Apartment. 
One is located on the wall near the back exit and one is near the equipment room near the front 
of the rehab gym.  The Rehab Apartment has the fire extinguisher located on the wall near the 
C hall entrance. One fire extinguisher is located in Rehab Admin.  
• A manual pull fire alarm is on the wall next to the front main entrance to the Rehab Gym. 
• A manual pull fire alarm is on the wall leading into the Rehab Unit from the visitor elevators.  
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• There are portable oxygen tanks in both equipment storage closets in the rehab gym. There is 
also a helium tank mounted to the wall in the equipment storage closet. 
• The entire patient population will require assistance with ambulation and or transportation during ECLS-012 (Rehabilitation Center 7096) 
Page 3 of 3 
an evacuation.  
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary horizontal evacuation would into the PCU Units or toward the Rehab Unit. Evacuation 
could occur down the halls in the Rehab Unit (A, B, and C), but there would be no further 
horizontal evacuation available beyond those compartments. 
• Secondary horizontal evacuation routes will be further into St. Mary’s Tower.  
• Should the evacuation require separate horizontal pathways, shift 
supervisors/managers/department director will lead the groups to safe areas. 
• Primary vertical evacuation will occur via 3-North and 3-South main building stairwells. 
• Rendezvous should occur on the first floor of Parking Garage 2. 
• Secondary vertical evacuation will occur via stairwells at the end of A, B, and C hallways on the 
3-North side of the main building. Rendezvous should occur in Parking Lot 3 (near the Medical 
Plaza). 
 
 