COR-109 
Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Corporate Compliance Section: N/A 
Title: 
DISCLOSURES FOR LAW 
ENFORCEMENT 
PURPOSES WITHOUT A COURT 
ORDER, SUBPOENA OR OTHER 
PROCESS 
Policy Reference #: COR/109 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: June 30, 2015 Last Review Date:  May 24, 2022 
Last Revision Date: N/A 
 
PURPOSE: It is the purpose of the policy to comply with Section 164.501 
(Definitions) and 164.512 (f) of the Privacy Rule and to set forth those 
circumstances under which it is appropriate to disclose information to 
law enforcement. 
POLICY: 
Healthcare providers may disclose Protected Health Information for law enforcement purposes 
without patient authorization in the absence of a court order, subpoena or other legal process in 
the circumstances set forth below.     
Definition of “Law Enforcement Official” – An officer or employee of any agency or authority 
of the United States, a State, a Territory, or a political subdivision of a State or Territory, or an 
Indian tribe, who is: 
• Authorized to investigate an official inquiry into a potential violation of the law. 
• Prosecute or conduct a criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding arising from an 
alleged violation of the law. 
 
I.  REQUIRED BY STATUTE OR REGULATION   
A.  General rule.  The healthcare provider may disclose Protected Health Information 
as required by statute or regulation, such as those requiring reports of gunshot 
wounds.   
B. Child abuse reports .  The healthcare provider may disclose protected health 
information about a minor for the purpose of reporting child abuse or neglect as 
permitted or required by state law. 
C.  Adult victims of abuse, neglect or domestic violence.   
1.  Requirements for disclosure .  The healthcare provider may disclose 
Protected Health Information about an adult individual whom the 
Organization believes is a victim of abuse, neglect or domestic violence to 
a government agency authorized by law to receive such disclosures, 
provided that one of the following conditions is satisfied:  
a.  The disclosure is required by law.  In such cases, the disclosure 
shall be limited to the extent necessary to comply with the law in 
question;   COR-109 
Page 2 of 5 
b.  The individual agrees to the disclosure;   
c.  The disclosure is permitted by law, and the healthcare provider 
believes the disclosure is necessary to prevent harm to someone; or   
d.  In situations in which the individual is unable to agree to the 
disclosure because of incapacity, the disclosure is permitted by law 
and a public official states that the disclosure is necessary for an 
immediate enforcement activity against someone other than the 
individual in question.     
2.  Notification to individual .  Disclosures of Protected Health Information 
about victims of abuse, neglect or domestic violence must be reported 
promptly to the victim, unless the healthcare provider believes that such 
notification would pose a risk of harm to the victim.   
  
II.  HEALTH OVERSIGHT ACTIVITIES  
A.  The healthcare provider may disclose Protected Health Information to "health 
oversight agencies."  The following government agencies, among others, may be 
health oversight agencies, but only to the extent that they are overseeing or 
investigating alleged violations involving (a) the health care system; (b) 
government benefit programs for which health information is necessary to 
determine eligibility; (c)  government regulatory programs for which health 
information is necessary to determine compliance; or (d) civil rights laws for 
which health information is necessary to determine compliance:   
• Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
• Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector 
General (OIG)  
• state licensure boards   
 
B.  An agency is not acting as a health oversight agency if it is investigating an 
individual and the investigation is not directly related to the receipt of health care 
or a claim for public benefits related to health.  In such cases, any request for 
Protected Health Information must satisfy the criteria set forth in Section II of the 
Policy Regarding Disclosure of Protected Health Information Pursuant to Court 
Orders, Subpoenas and Discovery Requests.       
 
III.  IDENTIFICATION OF SUSPECTS, WITNESSES, AND MISSING PERSONS  
A.  The Organization may disclose Protected Health Information in response to a law 
enforcement official’s request for such information to assist in identifying or 
locating a suspect, fugitive, material witness, or missing person.   
B.  The Organization may only respond to requests by law enforcement officials.  It 
may not initiate disclosures without a request.   COR-109 
Page 3 of 5 
C.  Requests by law enforcement officials must be written, and include requests made 
on behalf of law enforcement officials.  
D.  In making disclosures under this section, the healthcare provider may disclose 
only the following information:  
1. Name and address;  
2. Date and place of birth;  
3.  Social security number;  
4.  ABO blood type and Rh factor;  
5.   Type of injury;  
6.  Date and time of treatment;  
7.   Date and time of death, if applicable; and  
8.   A description of distinguishing physical characteristics, including height, 
weight, gender, race, hair and eye color, presence or absence of facial hair 
(beard or moustache), scars, and tattoos.  
E.  The healthcare provider shall not disclose Protected Health Information related to 
an individual's DNA or DNA analysis, dental records, or typing, samples or 
analysis of body fluids or tissue.  
 
IV.  VICTIMS OF A CRIME  
A.  The Organization may disclose Protected Health Information in response to a law 
enforcement official’s request for information about an individual who may be the 
victim of a crime:  
1.  If the individual agrees to the disclosure; or  
 
2.  If the individual is unable to agree to the disclosure because of incapacity, 
a law enforcement official states that disclosure is necessary for an 
immediate law enforcement action, the information will not be used 
against the individual, and the Organization determines that disclosure is 
in the best interests of the individual.   
B.  The healthcare provider may only respond to requests by law enforcement 
officials.  It may not initiate disclosures without a request from a law enforcement 
official.  
C.  An individual's agreement to release Protected Health Information may be oral, 
and does not need to satisfy the requirements of an authorization.     
D.  If an individual is both a victim and a suspect (for example, an individual who 
was injured in a drug -related shooting), the healthcare provider shall treat the 
individual as a suspect, and release only the Protected Health Information set 
forth in this Policy.   COR-109 
Page 4 of 5 
E.  This section does not apply to victims of child abuse.  In such cases, the 
provisions of Section I.A shall apply.   
F.  This section does not apply to victims of abuse, neglect, or domestic violence.  In 
such cases, the provisions of Section I.B of this Policy shall apply.     
 
V.  DECEDENTS  
The healthcare provider may disclose Protected Health Information about an individual 
who has died to a law enforcement official for the purpose of alerting the law 
enforcement official about the death if the Organization suspects that the death may have 
resulted from criminal conduct.     
 
VI.  CRIME ON PREMISES  
The healthcare provider may disclose Protected Health Information to a law enforcement 
official if the healthcare provider believes that it constitutes evidence of criminal conduct 
that occurred on its premises.     
 
VII.  AVERTING SERIOUS THREATS TO HEALTH OR SAFETY  
 
A.  The healthcare provider may use or disclose Protected Health Information if it 
believes that such use or disclosure:  
1.  Is necessary to prevent a serious threat to a person or the public.  In such 
cases, the use or disclosure shall be directed to a person able to prevent the 
threat, including the target of the threat.   
2.  Is necessary for law enforcement authorities to apprehend an individual 
who either admitted participating in a violent crime or has escaped from a 
correctional institution or other lawful custody.   
 
B.  A statement made by an individual admitting participation in a violent crime 
cannot be the basis of a disclosure to law enforcement authorities if the statement 
was made while the individual was in a course of therapy or counseling, or was in 
the process of requesting such therapy or counseling.  
C.  A disclosure made based on a statement by an individual admitting participation 
in a violent crime shall be limited to the statement itself and the information set 
forth in Section III.D of this Policy.   
 
VIII.  INMATES   
The Organization may disclose Protected Health Information about an inmate to a 
correctional institution or to a law enforcement official having lawful custody of the COR-109 
Page 5 of 5 
inmate if the disclosure of such information is necessary for the health of the inmate, 
other inmates, correctional employees, and the security and good order of the correctional 
institution.    
 
Reviewed:  Philip LeBlanc, Compliance Officer, June 11, 2019 
 