 1 of 2 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:   Operational 
Subject:  Correcting Patient Medical Record Number When 
Existing Patient Medical Record Number has been 
Inadvertently Assigned 
Section:   General 
Date of Origination:  December 2002 Supersedes       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed:  
 April 2011; February 2015, Jan 2018 Serial Code:   
  
Policy Statement:  
It is the policy of OLOLRMC, to assign an appropriate medical record number to a patient at the time of 
admissions.  If an existing patient’s medical record number is inadvertently assigned to another patient, 
OLOLRMC will promptly notify appropriate personnel and will correct the medical record and billing 
information as outlined below. 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
To outline the procedures for correcting the medical record and billing when an existing medical record 
number is inadvertently assigned to another patient 
 
 
 PROCEDURES: 
 
1. When an Access Services Representative identifies or is notified that a patient has been 
admitted using another person’s medical record number, the Access Services Representative 
will immediately notify the Nurse Manager of the appropriate unit and the A ccess Services 
Supervisor/Manager. 
2. The Access Services Supervisor/Manager will immediately notify the following departments of 
the situation in order for each area to make any necessary corrections: * IS, Radiology, Lab, 
Respiratory Therapy, Nuclear Medicine; Physical Medicine, HIM, Pharmacy, Business Office, 
Patient Care Services, and Emergency Department. 
3. Risk Management and Access Services will determine if patient notification is necessary 
4. If the patient is currently receiving treatment or has not been discharged f rom the 
hospital when the error is found, the following will occur: 
 
a) Access Service Leadership Team will follow -up with the Clinical Leadership of the unit on 
which the Patient is currently located 
b) A footprint will be entered with as much information possible regarding the incorrect and 
correct MRN. 
c) When the patient is discharged. Access Services will create a new HAR  using the correct 
patient information. 
d) IS will move all medical record information , and billing information from the incorrect patient 
MRN to correct patient MRN. 
 
5. If Patent has been discharged from the hospital when error is found the following will 
occur:  2 of 2 
 
a) The Access Service Leadership Team will complete a safety event. 
b) A footprint will be entered with as much information possible regarding the incorrect and 
correct MRN. 
c) Access Services will create a new HAR using the correct patient information. 
d) IS will move all medical record information, and billing information from the incorrect patient 
MRN to correct patient MRN. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 