 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical 
Center 
Subject: Telemetry Monitoring  
Date of  Origination:  01/04/93                       
Last Date Revised: 02/01/2018 
Date of Last Review: 02/01/2018 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Outpatient Cardiac 
Rehabilitation  
Section:  Exercise Sessions 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CREX02 
 
 
Distribution:                    Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department  
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services   
 
Purpose: 
 
To establish guidelines for the use of a telemetry monitoring system during the Cardiopulmonary 
Rehabilitation Program and for proper connection of the patient to the ECG monitoring system. 
 
Applies To:                      All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
Policy: 
 
All patients entering the Phase II Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation program will be continually 
monitored via telemetry unless the referring physician specifies that patient is not to be monitored 
with telemetry. Continuous monitoring for the remainder of the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation 
Program is indicated and recommended in the following situations. 
 
 · Severe left ventricular dysfunction evidenced by an ejection fraction less than 30%. 
 · Resting complex ventricular dysrhythmias. 
 · Arrhythmias increasing with exercise. 
 · Decreasing systolic blood pressure with exercise.1 
 · Survivors of sudden cardiac death. 
 · Patients post MI who have a history of congestive heart failure, cardiogenic shock and/or        
 serious ventricular arrhythmia. 
 · Patients with severe coronary artery disease with exercise induced ischemia. 
 · Inability to self-monitor due to mental or physical impairment. 
 
The lead monitored will be up to the discretion of the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Registered 
Nurse and the type of monitoring system used by the Program. 
 
 
Procedure: 
 
The Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation participant will be responsible for attaching the telemetry 
monitoring system before each exercise session. The procedure for attaching the telemetry monitoring 
system will be reviewed with the patient as many times as is necessary.  The Cardiopulmonary 
Rehabilitation staff will be responsible for those patients who are either physically or mentally 
incapable. 
  
Equipment needed: 
 
 ScottCare TeleRehab Telemetry Monitoring System 
 Telemetry transmitters and receivers 
 Pre-gelled, disposable electrodes 
 Alcohol gauze pads  
  
  
 
General Information 
 
 Avoid skeletal muscles by using the hollow of the clavicles and the lower sides of the thoracic 
cage. Removal of skin oils and hair is imperative to conduction. Always check the pre-gelled 
disposable electrodes after opening for sufficient conduction gel. Loss of gel will cause 
baseline instability and motion artifact. 
 
Method 
 
 Choose sites for electrode placement. Prepare areas by rubbing with an alcohol prep pad and 
drying with gauze pad.  Make sure that the skin has been abraded slightly for proper 
conduction. Apply pre-gelled electrode to the prepared sites taking care not to touch gel nor 
adhesive.  Press around electrode firmly to ensure attachment. After preparing monitor 
transmitter with battery, connect lead wires to electrodes. Examine ECG recording and adjust 
electrodes, wires, or monitor box for best recording. 
 
Documentation 
 
 Record pre-exercise and post -exercise ECG rhythm strip from each patient each session. 
Further strips may be documented to show rhythm changes during exercise. Label strip with 
patient's name, date, rate, rhythm, and lead selection and place in patient's permanent record. 
 