 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Resistance Training  
Date of  Origination:  03/02/95                       
Last Date Revised: 01/11/2011 
Date of Last Review: 02/01/2018 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Outpatient Cardiac 
Rehabilitation  
Section:  Exercise Sessions 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CREX04 
 
 
Distribution:                    Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department  
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services   
 
Purpose: 
 
The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines for safe resistance training of Cardiopulmonary 
outpatients (Phase II and III Cardiac, Basic and Maintenance Pulmonary).  Improving muscular 
endurance and strength are important complements to cardiorespiratory conditioning and may increase 
the ability and efficiency of individuals in performance of activities of daily living and maximization 
of health potential.  These guidelines are reflective of resistance exercise guidelines established in the 
American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation Guidelines for Cardiac 
Rehabilitation Programs, second edition, and the American College of Sports Medicine Guidelines for 
Exercise Testing and Prescription, fifth edition. 
 
Applies To:                      All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
 
Policy: 
Patients diagnosed with the following conditions should be excluded from resistance training: 
 
 1. Acute Congestive Heart Failure  
 2. Uncontrolled arrhythmias 
 3. Severe valvular disease 
 4. Uncontrolled hypertension (systolic greater than or equal to 160 mm Hg or diastolic greater 
  than 105 mm Hg) 
 5. Peak exercise capacity of less than 5 METs for cardiac Patients 
 
Resistance training may begin for cardiac patients four to six weeks after myocardial infarction or 
CABG surgery, and one to two weeks following P CI or other revascularization procedure. Patients 
should have been participants in a supervised aerobic program for four to six weeks prior to beginning 
strength training. 
 
Pulmonary patients may begin resistance training provided that they do not exhibit any of the exclusion 
conditions.  Exercises should include high repetition, low intensity efforts, using manual resistance or 
light weights (under 5 lbs.). 
 
The resistance training exercise prescription should be no greater in intensity than the level of 
cardiovascular effort in the aerobic component. 
 
ECG and blood pressure should be monitored.   
The absolute and relative indications for termination of an exercise test (American College of Sports 
Medicine Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Training, fifth edition) should be observed for any 
patient while resistance training: 
 
 
Absolute Indications 
 1. Acute myocardial infarction or suspicion of a myocardial infarction 
 2. Onset of moderate-to-severe angina 
 3. Drop in systolic blood pressure with increasing workload accompanied by signs or 
  symptoms or drop below standing resting pressure 
 4. Serious arrhythmias (e.g., second or third degree  
  atrioventricular block, sustained ventricular tachycardia, or increasing premature ventricular 
  contractions, atrial fibrillation with fast ventricular response) 
 5. Signs of poor perfusion, including pallor, cyanosis, or cold and clammy skin 
 6. Unusual or severe shortness of breath 
 7. Central nervous system symptoms, including ataxia, vertigo, visual or gait problems or 
  confusion 
 8. Technical inability to monitor ECG 
 9. Patient's request 
 
 
Relative Indications 
 1. Pronounced ECG changes from baseline (greater than 2 mm of horizontal or downsloping 
ST-segment depression, or greater than 2 mm of ST-segment elevation 
 2. Any chest pain that is increasing 
 3. Physical or verbal manifestations of severe fatigue or shortness of breath 
 4. Wheezing 
 5. Leg cramps or intermittent claudication (grade 3 on 4 point scale) 
 6. Hypertensive response (SBP greater than 260 mm Hg; DBP greater than 115 mm Hg) 
  7. Less serious arrhythmias such as supraventricular tachycardia 
 8. Exercise-induced bundle branch block that cannot be distinguished from ventricular 
 tachycardia 
 
 
Procedure: 
 
To prevent soreness and injury, for each resistance exercise initially choose a weight that will allow the 
performance of 12 to 15 repetitions comfortably.  This should correspond to approximately 30% to 
50% of the maximum weight load that the patient could lift in one repetition. 
 
During initial resistance exercise sessions, blood pressure should be checked for excessive response to 
exertion.  
 
Begin patient's resistance program with one or two sets of each exercise.  Eventually the patient may 
increase up to three sets per exercise, as conditioning and toleration increases. 
 
Avoid straining. Ratings of perceived exertion should not exceed fairly light to somewhat hard during 
lifting (11-13 on 20 point Borg scale). 
 Avoid breath holding.  Exhale during the exertion phase of the lift.  For example, exhale when pushing 
a weight stack overhead and exhale when lowering it. 
 
Increase weight loads by small increments: 5 to 10 lbs. when 12 to 15 repetitions can be comfortably 
accomplished. 
 
Raise weights with slow, controlled movements through the entire range of motion of the exercise; 
emphasize near complete extension of the limbs without locking or hyper extending joints when 
lifting. 
 
Exercise large muscle groups before small muscle groups. Include exercises for both upper and lower 
extremities, when possible. 
 
Weight training should occur 2 to 3 times per week. 
 
Loosely hold hand grips when possible; sustained, tight gripping may evoke excessive blood pressure 
response to lifting. 
 
Stop exercise in the event of warning signs or symptoms, especially dizziness, arrhythmias, unusual 
shortness of breath, and/or angina pectoris. 
 
Allow minimal rest periods between exercises (30-60 seconds) to maximize muscular endurance and 
aerobic training benefits. 
 
 
 
 
 