CRNP05 
Page 1 of 1 
 
 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Charge and Crediting Criteria 
Date of  Origination:  04/08/92                       
Date of Last Revision:  6/09/18 
 
::: 
 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: CRNP 
Section: Inpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CRNP05 
  Date of Review:  6/09/18  
 
 
 
 
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services   
 
Purpose: 
 
To establish charge and credit procedure for Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation. Inpatient procedures may include 
Cardiac Inpatient (Phase I), Pulmonary Rehabilitation. Outpatient procedures may include Cardiac Outpatient 
(Phase II), Cardiac Maintenance (Phase III), Pulmonary Basic and Pulmonary Maintenance. 
 
Policy: 
 
Patients are admitted into the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Program by an order from their physician. Upon 
receipt of a physician's referral of a patient into the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Program the appropriate 
reconditioning and education procedures will then be initiated. 
 
Inpatient orders received before noon will initiate treatment by that same afternoon. Orders received after 12:00 
noon will be started by the next morning. Every effort will be made to initiate treatment at the earliest possible 
time. Daily assessments are conducted by the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation staff and entered daily. 
 
Inpatient charges for Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation may be entered through documentation of procedures in 
the hospital computer charting system. For Outpatient procedures, or when the hospital computer charting 
system is unavailable for Phase I, charges may be entered manually through the Charge function of the MIS 
system.  
 
Credits may be made to the patient's account, where appropriate.  Such credits might include errors in ordering, 
patient status changes, etc. All credits must meet with the approval of the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation 
Manager.  