 
 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Admission Criteria  
Date of  Origination:  01/04/93                       
Last Date Revised: 02/01/2018 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Outpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Section:  General Policies 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CROP02 
 
Distribution:                    Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department  
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services   
 
Purpose:.                          To establish guidelines for the referral of a patient to the Cardiopulmonary  
                                           Rehabilitation program. 
 
Applies To:                      All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
Policy: 
 
All patients must be referred to the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Program through a written physician order.  
A verbal order may be taken; however, a written order should be signed by the referring cardiologist or 
cardiovascular surgeon as soon as possible. 
 
Guidelines for appropriate admission diagnoses to outpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation that may be considered 
include: 
 
Myocardial Infarction  
(1) Patient is called and scheduled for orientation within 48 hours, (business days) of discharge. The patient  
may begin treatment when cleared by cardiology. 
 (2) Adequate control of complications, including angina, congestive heart failure (CHF), and arrhythmias is 
       preferable. 
 
Cardiovascular Surgery   
 (1) Patient is called and scheduled for orientation within 48 hours, (business days) of discharge.  Patient may  
             begin treatment when cleared for exercise by cardiology or cardiovascular surgery. 
        (2)Adequate control of any complications is preferable. 
 
Percutaneous transluminal coronary surgery or Stent Placement 
        The patient is called and scheduled for orientation within 48 hours, (business days) of discharge and may  
         begin treatment when cleared by cardiology. 
 
Stable Angina Pectoris 
 (1) At any time 
 (2) Recent changes in medication for angina control are permissible at the discretion of cardiology. 
 
Hypertension 
 A patient with low functional capacity (< 7 METs) who needs physical conditioning while evaluating blood 
pressure control with exercise.  
Arrhythmias  
Activity induced arrhythmias without coronary disease or any arrhythmias with associated heart disease. 
 
Pacemakers/ AICD  
The patient will be called and scheduled for orientation within 48 hours, (business days) of discharge and may 
begin treatment when cleared by cardiology. 
 
Other Conditions   
Medical conditions that benefit from structured exercise, cardiac conditioning, dietary therapy, and risk factor 
control. These conditions may include: 
• Diabetes  • Limiting arthritis 
• Cardiomyopathies  • Obesity 
• Peripheral Vascular Disease  • Heart or other organ transplant (pre and post) 
• Valvular heart disease  • Congestive Heart Failure (compensated) 
 • Renal disease  • High-risk cardiovascular disease ineligible for surgical intervention 
 
Patients may be admitted without the GXT, and exercise prescription initially will be determined from orientation 
assessments, including the six minute walk test and by using the symptom limited resting heart rate plus 20 - 30 
bpm formula in conjunction with the Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE) scale and other appropriate rating scales 
pertaining to the patient's condition. 
 
Contraindications for Entry into Cardiac Rehabilitation include: * 
 1.  Unstable angina 
 2.  Resting systolic blood pressure > 200mmHg or resting diastolic blood pressure > 110 mmHg should  
      be evaluated on a case by case basis, according to physician discretion 
 3.  Orthostatic blood pressure drop of > 20 mmHg with symptoms 
 4.  Critical aortic stenosis (peak systolic gradient > 50 mmHg with aortic valve orifice area < 0.75 cm2 in  
                  an average-size adult) 
 5.  Acute systemic illness or fever 
 6.  Uncontrolled sinus tachycardia (>120 beats/ min) 
 7.  Uncontrolled atrial or ventricular arrhythmias 
 8.  Decompensated CHF 
 9.  3rd degree AV block (without pacer) 
 10. Active pericarditis or myocarditis 
 11. Recent embolism. 
 12. Thrombophlebitis 
 13. Resting ST segment displacement > 2 mm 
 14. Uncontrolled diabetes (resting BG . 400 mg/dl) 
 15. Severe orthopedic problems that would prohibit exercise 
 16. Other metabolic problems, such as acute thyroiditis, hypo- or hyperkalemia, hypovolemia, etc. 
 
*American College of Sports Medicine guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription, 5th edition, Table 8-1 
 
Procedure: 
 
 1. Inpatient contact. 
 2. Assessment of patient appropriateness, patient availability for rehabilitation, and patient interest. 
 3. Record comments concerning patient on inpatient documentation.  4. Send referral form letter/ order to physicians for all interested candidates. 
 5. Follow up with physician's office for approval and insurance precertification. 
 6. Call patient for orientation appointment within 48 hours of receiving written or verbal order (including 
insurance pre-certification, if necessary), or as soon as possible.  
  
 
 * Non-candidate forms to be placed in education file or monthly files (if not appropriate). 
 * Referrals should be followed and processed on a weekly basis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 