 
 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Patient Treatment Care Plan  
Date of  Origination:  01/04/96                       
Last Date Revised: 02/01/2018 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Outpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Section:  General Policies 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CROP05 
 
Distribution:                    Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department  
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services   
 
Purpose: 
 
To provide a structured plan for the treatment of the Cardiac or Pulmonary Rehabilitation patient and to 
identify expected outcomes resulting from in the Cardiac or Pulmonary Rehabilitation program. 
 
Applies To:                      All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
Policy: 
 
The Patient Treatment Care Plan outlines the potential program goals that may be anticipated for the care of 
the Cardiac Rehabilitation or Pulmonary Rehabilitation participant. Specific objectives are outlined 
concerning relevant aspects of behavior, disease management education, and risk factors concerning the 
patient's disease. Contents of the treatment for each objective, teaching methods, and anticipated outcomes of 
behavior modification are specified in order to create a standard plan and threshold of quality for the care of 
each patient. Some objectives, such as the diabetes or substance abuse objectives, may not apply to every 
patient. However, when any objectives pertain to and are significant to the responsible care of a particular 
patient, those objectives provide a guide for patient education, encouragement of behavior modification, and 
goals for individual outcomes that may be anticipated as a result of the care provided by the 
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation team. 
 
Procedure: 
 
A copy of the complete Patient Treatment Plan will be placed on each patient's chart. A separate Treatment 
Plan Summary will also be placed on the patient's chart. The Treatment Plan Summary is a one -page, short-
form individual report of the Patient Treatment Plan as it pertains to a single patient. It documents the 
initiation and achievement of the behavioral goals, education, and patient conferences. Individual patient 
goals that are not specified in the Patient Treatment Plan, but which the patient wishes to achieve, can be 
expressed and documented on the Treatment Plan Summary.  
 
The dates of the initiation of the Behavioral Goals included on the Treatment Plan Summary are documented 
when each particular goal is explained to the patient or is expressed by the patient. Usually the initiation of 
goals occurs during the Initial Assessment/ Orientation to the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation program, but 
may occur at any time during the course of treatment. If a follow -up is necessary, that also may be 
documented on the Treatment Plan Summary. When a specific goal is either achieved or is reported as 
having been achieved by the patient responses on the Patient Conference Questionnaire, the date of such 
achievement is noted on the Treatment Plan Summary and a staff member initials that achievement. Patient 
conferences are held after every 12 sessions and documented by the Patient Conference Questionnaires. The 
Patient Conference Questionnaire references and quantifies the progress or difficulty for the patient toward 
the realization of the goals in the Patient Treatment Plan and Treatment Plan Summary.  
 The Treatment Summary Plan also documents that the patient has received Our Lady of the Lake Patient 
Rights & Responsibilities, Advance Directives information, and includes a record of patient 
acknowledgement of training in the safe use of the exercise equipment. 
 