 
 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Patient Orientation  
Date of  Origination:  01/04/93                       
Last Date Revised: 02/01/2018 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Outpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Section:  General Policies 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CROP03 
 
Distribution:                    Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department  
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services   
 
Purpose:                            To establish guidelines for the orientation of selected patients into the  
                                           Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation program 
 
Applies To:                      All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
Policy: 
 
All patients will attend an orientation and testing session prior to the first exercise session. The purpose of the 
orientation and testing is: 
 
 1. The professional staff to gain further insight into the patient's needs, goals, and medical history. 
 2. The patient and his/her family to gain a further insight into the cardiopulmonary rehabilitation  
                 process and to have questions and concerns addressed. 
 
Cardiac Rehabilitation patients will be assessed by both a Registered Nurse and Clinical Exercise 
Physiologist. Pulmonary Rehabilitation patients will receive the same assessments, with the addition of an 
assessment by a Respiratory Therapist. During patient orientation, an initial assessment will be completed by 
one of the appropriate staff. All other assessments should be completed within the first week of the patient’s 
rehabilitation program. 
 
 
Procedure: 
 
Each patient will receive an orientation packet, which includes: 
 Orientation explanation Patient instructions for Lipid Profile 
 Exercise class schedules Exercise reminder list 
 Stretch exercises Schedule for Cardiac Education Classes 
 Patient Rating Scales:  Patient Rights and Responsibilities 
 Rating of Perceived Exertion Information on Advance Directives 
 Angina  Initial education materials 
 Dyspnea 
 
The orientation process includes: 
Introduction of staff and patient. 
Patient Assessment 
 Review teaching/learning that has already taken place. 
 Presentation of patient packet materials containing Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Program 
 information: 
  Inform patient of program content, expected outcomes, schedules.   Review exercise session times, days. 
   Review symptoms to report and termination of exercise criteria. 
   Discuss exercise sequence (warm-up, cardiovascular, cool-down), and proper/safe use of equipment. 
  Inform patient and family members of emergency protocol and safety procedures. 
  Demonstrate use of telemetry system 
  Access chart for proper documentation and needs. 
  Instructions for Lipid Survey and Diet Survey. 
  Discuss availability of Advance Directives 
  Overview of patient rights and responsibilities 
  Discuss program goals and individual goals 
  Tour facility. 
 
Patient orientations are confidential to Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation staff and may be held in the following 
areas: 
  Cardiopulmonary Gym Education Area 
  CVS Heart Management Office 
  Any available priv ate room agreed upon by patient being oriented  and Cardiopulmonary 
Rehabilitation staff 
  
The patient record, which remains within the department, will be assembled after orientation and assessments 
and will include the following forms: 
  
 Staff Documentation: 
  1. Attendance record/Charge Sheet 
  2. Patient Master Questionnaire 
  3. Initial Assessment (includes Nursing, Exercise and Risk Factor Assessment) 
  4. Respiratory Assessment (Pulmonary only) 
  5. Copy of Insurance Card  
  6. Patient Treatment Plan 
  7. Generic Exercise Prescription 
  8. Orientation checklist 
 9. Chart Organization Sheet 
 
 Patient Documentation: 
  1. Treatment Summary Plan with patient goals 
  2. Equipment Safety Checklist 
  3. Agreement of Financial Responsibility 
  4. Explanation of Program (Voluntary Consent) 
  5. Medicare Release Form (when patient enters Maintenance) 
 
 Medical Documentation: 
   1. Patient Conference Forms 
   2. Reports to physicians (12/24/36 sessions) 
   3. Lipid Survey 
   4. Quality of Life Survey/ DASI and score sheet  
   5. Quick Check Diet Survey and Analysis 
   6. ECG Stress Tests 
   7. Six Minute Walk Tests (Pulmonary only) 
   8. Physician’s referral order 
   9. Cardiopulmonary Rehab Inpatient Assessment Sheet (Phase I) 
  10. Inpatient Medical history (when available) 
  11. 12-lead ECG from inpatient stay        12. All other relevant patient tests and communication from physicians  
 
 Exercise Documentation: 
  1. Daily Exercise records 
  2. Daily ECG documentation 
  3. Pulmonary Rehabilitation Daily Notes (respiratory therapist sign daily) 
  3. Progress Notes (Cardiopulmonary or Pulmonary) 
 