 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Lipid and Blood Glucose Survey  
Date of  Origination:  01/04/93                       
Last Date Revised: 02/01/2018 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Outpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Section:  General Policies 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CROP06 
 
 
Distribution:                    Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department  
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services   
 
Purpose:                           To establish guidelines in the staffing of the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
                                           Program. 
 
Applies To:                      All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
 
Policy: 
 
All patients will have a recent fasting lipid and blood glucose survey noted within two months of entrance into 
Cardiac or Pulmonary Rehabilitation.  Participants may have obtained profile as part of their post-event procedure. If 
a post-event profile has not been already obtained, participants will be asked to obtain a profile with their family 
physician or cardiologist/pulmonologist. 
 
Cardiac rehabilitation participants will be asked to repeat the survey upon exiting the Phase II program. 
 
  
Procedure: 
 
During orientation, participants will be requested to provide a fasting lipid and blood glucose survey. When results 
have been obtained, participants will be counseled concerning their cholesterol levels, cholesterol risk ratio, and 
blood glucose levels. Cholesterol and blood glucose levels will be included in the summary report next sent to 
participant’s physician. 
 
Lipids 
Following the National Cholesterol Education Project (NCEP II) guidelines for individuals with established cardiac 
disease, patients will be encouraged to maintain cholesterol levels as follows: 
  
 Total cholesterol  < 150 mg/dl 
 LDL cholesterol    < 100 mg/dl 
 HDL cholesterol  >   35 mg/dl 
 Risk Ratio (total/HDL)  < 4.5 
 Triglycerides  < 200 mg/dl 
 
Blood Glucose 
When a participant (who has not been previously diagnosed for diabetes) exhibits a fasting blood glucose level above 
120 mg/dl, the participant’s physician will be notified so that follow -up determination for diabetes potential may occur. (Source: The recommendation guidelines of the American Diabetes Association expert committee for 
diagnosis of diabetes) 
 
The participant will be counseled concerning the glucose level and recommendation will be made for the participant 
to consult his/her physician for follow-up study and possible referral to a Diabetes and Nutrition Education program. 
 
 