Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Cardiac Rehabilitation Physician 
Supervision 
Date of  Origination:  01/31/2004                       
Date of Last Revision:  01/31/2004 
Date Reviewed: 06/09/2018 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary 
Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Section: Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Overview 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CROV06 
 
 
Purpose: 
 
To establish guidelines for the Physician Supervision of the Cardiac Rehabilitation program  as 
related to ‘incident to’ and documentation. 
 
Qualifications: 
 
The Physician shall be: 
1. A physician in good standing with Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center and possess a 
valid and current license to practice medicine in the state of Louisiana.  
2. Proficient in interpreting exercise EKGs and telemetry rhythm strips 
3. Willing to champion cardiac rehabilitation as a secondary prevention opportunity and an 
essential part of the continuum of care for both the medical and surgical/interventional cardiac 
patients. 
4. Receptive to working with a multidisciplinary rehab staff, such as, Registered Nurses, Clinical 
Exercise Physiologists, Dieticians, Physical Therapists, etc. 
 
Policy: 
 
The Cardiac Rehabilitation Medical Director will provide Physician supervision and medical 
leadership for the Cardiac Rehabilitation program. The Medical Director and the Cardiopulmonary 
Rehabilitation manager, or a representative from the department will meet on a regular basis to 
discuss Cardiac Rehabilitation matters. An assistant Medical Director may be appointed who will 
assist with the Medical Director's duties or represent the Medical Director when the Medical 
Director is unavailable.  
 
Procedure: 
 
The Medical Director role involves providing general oversight to the cardiac rehabilitation staff on 
medical issues and patient care questions that arise during program operations. Except in 
emergencies, individual patient care remains under the management of each patient's referring 
physician unless that physician requests the medical director to assume responsibility for managing 
the patient's rehabilitative course. The hospital medicine physicians will be available in his absence, 
for any emergency needs of the staff and/or patients. 
 
 
  
The duties of the Cardiac Rehabilitation Medical Director will include but are not limited to: 
1. Conducting regular “walk through” rounds of cardiac rehab in action 
2. Review and evaluation of actual patient events that occurred in cardiac rehab, including 
interpretation of abnormal rhythm strips identified by the staff  
3. Advising/assisting cardiac rehab staff to adjust rehab treatment orders and/or exercise 
prescriptions if/when indicated 
4. Meeting with the clinical and administrative cardiac rehab staff on a regular basis to: 
a. Discuss program operational and management issues  
b. Review selected patient cases 
c. Ensure that all patients have seen their physician face-to-face during the course of 
treatment as evidenced by documentation, or by the Medical Directors on-site evaluation. 
d.  Serve as an educational resource for the Cardiac Rehabilitation staff.  
5. Collaborating with the staff in the development of plans for responding to changing 
regulatory requirements that impact cardiac rehab services or operations 
6. Enforcing safety measures and emergency preparations including:  
a. Personal availability to respond to urgent/emergent developments in cardiac rehab or 
assignment of another physician to provide that onsite coverage in his/her absence  
b. Development & approval of standing orders for urgent situations that arise during cardiac 
rehab exercise, e.g. chest pain, rhythm changes, blood pressure and blood sugar 
abnormalities, etc.  
c. Participation, when possible, or approval of quarterly emergency drills with rehab staff  
7. Reviewing  and approve all clinical policies and procedures on a yearly basis  to assure patient 
safety and medical appropriateness 
8. Informing/educating other physicians about the need for and value of cardiac rehab services 
as part of secondary prevention  
9. Occasionally participating in patient or public education programs sponsored by cardiac 
rehab, e.g. Heart Month. 
 