 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Cardiac Rehabilitation Program Organization 
Date of  Origination:  01/04/93                       
Date of Last Revision: 12/11/2017 
Date of Review: 06/09/2018 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Section: Cardiac Rehabilitation Overview 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CROV05 
 
 
Distribution:                    Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department  
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services   
 
Purpose:                           To establish guidelines for the definition of the various phases of the Cardiac  
                                           Rehabilitation Program 
 
Applies To:                      All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
Definitions: 
 
Inpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation (Phase I) 
The Cardiac Rehabilitation Program for hospitalized patients, which includes patient and family education and 
progressive patient exercise at approximately the 1-2 MET level.  Phase I begins in the CICU/Heart Center and 
ends when the patient is discharged to home.  Generally a part of the DRG. 
 
Goals: (1) Educate the patient and family concerning the procedure/condition and recovery possibilities 
 (2) Assist the patient in recovery through activity, education, spiritual, and emotional support. 
 
Outpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation - Close supervision (Phase II) 
The ECG monitored Cardiac Rehabilitation Program generally begun immediately post discharge from the 
hospital lasting for from 4 weeks to approximately 12 weeks or from 12 to 36 sessions. However, phase II may 
begin while the patient is yet an inpatient or may not begin for up to 12 months following discharge due to 
complicating factors.  Phase II offers patient and family education concentrating on cardiovascular disease, MI 
risk factor reduction, nutrition, stress management, and emotional support.  Phase II also includes an 
individualized, progressive exercise regiment geared towards gradually increasing the patient’s intensity and 
duration of exercise.  MET levels are generally five and below. The patient is monitored quite closely by nurses 
and exercise physiologists with the aid of telemetry monitors. Generally paid by third party reimbursement. 
 
Goals: (1) Educate the patient and family about prevention of further health problems and about maintenance of 
       health 
 (2) Increase exercise capacity to at least 5 METs continuous activity (functional capacity equivalent to an 
       8 METs performance on a graded exercise test) 
 (3) Continue emotional, spiritual, and social support  
 (4) Refer individuals with special needs to appropriate assistance programs or health care providers who 
    may be able to address those needs 
 
Outpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation - Transition to Independence/ Maintenance (Phase III) 
The Cardiac Rehabilitation Program which is entered by patients after Phase II completion. A patient may be 
enrolled in Phase III Cardiac Rehabilitation for three months with a physician referral. The exercise program 
continues, generally five METs and above.  Phase III Cardiac Rehabilitation serves as a transition for the individual from supervised care to an independent exercise program, unless the referring physician designates 
the individual as High Risk. Without a High Risk designation, the individual will be transitioned to an 
independent exercise program at the end of the three month Phase III program. If designated as High Risk by 
the referring physician, Phase III may last indefinitely. However, it generally is not monitored as closely, as in  
 
Phase II with telemetry.  The participants are encouraged to continue healthy lifestyle choices and become more 
independent.  Not generally paid by third party reimbursement. 
 
Goals: (1) Transition patient to independent exercise, if appropriate 
 (2) Continue to serve as maintenance program for physician-designated high-risk individuals 
 (3) Continue health and prevention education  
 (4) Continue improvement in functional capacity 
 