 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 1 of 17 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
SOP Manual: Blood Cancer and Cellular 
Therapy Program 
Section: Clinical 
Title: Acceptance Criteria for Candidates of Hematopoietic Stem Cell 
Transplant 
Date of Origination: 12/4/2024 SOP Reference #: CT-CLIN-101 
Revision Date:  Effective Date: 12/19/2024 
 
SCOPE:  
This standard operating policy/procedure (SOP) applies to all patients undergoing Hematopoietic Stem 
Cell Transplantation (HSCT) at Our Lady of the Lady Regional Medical Center (OLOL) Cellular Therapy 
(CT). 
PURPOSE:   
 To outline a standard set of acceptance criteria for recipients who are candidates for autologous or 
allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation. 
GENERAL INFORMATION: 
Once it is determined that a recipient is a candidate for transplant, a series of tests/procedures must be 
performed to determine eligibility for HCT. Established criteria has been set forth to ensure the safety of 
patients and to mitigate the risks associated with treatment. 
Patients that do not progress to HCT will be monitored according to their disease and stages treatment. 
The patient will follow up with their referring physician or transplant physician. Ongoing communication 
between the referring physician, patient and transplant team should occur regularly. Clinical updates are 
to be reviewed with the transplant team at the weekly intake meetings. 
If a patient is enrolled on an IRB approved clinical trial for transplantation, the acceptance criteria for the 
clinical trial, where applicable, supersedes the requirements listed below. 
Disease Reassessment/Restaging timelines: 
1. Allogeneic stem cell transplant: re-staging within 30 days from the initiation of induction 
chemotherapy. 
2. Autologous stem cell transplant: re-staging/reassessment within 30 days from the initiation of 
induction chemotherapy, except for Multiple Myeloma candidates which can be reassessed/ 
restaged within 60 days of induction chemotherapy. 
All organ function testing should be current within 60 days of transplant unless patient has received 
treatment in the interim, in which, the testing should be repeated. In addition, patient's overall health, 
performance status, comorbidities, disease risk/status, and graft/donor source should be considered when 
evaluating candidacy for HCT. 
Patients that do not meet the acceptance criteria to proceed to transplant may continue with standard 
therapy. 
DEFINITIONS: N/A 
SOP: 
A. MANAGEMENT DURING PERIODS OF ENDEMIC INFECTION RISK  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 2 of 17 
 
1.  The program should screen patients with fever, cough, or other symptoms by clinical and 
laboratory testing for influenza or related viral illnesses, e.g. COVID-19. 
2. The program may defer non-urgent autologous transplants and non-urgent allogeneic 
transplants as needed to manage bed capacity and blood product availability issues. 
3. The program shall consider deferring transplants until beyond the incubation period 
recommended by local, regional, and/or federal health authorities for any HCT recipients, 
including planned peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC) mobilization who have: 
i. Had close contact with a case of viral infection (e.g. 2019 novel coronavirus [COVID-
19]) within timeframes defined by health authorities; or 
ii. Had frequent or close contact with recent travelers from areas of endemic infection 
within timeframes defined by health authorities; or 
iii. Have household members who returned from areas of endemic infection within 
timeframes defined by health authorities. 
iv. Refer to ID specialist for recent exposure to any emerging pathogens. 
 
4. The program shall consider deferring any donors until beyond the incubation period 
recommended by local, regional, and/or federal health authorities who have: 
a. Traveled within areas of endemic infection within timeframes defined by health 
authorities; or 
b. Had close contact with a case of viral infection (e.g. COVID-19); or 
c. Had frequent or close contact with recent travelers within areas of endemic infection 
within timeframes defined by health authorities; or 
5. For volunteer unrelated donors (URD) from other countries requested through a registry like 
the National Marrow Donation Program (NMDP), especially from regions with high 
incidence/prevalence of endemic infection or as defined by health authorities, e.g. COVID-
19, the program shall:  
a. Consider pre-harvest and cryopreserve the graft to ensure that the product is safely on-
site before starting the preparative regimen, in case of unforeseen travel disruption or 
donor illness. If this is not possible, ensure that an alternative stem cell source will be 
available within a reasonable time frame for the recipient should the product fail to 
arrive. This may include reserving cells for future use. 
B. Disease Specific Criteria-Adult (refer to attachment 1) 
C. General Acceptance Criteria for Transplant (for autologous evaluation criteria, refer to 
OLOL SOP CT-CLIN-104 "Evaluation of Recipient for Autologous Donation and HPC 
Transplant or Cellular Therapy”) 
1. AGE 
a. Autologous Transplant:  Less than or equal to 80 years of age 
b. Allogeneic Transplant: Less than or equal to 75 years of age 
 
2. PERFORMANCE STATUS (scale used to quantify the functional status of cancer 
patients) 70% or greater – Karnofsky Performance Status scoring (KPS) system. 
  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 3 of 17 
 
3. SEROLOGIES 
a. Autologous: HIV positive patients should have a formal infectious disease consult. 
b. Allogeneic: HIV negative unless enrolled in a clinical trial or disease well controlled on 
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). 
 
1. PULMONARY FUNCTION  
a. O2 saturation >90%; no supplemental O2; FEV1/FVC/DLCO greater than 50% 
autologous and allogeneic transplants. If a patient does not meet minimum criteria, 
pulmonary consultation and clearance is recommended. 
 
2. CARDIAC FUNCTION 
a. ECHO/MUGA with LVEF greater than or equal to 50% for myeloablative transplant. 
b. ECHO/MUGA greater than 40% for autologous or reduced intensity transplants. 
c. If a patient does not meet minimum criteria and/or will receive cardio toxic agents, 
cardiology consultation and clearance is recommended. Patient should have no New 
York Heart Association (NYHA) class III or IV Congestive Heart Failure. 
 
3. RENAL FUNCTION 
a. Autologous Transplant: no restrictions –consider dose modification for patients with 
elevated creatinine, poor creatinine clearance, or those who are on dialysis. 
b. Allogeneic Transplant: creatinine less than 2.0mg/dL. If patient does not meet 
minimum criteria, nephrology consultation and clearance is recommended. 
 
4.  LIVER FUNCTION 
a. Bilirubin less than 2.5mg/dL (exceptions: hemolysis or Gilberts) and transaminases 
less than 3 times the upper limit of normal. 
b. If patient does not meet minimum criteria, consider Hepatology consultation and 
clearance.  
 
5. INFECTION 
a. Chest X-ray with no active disease. 
b. If any active disease or recent previous infection, consider CT scan and/or infectious 
disease consultation and clearance. 
c. No active Hepatitis infection (refer to The American Society for Transplantation and 
Cellular Therapy (ASTCT) Guidelines for Preventing Infectious Complications in 
HCT Recipients). 
 
6. PYSCHOSOCIAL EVALUATION  
a. A pre-HSCT psychological evaluation is required to assess risk factors that may affect 
a patient’s ability to tolerate or adhere to the transplant process and/or the compliance 
of caregivers. 
 
7. EVALUATION OF SOCIAL AND FINANCIAL ISSUES 
a. Performed to determine the needs of the transplant patient. 
b. Identify if there are adequate support resources (caregivers, ability to obtain and 
afford necessary medications, transportation, housing) to permit safe and effective 
transplant care.  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 4 of 17 
 
c. To identify and assess that there will are dedicated caregiver(s) that shall be 
available for the duration of the transplant recovery period: autologous transplant 
patients to be determined by their attending transplant physician and 100 days for 
allogeneic recipients. 
 
8. DENTAL EVALUATION  
a. To minimize the risk for systemic infection before, during and after transplant, 
patients must have a complete oral dental exam with x-rays and submit a dental 
clearance; however, under circumstances it may be necessary to move forward with 
transplant without it.   
 
D. CONTRAINDICATIONS 
1. Systemic disease not correctable by stem cell transplantation – includes patients with active 
central nervous system (CNS) metastases or uncontrolled leptomeningeal disease. 
2. Consideration should be taken for patients with 'other malignancies' i.e. lung cancer, which 
may limit the ability to be cured or may impact survival. 
3. Active cardiac disease defined as myocardial infarction within 3 months of transplants or 
uncontrolled angina, class III or IV CHF, or serious arrhythmia. 
4. Systemic and/or uncontrolled infection. 
5. Active untreated or untreatable malignancy or other significant uncorrectable life limiting 
medical conditions that will not be cured with HPC transplantation. 
6. Active alcohol and/or other substance abuse. 
7. Inability to obtain informed consent. 
8. History of psychiatric or social non-compliance that has not been successfully remediated. 
9. Pregnancy. 
 
E. Human Leukocyte Antigens (HLA) MATCHING/DONOR SELECTION 
1. HLA typing Algorithm/Donor Preference (refer to ATTACHMENT 3 “Guidelines for 
HLA Typing and Donor Selection”) 
a. HLA Typing should be performed by an ASHI certified laboratory, at a minimum, for 
high resolution HLA A, B, Cw, DRB1, and DQB1 
b. HLA Matched Related Donors are preferred followed by 10/10 or 9/10 matched unrelated 
donor (URD) or haploidentical donor cannot be identified, consider a referral to a center 
that does cord blood transplants. 
c. Confirmatory typing should be performed on all recipients and donors. 
 
2. Donor Selection – HLA  
a. In circumstances where there are antigen or allele mismatched, allele mismatched donors, 
should be prioritized over antigen mismatched donors. 
b. Consider Class I mismatches over Class II mismatches. 
i. Consider mismatches at DQB1 followed by A, B, Cw (Cw mismatches 
within the same P group are acceptable). 
ii. DRB1 mismatches should be avoided, whenever possible. 
c. When selecting donors, careful consideration should be made to evaluate graft rejection 
and Graft Versus Host Disease (GVHD) vectors as well as HLA null results. 
d. For all unrelated donor transplants or mismatched related donor transplants, Panel 
Reactive Antibody (PRA) testing must be performed to ensure there are no Donor  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 5 of 17 
 
Specific Antibody (DSA) anti-HLA antibodies present. In addition, for all unrelated 
donors that are 10/10 matches, PRA should be performed to verify the level of Mean 
Fluorescent Intensity (MFI) DSA anti-HLA antibodies. In the presence of DSA, Anti-
HLA antibodies and no other alternative donor, consider desensitization strategies. 
 
3. Donor Selection – Other Variables 
a. When selecting unrelated donors, financial consideration should be considered when 
selecting donors from international sites. All else being equal, domestic donors should be 
considered over international donors, and if two or more equivalent international donors 
are available, cost of the product should be reviewed. 
b. All else being equal, male donors should be chosen over female donors to minimize the 
risk of graft versus host disease. 
c. All else being equal, consider younger adults rather than older adult donors. 
d. CMV should be considered in allogenic donor selection; whenever possible, seronegative 
recipients should have a seronegative donor. 
e. ABO compatibility should be considered when selecting donors, avoiding major ABO 
incompatible mismatches. 
 
F. HEMATOPOIETIC PROGENITOR CELL COLLECTION, CELL DOSE AND 
CYROPRESERVATION 
1. Hematopoietic Progenitor Cells 
a. Bone Marrow (HPC, Marrow) 
i. Donor must be able to tolerate general or spinal anesthesia. 
ii. Minimum cell dose: 1 X 108 TNC/kg recipient body weight 
iii. Aplastic Anemia or Mismatched Unrelation Donors Bone marrow is preferred. 
b. Peripheral Blood Stem Cells (HPC, Apheresis) – Additional information regarding cell 
dose targets can be found in the Mobilization Pathway Algorithm (attachment #3) 
i. Stem cells can be collected via growth factor alone or chemotherapy plus growth 
factor. 
ii. Minimum cell dose: 2.0 x 106 CD34/kg recipient body weight 
             
PROCEDURE: 
N/A 
 
ASSOCIATED SOPS: 
1. OLOL CT-CLIN-104 "Evaluation of Recipient for Autologous Donation and HPC 
Transplant or Cellular Therapy" 
2. OLOL Mobilization Pathways 
 
ACCEPTABLE END POINTS: 
Decision to proceed with HCT or to proceed with other treatment. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
 
1. American Society for Transplantation and Cellular Therapy (ASTCT). "ASTCT Response to 
COVID-19". https://www.astct.org/connect/astct-response-to-covid-19  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 6 of 17 
 
2. Barker JN, Byam C, Scaradavou A. How I treat: the selection and acquisition of unrelated 
cord blood grafts. Blood. Feb 24, 2011;117(8):2332-2339. 
3. NMDP "Be the Match Statement Regarding COVID-19" https://bethematch.org/news/ news-
releases/be-the-match-statement-regarding-covid-19/ 
4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/ 2019-
nCoV/summary.html 
5. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC): 
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/ publications-data/risk-assessment-outbreak-acute-
respiratory-syndrome-associated-novel-1 
6. Food and Drug Administration. "Important Information for Human Cel, Tissue, or cellular or 
Tissue-based Product (HCT/P) Establishments Regarding the 2019 Novel Coronavirus 
Outbreak" https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/safety-vailability-biologics/ 
important-information-human-cell-tissue-or-cellular-or-tissue-based-product-hctp- 
establishments 
7. Hamadani M, Craig M, Awan FT, Devine SM. How we approach patient evaluation for 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Bone marrow transplantation. Aug 2010;45(8):1259-
1268. 
8. Koh, M. et al. "Coronavirus and Haematopietic Stem Cell Transplantation". Worldwide 
Network for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (WBMT); 02/24/2020. 
9. Majhail NS, Farnia SH, Carpenter PA, et al. Indications for Autologous and Allogeneic 
Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation: Guidelines from the American Society for Blood and 
Marrow Transplantation. Biology of blood and marrow transplantation: Journal of the 
American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Nov 2015;21(11):1863-1869. 
10. National Health Commission's Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia and Control Strategy (website 
in Chinese) http://www.nhc.gov.cn/jkj/s3577/202002/ 
573340613ab243b3a7f61df260551dd4.shtm 
11. Rocha V, Broxmeyer HE. New approaches for improving engraftment after cord blood 
transplantation. Biology of blood and marrow transplantation: Journal of the American 
Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Jan 2010;16(1 Suppl): S126-132.Sorror ML. 
How I assess comorbidities before hematopoietic cell transplantation. Blood. Apr 11, 
2013;121(15):2854-2863. 
12. Tomblyn M, Chiller T, Einsele H, et al. Guidelines for preventing infectious complications 
among hematopoietic cell transplant recipients: a global perspective. Preface. Bone Marrow 
Transplantation. Oct 2009;44(8):453-455. 
13. OLOL HSCT Pathways-   
14. OLOL CT-CLIN-117 "Evaluation of Recipient for Autologous Donation and HPC 
Transplant or Cellular Therapy" 
15. Wadsworth K, Albrecht M, Fonstad R, Spellman S, Maiers M, Dehn J. Unrelated donor 
search prognostic score to support early HLA consultation and clinical decisions. Bone 
marrow transplantation. Jun 6, 2016. 
16. World Health Organization (WHO): https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel- 
coronavirus-2019 
17. World Marrow Donor Association (WMDA): https://share.wmda.info/display/DMSR/ 
Coronavirus+-+2019-nCoV#/  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 8 of 17 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 Disease Specific Criteria: 
1. Severe Aplastic Anemia: 
a. Timing of Evaluation: at diagnosis or relapse 
b. Type of transplant: Related Donor, Unrelated Donor 
c. Indications 
i. Less than 40 years of age with Related Donor may be 
considered for transplant as initial therapy or failure of 
immunosuppressive therapy 
ii. Greater than 40 years of age with Related Donor, Unrelated 
Donor after first failure of immunosuppressive therapy 
2.    Myelodysplastic Syndromes: 
a. Timing of evaluation: at diagnosis or after therapy 
b. Type of transplant: Related Donor, Unrelated Donor 
3.    Myeloproliferative disease (ET, PV, Primary MF) 
a. Timing of evaluation: after failing primary therapy or progressing 
fibrosis or development of leukemia 
b.Type of transplant: Related donor, Unrelated donor 
4.    Acute Myelogenous Leukemia: 
a. Timing of evaluation: 
i. Adult: at diagnosis, first relapse, first or subsequent remission, except 
good risk cytogenetics 
ii. Pediatric: at diagnosis, first relapse, first or subsequent remission 
b. Type of transplant: 
i. Autologous: First CR; Second CR with no allogeneic donor 
ii. Allogeneic: Related Donor or Unrelated Donor 
c. Indications: 
i. First CR: all pediatric patients will Related Donor except for FAB M3 
or M7 with Down’s; high risk for relapse- requirement of multiple 
inductions to enter remission or high risk cytogenetics 
ii. Second or subsequent remission 
iii. Induction failure or relapse 
iv. Persistent MRD (minimal residual disease) for pediatric patients 
5.  Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia (ALL): 
a. Timing of evaluation: 
i. Adult: any patient after diagnosis 
b. Type of transplant: Related Donor, Unrelated Donor 
c. Indications: 
i. First CR 
1) Adult patients in 1st CR 
2) Less than 1 year and MLL rearrangement 
3) Greater than 6 weeks to enter remission 
4) Normal or adverse cytogenetics;  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 9 of 17 
 
5) In pediatrics: Ph+ or 11q23 
6) Persistent MRD 
ii. Second or subsequent remission 
iii. Early CNS relapse (less than 18 months) 
 6.  Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML): 
a. Timing of evaluation: at diagnosis 
b. Type of transplant: Related Donor, Unrelated Donor 
c. Indications: 
i. Chronic phase: 
ii. Patients not in Hematologic remission after three months of tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor therapy. 
1) Lack of Complete cytogenetic remission after 12 months 
(follow current) NCCN criteria 
2) Cytogenetic progression on therapy 
3) Intolerant to TKI 
4) Pediatric patients 
a) For all patients with Related Donor 
b) Unrelated Donor if evidence of disease despite 6-
12 months with imatinib or like agents 
iii. Accelerated, blast phase, preferably after attempts to re-enter CP 
 7.  Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL): 
a. Timing of evaluation: progression or lack of response to fludarabine therapy 
b. Type of transplant: Related Donor, Unrelated Donor 
c. Indications: 
i. Progression or lack of response to fludarabine therapy 
ii. Poor risk cytogenetics in 1st CR 
 8.  Multiple Myeloma (MM): 
a. Timing of evaluation: all patients greater than or equal to stage 1 
b. Type of transplant: Autologous (single or tandem), Related Donor, 
Unrelated Donor 
c. Indications: 
i. Autologous: no restrictions except for acceptance criteria 
ii. Allogeneic: no restrictions except for acceptance criteria 
 9.  Hodgkin’s Disease (HD): 
a. Timing of evaluation: first relapse or failure to enter first complete remission 
b. Type of transplant: Autologous, Related Donor, Unrelated Donor 
c. Indications: 
i. Autologous: primary refractory, chemotherapy sensitive or resistant relapse 
ii. Allogeneic: inability to harvest an acceptable hematopoietic stem cell 
graft, refractory or progression after autologous transplant or persistent 
marrow disease. 
 10.  Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma (follicular): 
a. Timing of evaluation: first relapse or failure to enter first remission 
b. Type of transplant: Autologous, Related Donor, Unrelated Donor  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 10 of 17 
 
c. Indications: 
i. Autologous: chemotherapy sensitive, acceptable hematopoietic stem 
cell graft 
ii. Allogeneic: with chemo-sensitive disease; inability to harvest an 
engrafting dose of autologous hematopoietic progenitors; bone 
marrow or peripheral blood involvement 
 11.  Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma (Intermediate and High grade): 
a. Timing of evaluation: failure to enter first complete remission; first 
relapse or second remission; first remission and high-risk features 
b. Type of transplant: Autologous, Related Donor, Unrelated Donor 
c. Indications for transplant: 
i. Autologous: chemo-sensitive disease; acceptable hematopoietic stem 
cell graft 
ii. Allogeneic: chemo-sensitive disease and: Unacceptable autologous 
hematopoietic stem cell graft or progression after autologous 
transplant, inability to harvest an engrafting dose of autologous 
hematopoietic progenitors; bone marrow or peripheral blood 
involvement 
iii. In pediatrics treat as Leukemia lymphoma syndrome (allogeneic 
preferred); except anaplastic large cell lymphoma when autologous 
stem cell transplant is still preferred. 
12.  Testicular Cancer and other Germ-cell tumors: 
a. Timing of evaluation: first relapse, second remission or failure to achieve first CR 
b. Type of transplant: Autologous (single or tandem) 
c. Indications for transplant: Relapse 
 
 13.  Autoimmune disorders: 
a. Autologous or allogeneic transplant for refractory autoimmune hemolytic 
anemia, or ITP 
 
14.  Immunodeficiency Syndromes: 
a. Timing of evaluation: at diagnosis 
b. Type of transplant: Related Donor, Unrelated Donor 
c. Indications for transplant: severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome or 
other life-threatening inherited immunodeficiency syndromes, 
lymphoproliferative and phagocytic disorders, hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis. 
  
15.   Congenital Disorders of Hematopoiesis: 
a. Timing of evaluation: at diagnosis or treatment failure 
i. Except sickle cell anemia – with clinical evidence of high-risk 
disease 
b. Type of transplant: Related Donor, Unrelated Donor 
c. Indication for transplant: 
i. Diamond Blackfan Anemia  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 11 of 17 
 
ii. Sickle cell disease: Related Donor with high-risk disease (CNS, 
pulmonary, recurrent pain crisis). Unrelated Donor on clinical trial 
only 
iii. Fanconi’s anemia: at development of marrow failure, MDS, or 
leukemia 
iv. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria – with MDS or marrow failure 
v. Transfusion-dependent thalassemia syndrome (covers 
intermedia and other double heterozygous conditions) 
vi. Congenital disorders of white cell and platelet production and 
functions, severe: such as chronic granulomatous disease, 
Glanzmann syndrome, etc.) 
vii. Constitutional marrow failure syndromes: in addition to 
Fanconi, also traditionally include Dyskeratosis Congenita, 
Diamond Shwachmann syndrome, Diamond Blackfan 
syndrome, Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia. 
viii. Malignant Osteopetrosis 
  
16.  Amyloidosis: 
a. Timing of evaluation: all patients 
b. Type of transplant: Autologous (single or tandem) 
c. Indications: 
i. Autologous: no restrictions except for acceptance criteria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 12 of 17 
 
ASTCT Recommendations for Adult Disease Criteria and type of Transplant 
Indication and Disease 
Status Allogeneic HCT Autologous HCT 
Acute myeloid leukemias  
 CR1, low risk N N 
 CR1, intermediate risk C N 
 CR1, high risk S N 
 CR2+ S N 
 Not in remission S N 
   Acute promyelocytic 
leukemia, relapse R R 
ALL 
 CR1, standard risk N N 
 CR1, high risk S N 
 CR2 S N 
 CR3+ C N 
 Not in remission C* N 
Chronic myeloid leukemia 
 Chronic phase C N 
 Accelerated phase C N 
 Blast phase C N 
Myelodysplastic syndromes 
 Low risk C N 
 High risk S N 
 Therapy related S N 
T cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
 CR1, standard risk N R 
 CR1, high risk R R 
 CR2 S C 
 CR3+ C C 
 Not in remission C N 
Burkitt lymphoma 
 First remission N N  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 13 of 17 
 
Indication and Disease 
Status Allogeneic HCT Autologous HCT 
 First or greater relapse, 
sensitive C C 
 First or greater relapse, 
resistant C N 
Hodgkin lymphoma 
CR1 N N 
   Primary refractory, 
sensitive N C 
   Primary refractory, 
resistant C N 
   First relapse, sensitive N S 
   First relapse, resistant C N 
   Second or greater relapse C C 
Solid tumors 
   Germ cell tumor, relapse D C 
   Germ cell tumor, refractory D C 
Nonmalignant diseases 
   Severe aplastic anemia, 
new diagnosis S N 
   Severe aplastic anemia, 
relapse/refractory S N 
   Fanconi anemia R N 
   Other bone marrow failure 
syndrome‡ R N 
 
Classification of Indication Definition 
Standard of care (S) 
This category includes indications that are well defined and are 
generally supported by evidence in the form of high-quality clinical 
trials and/or observational studies (e.g., through CIBMTR or 
European Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation). 
Standard of care, clinical 
evidence available (C) 
This category includes indications for which large clinical trials and 
observational studies are not available. However, HCT/IECT has 
been shown to be an effective therapy with acceptable risk of 
morbidity and mortality in sufficiently large single-center or 
multicenter cohort studies. HCT/IECT can be considered as a 
treatment option for individual patients after careful evaluation of 
risks and benefits. As more evidence becomes available, some 
indications may be reclassified as “Standard of care.”  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 14 of 17 
 
Indication and Disease 
Status Allogeneic HCT Autologous HCT 
Standard of care, rare 
indication (R) 
Indications included in this category are rare diseases for which 
clinical trials and observational studies with sufficient number of 
patients are not currently feasible because of their very low 
incidence. However, single-center or multicenter or registry studies 
in relatively small cohorts of patients have shown HCT/IECT to be 
effective treatment with acceptable risks of morbidity and mortality. 
For patients with diseases in this category, HCT/IECT can be 
considered as a treatment option for individual patients after careful 
evaluation of risks and benefits. 
Developmental (D) 
Developmental indications include diseases where preclinical 
and/or early-phase clinical studies show HCT/IECT to be a 
promising treatment option. HCT/IECT is best pursued for these 
indications as part of a clinical trial. As more evidence becomes 
available, some indications may be reclassified as “Standard of care, 
clinical evidence available” or “Standard of care.” 
Not generally recommended 
(N) 
HCT/IECT is currently not recommended for these indications 
where evidence do not support the routine use. However, this 
recommendation does not preclude investigation of HCT/IECT as a 
potential treatment and may be pursued for these indications within 
the context of a clinical trial. 
Kanate, A. S., Majhail, N. S., Savani, B. N., Bredeson, C., Champlin, R. E., Crawford, S., Giralt, S. A., LeMaistre, C. F., Marks, D. I., 
Omel, J. L., Orchard, P. J., Palmer, J., Saber, W., Veys, P. A., Carpenter, P. A., & Hamadani, M. (2020). Indications for 
Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation and Immune Effector Cell Therapy: Guidelines from the American Society for Transplantation 
and Cellular Therapy. Biology of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, 26(7), 1247–1256. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbmt.2020.03.002 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 15 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-101 
Page 16 of 17 
 
ATTACHMENT #3 Mobilization Algorithm 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
CT-CL IN-101 
Page 17 of 17 
