 
1 
Purpose:  
The Loss of Utilities, Information Systems and/or Telecommunications Failure Plan is to provide for the 
safety and protection of all patients, personnel, visitors and property during a loss of information systems 
and/or telecommunications incident. 
 
Policy:  
The Loss of Utilities, Information Systems and/or Telecommunications Failure Plan will be used in 
conjunction with the Emergency Operations Plan (ECEP001) to guide the hospital’s preparation and 
response in the event of a loss of information systems/telecommunications incident.  
 
Definitions:  
Information Systems and/or Telecommunications Failure - Any interruption of the hospital’s computer 
system or computer networking software (such as a virus that necessitates the shutting down the servers) 
or any emergency that makes other electronic communication systems inoperable (telephone, beeper, cell 
phone, two way radio, overhead paging, or fax) is considered an information systems/telecommunications 
failure. 
 
Preparedness: 
In preparation for the possibility of an Information Systems and/or Telecommunications Failure: 
• Maintain a hard copy of this plan and the Emergency Operations Plan (ECEP-001) in a readily 
accessible location.  The Emergency Operations Plan contains information that serves as a useful 
reference and companion to OLOL Code Policies. 
• Maintain all Call Trees in an accessible, hard copy format.  Each department/unit must maintain a 
departmental call tree, and call trees must be updated on a regular basis.  Call trees should contain 
personnel mobile telephone numbers whenever possible, and hard copies must be maintained in 
the department/unit. 
• Ensure that each department/unit maintains all necessary paper forms to be utilized during a 
downtime.  
• Follow the procedures for staffing/utilizing the Personnel Pool as described in the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) Response Procedures and Resources, Section F. Staff, 2.  
Personnel Pool. 
• Refer to Attachment 2 of this policy for the location of Couriers/Runners if needed for transport 
of materials and/or messages. 
• Ensure that staff are educated about this procedure and participate in Code Purple 
Drills/Exercises.   
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  EOC - Safety 
Subject:  Code Purple – Loss of Utilities, Information 
Systems, or Telecommunications. 
Section:  A 
Date of Origination:  August 2015 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: 07/22/2021 Serial Code: ECEP009  
Date Last Reviewed:  05/06/2024  
2 
Authorization to Activate: 
1. The Administrator on Call (AOC) or designee has the authority to activate the plan when it is 
determined that the hospital’s ability to communicate internally and /or externally has been 
compromised.  
2. The Administrator on Call (AOC) will assume the role of Incident Commander and activate 
appropriate Hospital Incident Command System positions to respond to the event. 
 
Notification: 
1. A Team Member, upon becoming aware that the hospital’s ability to communicate internally 
and/or externally has been compromised, will attempt to notify the House Manager of the 
situation.  If it is not possible to notify the House Manager via an electronic method, the Team 
Member or designee will attempt to contact the House Manager’s Office in person. 
2. The House Manager will attempt to notify the AOC.  The House Manager will assume the role 
of Incident Commander until such time as the AOC or other Senior Leader is available to 
assume the role of Incident Commander. 
3. An attempt will be made to contact Plant Operations and Information Systems to determine the 
extent of the outage.  If it is not possible to contact Plant Operations and/or Information Systems 
via an electronic method, the Team Member or designee will go to Plant Services and/or 
Information Systems to obtain a status report. 
4. Once a status report is obtained, the Incident Commander will review the situation with Plant 
and/or IS and determine the appropriate level of response to maintain operations. 
5. If required, the PBX Operator will be contacted.  If the PBX operator cannot be reached with a 
house phone, the Incident Commander will attempt to contact the PBX operator using a cell 
phone.  
6. Once the PBX Operator is notified, the PBX page operator will clearly announce “Attention 
Please: Code Purple” three times to alert staff of the situation as required by the on-scene 
assessment. 
7. The Incident Commander will activate cell phone call trees to notify appropriate personal, 
including personnel of appropriate off-campus locations. 
8. If required, the Incident Command Center will establish a conference bridge to facilitate 
conference communication. 
9. If needed, utilize cell phones to call for: 
a. Incident Command Center – (225) 765-3429 
b. Status Updates – (225) 765-6651 
c. MET – (225) 765-1776 
d. Code Blue – (225) 765-3333 
e. Any other time-sensitive Code Event. 
 
 
 
 
  
3 
Response: 
 
• All emergency events will be managed by following the Emergency Operations Plan (ECEP-
001) 
• Utility Failure – Generator (reference policy ECUS031) 
• Utility Failure – Natural Gas (reference policy ECUS032) 
• Utility Failure – HVAC (reference policy ECUS033) 
• Utility Failure – Sewage (reference policy ECUS038) 
• Utility Failure – Med Gas/Vacuum (reference policy ECUS039) 
• See also Responsibility Matrix (below). 
 
 
Responsibility Matrix: 
 
Department/ 
Personnel Job Function/Responsibility 
Administrator on Call/ 
House Manager  
▪ Assume the role as Incident Commander.  Proceed with establishing Incident 
Command Center. 
▪ Activate appropriate Hospital Incident Command System positions to respond 
to an Information System and/or Telecommunications Failure. 
▪ Obtain additional resources as needed. 
PCS (Patient Care 
Services)  
▪ Compile a list of current Charge Nurses with cell phone numbers. 
▪ Compile a list of Charge Nurses with cell phone numbers scheduled to work 
during the next 24 hours.  
Incident Commander ▪ Evaluate level of communication interruption and determine degree to which 
communication with external partners (i.e. LERN, EMS, AASI, etc.) is 
impacted, and instruct departments/units to activate call trees or compile list of 
personal cell phone numbers for Charge Nurses scheduled for the next 24 hours. 
Emergency 
Department/Outpatient 
Procedures 
▪ Utilize process for manually maintaining billing sheets for codes to continue 
charge capture. 
▪ Utilize EMCO walkie-talkie radios to maintain internal departmental 
communications if telephone communications are compromised. 
PBX  ▪ Clearly announce, three times, on the overhead paging system “Code Purple” 
and affected areas, if known.  
▪ Clearly announce, three times, on the overhead paging system “All Clear Code 
Purple” when all conditions have been restored to normal. 
Nursing Units ▪ Activate Call Trees if possible, or compile list of personal cell phone numbers 
for staff scheduled for the next 24 hours. 
▪ Initiate downtime procedures. 
▪ Utilize cell phones if house phones are inoperative for getting status updates, 
contacting MET, calling Codes and physicians. 
▪ Revert to paper documentation utilizing downtime forms. 
▪ Use paper forms for requesting tests, pharmacy orders, and all other patient 
needs. 
▪ Utilize couriers from personnel pool to obtain diagnostic results and supplies. 
Medical Staff 
Office/Physicians 
▪ Notify/update Physicians regarding unscheduled downtime. 
▪ Compile list of Medical Staff/Physicians and cell phone numbers scheduled to 
be on-call for the next 24 hours. 
▪ Supply information regarding which systems are down and which remain  
4 
functional. 
▪ Initiate downtime procedures. 
▪ Determine if/when scheduled procedures, operating schedules and imaging are 
affected. 
▪ Utilize backup communications to nursing/ancillary staff should VoIP phones 
be affected. 
Security ▪ Utilize Motorola Capacity Plus System 2-way radios for communication as 
needed in event telephone communication compromised. 
Plant Services ▪ Utilize Motorola Capacity Plus System 2-way radios for communication as 
needed in event telephone communication compromised. 
Information Systems ▪ Implement IS Disaster Recovery Plan as needed. 
▪ Utilize Motorola Capacity Plus System 2-way radios for communication as 
needed in event telephone communication compromised. 
▪ Issue mobile phones to Incident Command Center to be utilized as appropriate 
as determined by Incident Commander. (Four Cell Phones, two AT & T and 
two Verizon). 
▪ Advise Command Center regarding the type of problem and projected outage 
period. 
Human Resources ▪ Form Personnel Pool, as described in the Emergency Operations Plan 
(ECEP001) Response Procedures and Resources, Section F Staffing, Number 2 
Personnel Pool. 
▪ Designated Human Resources representative will stand up Personnel Pool. 
▪ Dispatch Personnel Pool members to key areas (elevator lobbies and other 
critical locations) to serve as messengers/runners/couriers as a back up to voice 
communications. (Refer to Attachments 2 & 3 for location of 
Couriers/Runners) 
Ancillary Departments 
- Clinical 
▪ Suspend all non-emergency operations as practical. 
▪ Compile list of personal cell phone numbers for staff scheduled for the next 24 
hours. 
▪ Activate Downtime procedures to enable continuity of ordinary 
diagnostics/medication and resulting. 
▪ Support Command Center and Clinical Departments as are able. 
Ancillary Departments 
– non-Clinical 
▪ Suspend all non-emergency operations as practical. 
▪ Compile list of personal cell phone numbers for staff scheduled for the next 24 
hours. 
▪ Support Command Center and Clinical Departments as are able. 
 
Recovery: 
1. See Emergency Operations Plan (ECEP-001) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
5 
Attachment 1: Potential Data Center Impacted 
 
Application/System Department 
Head 
Cell 
Number 
OLOL 
RMC 
Lake 
Livingston 
North 
ED 
 Network Joe Bumpus 
(IS) 
225-315-
5186 
   
Internet Access Team     
Cisco Jabber Joe Bumpus 
(IS) 
225-315-
5186 
   
Phones Team     
Footprints Joe Bumpus 
(IS) 
225-315-
5186 
   
Email Team     
Email to Phones Team     
SharePoint (Lake link) Team     
Lake T:\H: \drives Team     
Cerner 
Powerchart/Firstnet/Surginet/Pharmnet/Radnet 
     
Cerner Printing      
Cerner Prescription Printing      
Handhelds      
EPIC (Access & Printing)      
PACS      
Powerscribe 360      
Spacelabs & Interfaces to Cerner      
Dragon for both Epic & Cerner      
VDI (Virtual Desktops) {Applications only or 
Full Desktop} 
     
Cafeteria System (Gempay)      
HBOC Registration & Billing       
6 
Application/System Department 
Head 
Cell 
Number 
OLOL 
RMC 
Lake 
Livingston 
North 
ED 
Bedboard      
Pyxis      
Epiphany      
Apollo      
Sensis    N/A  
3M Coding & Abstracting      
Remote Access      
Patient Portal      
Physician Portal      
Employee Portal      
OP Pharmacy (QS/1)      
Telemedicine/Telestroke (Internet/WiFi)    N/A  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
7 
Attachment 2: Locations for Couriers/Runners – Main Hospital 
         
Floor Locations for Couriers/Runners 
1st  
 
Elevator- C 
 
Main 
Elevators- E 
 
Back Hall – 
Pharmacy/Laboratory
/Radiology 
Back Hall – Central 
Supply/Respiratory 
Pharmacy 
Plaza 1 
 
2nd  
 
HVI-Elevators- B 
 
Tower 
Elevators -D 
 
Main Elevators near 
Main Surgery 
ER Ambulance 
Entrance/Lobby 
area 
 TNCC 
 
3rd  
 
Peds-Elevators –C Peds-
Elevators-D 
Main Elevators-E   
4th  
 
HVI-Elevators-B Tower 
Elevators-D 
Main Elevators-E   
5th  
 
Elevators-C Tower 
Elevators –D 
Main Elevators-E   
6th  
 
HVI Elevators –B Tower 
Elevators-D 
Main Elevators-E   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
8 
Attachment 3: Locations for Couriers/Runners – Children's 
Hospital 
 
Floor Locations for Couriers/Runners 
1st  
 
Patient/Staff Elevators East Stairwell (Stairway 7) West Stairwell (Stairway 1) 
2nd  
 
Patient/Staff Elevators East Stairwell (Stairway 7) West Stairwell (Stairway 1) 
3rd  
 
Patient/Staff Elevators East Stairwell (Stairway 7) West Stairwell (Stairway 1) 
4th  
 
Patient/Staff Elevators East Stairwell (Stairway 7) West Stairwell (Stairway 1) 
5th  
 
Patient/Staff Elevators East Stairwell (Stairway 7) West Stairwell (Stairway 1) 
 
 
Attachment 4: Locations for Couriers/Runners – OLOL Ascension 
 
Floor Locations for Couriers/Runners 
1st Main Patient/Staff Elevators (ED/Telem 
Elevator) 
Patient/Staff Elevators (Front lobby/ 
Medicine Unit) 
2nd Main Patient/Staff Elevators (ED/Telem 
Elevator) 
Patient/Staff Elevators (Front lobby/ 
Medicine Unit) 
1st Plaza 2 Patient/Staff Elevators  
2nd Plaza 2 Patient/Staff Elevators  
 
 