ECEP008 Mass Influx Infectious Patients/Biological Terror Event Plan - 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Emergency Management 
Subject:  Mass Influx of Infectious Patients / Bioterrorism Section:  A 
Date of Origination:  November 1999 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: 12/20/07 Serial Code:  ECEP008 
Date Last Reviewed: 05/06/2024 
PURPOSE:  
The purpose of this policy is to describe the measures Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center will take to 
identify and respond to an emergency event involving a mass influx of infectious disease patients or a suspected 
biological terror attack. 
POLICY: 
A. The Infection Control Department is responsible for implementing and maintaining a program to ensure 
effective surveillance to detect outbreaks of infectious disease or biological terror events. All clinical employees 
are responsible for reporting suspected infectious disease outbreaks or biological terror events to their manager 
and/or the Infection Control Department. 
B. If confirmed cases of continued person to person transmission of a highly contagious virus are reported to the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Infection Control Department will convene an 
emergency meeting of the Senior Management Team (Administrator on Call) and the Infection Control 
Committee to discuss implementation of this plan.  
C. A confirmed case of a highly contagious virus or biological terror agent in the southern United Sates will result 
in immediate implementation of this plan.   
1. See ECEP008 Appendix A for a description of common syndromes that may alert employees to a 
biological terror event.  
2. See ECEP008 Appendix B for a description of surveillance procedures and response actions for pandemic 
influenza. 
D. Suspected or confirmed cases will be reported to the East Baton Rouge and Louisiana State Office of Public 
Health.  
PROCEDURE: 
Activation 
A. The Administrator on Call (AOC) or designee has the authority to activate or discontinue the hospital’s 
infectious disease / biological terror emergency event plan. Activation may also occur by joint decision between 
the Emergency Care Unit Physician on duty, the AOC, or designee, and the Infection Control Practitioner. 
B. The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Chief Operations Officer (COO) will be notified as soon as possible 
whenever the emergency event plan is activated.  
C. Detection of Outbreaks and/or Biological Terror Event ECEP008 Mass Influx Infectious Patients/Biological Terror Event Plan - 2 
1. Syndrome-based criteria 
a. Clinical employees should be aware of high-risk syndromes associated with an infectious disease 
outbreak and/or biological terror event.  
b. See ECEP008 Appendix A for a description of common syndromes that may alert employees to a 
possible biological terror event.  
c. See ECEP008 Appendix B for a description of surveillance procedures and response actions for 
pandemic influenza. 
2. Epidemiological features 
a. Epidemiological principles must be used to assess whether a patient’s presentation is typical of an 
endemic disease or is an unusual event that should raise concern. Features that should alert healthcare 
providers to the possibility of an infectious disease outbreak or biological terror event include:  
1. A rapidly increasing disease incidence (e.g., within hours or days) in a normally healthy 
population. 
2. Unusual increases in the number of people seeking care, especially with fever, respiratory, or 
gastrointestinal complaints.  
3. An endemic disease rapidly emerging at an uncharacteristic time or in an unusual pattern.  
4. Lower attack rates among people who had been indoors, especially in areas with filtered air or 
closed ventilation systems, compared with people who had been outdoors.  
5. Clusters of patients arriving from a single locale.  
6. Large numbers of rapidly fatal cases. 
7. Any patient presenting with a disease that is relatively uncommon and has bioterrorism potential 
(e.g., pulmonary anthrax, tularemia, or plague). 
Response 
A. Notification of Internal Departments and External Agencies 
1. The Infection Control Department is responsible for reporting routine information regarding infectious 
diseases.  
2. When either an infectious disease outbreak or biological terror attack is suspected, the following hospital 
departments should immediately be contacted.  
Infection Control Department Manager 225-765-8864, Pager 225- 234-5568 
Infection Control Medical Director 225-765-8864, Pager 225-338-5052 
Administrator on Call 225-765-6565 
3. Infection Control will contact the Infection Control Practitioners from area hospitals when an infectious 
disease outbreak is suspected to request information about patients seen at those facilities with similar 
symptoms. This information will be communicated to the Administrator on Call (AOC) and Emergency 
Care Unit charge nurse as soon as possible.   
4. The Administrator on Call (AOC) and the Infection Control Practitioner have the authority to notify 
external agencies. This may be delegated to the appropriate staff person when necessary.  ECEP008 Mass Influx Infectious Patients/Biological Terror Event Plan - 3 
5. The following external agencies may be contacted to report a suspected biological terror event as 
determined by the AOC and Infection Control Practitioner.  
Local Health Department 225-925-7200 
State Health Department (New Orleans) 1-800-256-2748 
State Police  1-800-434-8007 
CDC Clinician Hotline 1-877-554-4625 
CDC Emergency Preparedness & Response 1-888-246-2675 
6. The Administrator on Call (AOC) will determine if the hospital’s Incident Command Center will be 
activated. (See also ECEP001 and the OLOLRMC Incident Command organizational chart.)  
7. Corporate Communications will coordinate with the Administrator on Call and Infection Control 
Practitioner to develop and disseminate information to staff regarding the event.  
B. Infection Control Practices  
1. Isolation Precautions 
a. Infection Control, Administration, and Patient Care Services will collaborate on the management of 
patients in a mass influx of infectious disease or suspected biological terror event.   
b. See IC 3001 for detailed information regarding Isolation Precautions. 
c. For suspected or confirmed cases of avian flu, the following procedures will be followed:  
1. All patients will be placed in Airborne and Contact Precautions, in a negative pressure room, until 
flu can be ruled-out or confirmed. This is in addition to Standard Precautions. 
2. During transport, the patient will be given a surgical mask to wear. 
3. Patients with confirmed flu (positive test results) can be cohorted. 
4. If the volume of patients becomes such that the use of negative pressure rooms is no longer 
feasible, patients will be placed in Airborne and Contact Precautions in a regular room.  
5. Staff and visitors will be required to don an N-95 particulate respirator or heap-filter prior to 
entering the room.  
6. Staff will be required to wear gloves, a gown and eye protection when caring for the patient.  
7. Meticulous hand hygiene will be practiced immediately after removal of personal protective 
equipment (PPE). 
8. Designated patient care items will be used and remain in the room until the patient’s discharge. 
The items will be discarded upon discharge. 
9. The patient’s room will be cleaned according to facility procedures using a hospital grade 
disinfectant. 
10. Housekeeping personnel will be required to don all personal protective equipment outlined above.  
2. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) 
a. Appropriate personal protective equipment must be worn during all patient interactions.  ECEP008 Mass Influx Infectious Patients/Biological Terror Event Plan - 4 
b. The Infection Control Department will advise Patient Care Services what PPE is appropriate for the 
type of infectious agent.  
3. Prophylaxis 
a. The Infection Control Medical Director will determine when it is appropriate to provide 
pharmaceutical prophylaxis to hospital employees.  
b. A cache of pharmaceuticals commonly used with exposures to biological terror agents is maintained in 
the hospital Pharmacy.  
c. The Administrator on Call and Pharmacy director will coordinate the release of prophylactic 
medication to hospital employees.  
C. Patient Care Operations 
1. Patient Placement  
a. When possible, routine patient placement and infection control practices should be followed.  
b. The Administrator on Call and Infection Control Practitioner will determine if alternative patient 
placement practices will be implemented, including cohort assignment, i.e., grouping patients with 
similar syndromes in a designated area or room.  
c. Patients with like illness may be cohorted in semiprivate or private rooms when necessary.  
d. The Infection Control Practitioner must be contacted before cohort assignment is implemented.  
e. Plant Services will verify that any area identified as an alternate care site within the hospital has 
adequate electrical service and utilities to support patient care 
f. Access to the patient placement area(s) will be strictly controlled to minimize the chance of 
transmission to other patients or visitors.  
2. Patient transport 
a. Limit transport of patients to movement essential to provide patient care to reduce the potential for 
transmission to other patients or visitors.  
3. Cleaning Patient Care Equipment, Soiled Linen, Contaminated Waste Disposal 
a. The patient’s room will be cleaned according to facility procedure using a hospital grade disinfectant.  
4. Postmortem Care 
a. Place the deceased patient in a leak-proof body bag and transfer to the hospital morgue.  
b. Inform Pathology and the Laboratory of any potentially infectious disease outbreak prior to submitting 
any specimens for examination or disposal.  
c. Advise the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals of any request for an autopsy.  
d. Instructions for funeral directors will be given according to infectious disease precautions.  
5. Laboratory Services 
a. Patient specimens will be collected according to CDC guidelines and will be referred to the appropriate ECEP008 Mass Influx Infectious Patients/Biological Terror Event Plan - 5 
agency for testing.  
b. The appropriate infection control measures and personal protective equipment should be used when 
obtaining diagnostic samples.  
c. Specimen packaging and transport must be coordinated with local and state health departments, and 
the FBI. A chain of custody document should accompany the specimen from the moment of collection. 
Identification of appropriate packaging materials and transport media will be coordinated by the 
Laboratory. 
D. Visitors 
1. The Administrator on Call and Infection Control Medical Director will determine if visitors will be allowed 
to enter a patient care area during an infectious disease outbreak.  
a. Limit visitors to immediate family members and significant others.  
b. Instruct visitors to wash their hands before and after patient contact and before leaving the patient’s 
room. 
c. Instruct visitors to wear appropriate personal protective equipment (such as an N-95 respirator for 
Airborne Isolation) throughout their visit.   
E. Security 
1. The Administrator on Call and Safety and Security Officer will determine the need to implement enhanced 
security measures during an infectious disease outbreak and/or biological terror event.  
2. See also ECEP001, Emergency Event Plan. 
Recovery 
See also ECEP001, Emergency Event Plan.  
1. The Administrator on Call in coordination with the Infection Control Medical Director and Infection 
Control Practitioner will determine when facility operations may resume.  
2. If necessary, decontamination of a patient care area will be completed prior to reopening the area.  
3. Psychosocial support will be available through the Critical Incident Stress Management Team  
 
 
 