ECEP-005 
Page 1 of 7 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Emergency Management 
Subject:  Hurricane Plan (Code Gray) Section:  A 
Date of Origination:  June 2000 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised:  4/30/2019 Serial Code: ECEP005 
Date Last Reviewed: 05/02/2024 
 
Purpose: 
The purpose of the Hurricane Plan is to provide specific instruction for the safety of the patients, visitors, 
and staff in the event of a hurricane.  
 
Policy:  
The Hurricane Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency Operations Plan (ECEP001) to guide 
the hospital’s preparation and response in the event of a hurricane.  
This policy was developed in response to the results of location specific Hazard Vulnerability Analysis 
which identified severe weather as a high-risk threat to OLOLRMC facilities and Region 2. 
OLOLRMC has incorporated National Incident Management Systems (NIMS) into its emergency 
operations plan (EOP) and associated code policies and procedures to ensure maximum compatibility 
with local, regional, state and federal government response plans and procedures 
Procedure: 
Weather Monitoring: The Regulatory Safety Officer or designee shall monitor weather reports and 
inform the Administrator on Call when a hurricane is projected to pass through or near the East Baton 
Rouge area and/or Ascension Parish. 
 
Authorization to Activate: 
1. The Hurricane Plan may be activated if either the following criteria is present: 
a. A Hurricane Watch has been issued for the Baton Rouge/Ascension Parish area, a 
hurricane is projected to pass through or near the area within 48-72 hours. 
b. A Hurricane Warning has been issued for the Baton Rouge/Ascension Parish area, a 
hurricane is projected to pass through or near the area within 24 hours. 
2. The Administrator on Call and/or the Chief Operating Officer (COO) in coordination with the 
Regulatory Safety Officer will determine and activate the Hospital Incident Command System 
(HICS) and the emergency event plan for a hurricane. 
3. The Incident Commander will determine and activate appropriate HICS positions to respond to 
the incident. 
 
Notification 
1. Acting on the recommendation of the Regulatory Safety Officer the AOC/Incident Commander 
and/or COO, will notify PBX page operator to clearly announce three times either: 
a. “Code Gray: Hurricane Alert” ECEP-005 
Page 2 of 7 
b. “Code Gray: Hurricane”  
2. Administration will begin the Administrative call out process to all hospital leaders such as 
Senior Administrators, Divisional Directors, Directors, Department Heads, Managers and 
Supervisors to inform them of the event. 
3. The RAVE Text Lake Alert system will be utilized to notify Team Members. 
Mitigation: Continuous Annual Planning 
1. Formation of Disaster Teams—upon hire and annually during evaluations, team members will be 
asked to declare the disaster team that they would like to participate on (see ECEP014 Disaster 
Staffing Policy) 
2. The hospital Emergency Management Committee will review and revise the Hazard Vulnerability 
Analysis annually. 
3. The facility hurricane plan will be reviewed and revised at least annually. 
4. Facility Mutual Aide Agreements will be reviewed, revised and executed at least annually. 
5. Departmental Disaster Call trees will be revised and posted at least annually. 
Alert Response  
1. Upon notification of a “Code Gray: Hurricane Alert” the following departments will 
complete an inventory of all supplies to ensure that enough is on hand to function without re-
supply for four (4) days. (See also Responsibility Matrix below) 
• Dietary (Nutritional Services) 
• Pharmacy 
• Materials Management 
• Surgical Materials 
• Plant Management 
• Laboratory 
• Blood Bank 
2. If additional supplies are needed, all requests must be submitted to the Incident Commander 
for approval prior to ordering any supplies. 
3. All other departments will 
• Check and update the departmental phone list (Administration will check and update 
Directors, Department phone list).  
• Review the department specific roles during emergencies.  
• Check communications devices i.e. charge cell phones/walkie-talkies, etc. 
• Notify staff of the Alert and review Disaster Staffing Team assignments.  
Response (In addition to the above, the following procedures will be implemented) 
 
1. All emergency events will be managed by following the Emergency Operations Plan (ECEP-
001). 
 
2. See also Department Specific Responses: Hurricane and Responsibility Matrix (below). 
 ECEP-005 
Page 3 of 7 
Department Specific Response, Hurricane 
A. Patient Care Areas 
1. Emergency Care Unit 
• Evaluate existing patients for potential discharge to home or an alternate care 
facility.  
• ECU Charge Nurse will report regularly to the Operations Section Chief the 
number of victims received, type of injuries, and any resource needs identified. 
• Report unit census and bed availability to Operations Section Chief as soon as 
possible and as often as requested throughout the event.  
2. Perioperative Services / Procedure Areas 
• Evaluate scheduled procedures to determine those that may be rescheduled.  
3. Medical Management 
• Assist with patient admissions, discharges, and transfers when needed. 
4. All Other Patient Care Units 
• Evaluate existing patients for potential discharge to home or an alternate care 
facility. 
• Report unit census and bed availability to the Operations Section Chief as soon as 
possible and as often as requested throughout the event. 
B. Clinical Support Areas (Pharmacy, Laboratory, Blood Bank, Imaging and Respiratory Care) 
• All areas will complete an inventory of supplies and scheduled services and report to the 
Operations Section Chief as soon as possible and as often as requested. 
• The Operations Section Chief and Medical Staff Specialist will determine if any changes 
will be made to scheduled services or procedures.  
C. Non-Clinical Support Areas 
1. Materials Management/ Linen / Nutritional Services  
• All areas will assess the need for additional supply and report to the Logistics 
Section Chief as soon as possible and as often as requested throughout the event.   
2. Plant Services 
• Plant Services will assess the need for additional Utility support and report to the 
Logistics Section Chief as soon as possible and as often as requested throughout 
the event.   
• Plant Services will ensure that all construction areas are secured to withstand 
increment weather and continually monitor and inspect buildings for structural 
damage. ECEP-005 
Page 4 of 7 
3. Security  
• Implement controlled access policies and procedures as needed.  
• Security will assess the need for additional resources and report any needs and 
concerns to the Safety/Security Officer when identified. 
Physical Structure 
 
      1.   Interior of Building 
a. Check out all equipment (fire equipment, first aid, etc.) and assure proper working order 
(all departments) 
b. Close and lock all windows, draw shades, blinds or drapes across the windows to prevent 
injury from flying glass (engineering/security). 
c. Place absorbent pads/folded towels on windowsills and inside bottom of doors leading to 
exterior to absorb any leaking water (nursing). 
d. Disconnect all unnecessary electrical equipment such as office machines, computers, 
copy machines, calculators, television sets, etc.  This will prevent damage due to blown 
transformers or excessive power surge when electricity is restored. 
e. Safeguard company records, patient records and important papers. Move all records away 
from windows.  All records and files located on the ground floor which are stored in 
lower drawers of file cabinets should be placed on top of the file cabinets or on tables or 
desk tops in the event the ground floor becomes flooded (All departments). 
 
2.    Elevators 
a. Elevator use may be restricted during Code Gray events to only emergency movement of 
critical patients 
b. Elevators may be removed from service under the director of Incident Command and 
Facilities Manager. 
c. Elevators may be placed back in service after the storm, subject to an inspection by the 
director of engineering and/or the elevator company 
 
3.     Exterior of Building 
a. An ample supply of plywood should be available to repair glass and windows.  Plywood 
may be installed prior to the hurricane at the discretion of administration.  
b. Check roof drains to ensure they are clear and able to drain off the heavy rains. 
c. Secure first floor doorways by applying duct tape or plastic sheeting to protect against 
flood waters. 
d. Check outside area of hospital for materials that may blow around, secure any items that 
cannot be brought inside.  
e. Secure building signs, parking gates, benches, vending machines, etc. 
f. Secure all vent hoods, exhaust louvers and other items on the roof which may cause 
leakage or be blown away by high winds 
 
Responsibility Matrix 
 
Department/Personnel Job Function/ Responsibility 
Administrator on Call 
(AOC)/ House Manager 
 
 Assume the role of Incident Commander. 
 Determine the need and type of emergency event policies, plans and 
procedures to implement to respond to a hurricane. 
 Activate appropriate HICS positions. 
 Notify PBX page operator when to announce “Code Gray: Hurricane ECEP-005 
Page 5 of 7 
Department/Personnel Job Function/ Responsibility 
Alert and “Code Gray: Hurricane when applicable.  
 Obtain additional resources when needed. 
PBX / Page Operator  Clearly announce, three times, on the overhead paging system when 
instructed to do so by the Incident Commander/AOC. 
o Code Gray: Hurricane Alert 
o Code Gray: Hurricane, please implement all safety measures 
immediately 
o Code Gray – Severe Weather Warning, shelter in place, close 
blinds, and stay clear of windows. Team please activate 
emergency plans 
o Code Gray – Severe Weather Warning, close blinds, move 
away from windows, move to a secure location 
 Await notification to call an “All Clear-Code Gray” from the Incident 
Commander/AOC. 
Patient Care Areas: 
Charge Nurse 
 Assure that all back-up communication devices are functional and 
charged: cell phones, flashlights, and other pertinent equipment. 
 Report and maintain unit census and bed availability information to the 
Operations Section Chief. 
o Number of patients and pertinent patient information 
o Number of possible discharges 
o Number of available beds 
 Direct and guide nursing staff in all procedures and response actions. 
Patient Care Areas:  
All Other Team 
Members 
 Conduct an inventory of all medical supplies and equipment in the 
unit/area, report status to the Operations Section Chief. 
 Evaluate existing patients for early discharge to home or an alternate care 
facility. 
 Wait further instructions from the Charge Nurse. 
 Send all requests for additional resources to the Charge Nurse. 
Cardiopulmonary  Conduct an inventory of all medical supplies and equipment in the 
unit/area, report status to the Operations Section Chief 
 Remove all portable medical gas bottles from the oxygen pad in 
conjunction with facilities and materials management 
 Ensure that all equipment is operating properly 
 Plug all essential equipment into red outlets 
 Set up and prepare oxygen cylinders to back feed main system in the 
event of a major oxygen failure 
 Set up and maintain emergency supply carts in all patient areas. Obtain 
any additional supplies. 
o Locate extra flow meters and place in departments 
o Check “E” tanks in the ED. 
 Adjust staffing as needed. 
Emergency Care Unit: 
Charge Nurse 
 Assure that all back-up communication devices are functional and 
charged: HEAR radio, cell phones, PAMEX, pagers, flashlights, and other 
pertinent equipment. 
 Report and maintain unit census and bed availability information to the 
Operations Section Chief. 
o  Number of patients and pertinent patient information 
o  Number of possible discharges 
o  Number of available beds ECEP-005 
Page 6 of 7 
Department/Personnel Job Function/ Responsibility 
 Direct and guide nursing staff in all procedures and response actions. 
Emergency Care Unit:  
All Other Team 
Members 
 Evaluate existing patients for early discharge to home or an alternate care 
facility. 
 Conduct an inventory of all medical supplies and equipment in the 
unit/area, report status to the Operations Section Chief 
 Wait further instructions from the Charge Nurse. 
 Send all requests for additional resources to the Charge Nurse. 
Perioperative Services  Evaluate the procedures scheduled to determine those that can be canceled 
 Conduct an inventory of all medical supplies and equipment in the 
area/unit, report status to the Operations Section Chief. 
 Assure that all back-up communication devices are functional and 
charged: cell phones, PAMEX, pagers, flashlights, and other pertinent 
equipment. 
 Report and maintain unit census and bed availability information to the 
Operations Section Chief 
o  Number of patients and pertinent patient information 
o  Number of possible discharges 
 Send all requests for additional resources to the Operations Section Chief. 
Medical Management  Assist with patient admissions, discharges, and patient transfers when 
needed. 
 Send all requests for additional resources to the Operations Section Chief. 
Laboratory  Take an inventory of supplies ensure enough supplies for in-house stock 
for the duration of four (4) days without supply delivery, report status to 
the Medical Care Branch Director. 
 Send all requests for additional resources to the Logistics Section Chief. 
 Send all requests for additional resources to the Logistics Section Chief. 
 Ensure that all essential equipment is on emergency power 
 Remove all items from floor 
 Remove and/or secure all hazardous materials and toxic substances. 
Imaging  Take an inventory of supplies ensure enough supplies for in-house stock 
for the duration of four (4) days without supply delivery, report status to 
the Medical Care Branch Director. 
 Send all requests for additional resources to the Logistics Section Chief. 
 Ensure that all essential equipment is on emergency power 
 Remove all items from floor 
 Remove and/or secure all hazardous materials and toxic substances 
 Cover critical equipment with plastic tarps and bags to prevent damage 
from possible water leaks per manufacturer’s guidelines. 
 Provide adequate technician coverage for the duration of the storm  
 Coordinate Radiologist staffing for onsite coverage. 
Pharmacy  Complete an inventory of supplies; ensure enough supplies for in-house 
stock for the duration of four (4) days without supply delivery, report 
status to the Logistics Section Chief. 
 Send all requests for additional resources to the Logistics Section Chief. 
Blood Bank  Take an inventory of supplies ensure enough supplies for in-house stock 
for the duration of four (4) days without supply delivery, report status to 
the Logistics Section Chief. 
 Send all requests for additional resources to the Logistics Section Chief. 
Dietary   Take an inventory of supplies ensure enough supplies for in-house stock ECEP-005 
Page 7 of 7 
Department/Personnel Job Function/ Responsibility 
(Nutritional Services) for the duration of four (4) days without supply delivery, report status to 
the Logistics Section Chief. 
    Emergency call-in list will be activated by director 
    Review emergency feeding plan with appropriate staff members 
    Contact material management regarding emergency water 
    Prepare to take deliveries at off hours 
    Disconnect all nonessential electrical equipment 
    Prepare task assignments/cafeteria service operations 
 Remove and/or secure all hazardous materials and toxic substances 
Materials Management  Take an inventory of supplies ensure enough supplies for in-house stock   
for the duration of four (4) days without supply delivery, report status to 
the Logistics Section Chief. 
 Provide adequate staffing for distribution of supplies during and after the 
event 
    Distribute supplies a needed. 
    Remove all supplies from the floor in the event the area becomes flooded. 
    Disconnect all non-essential electrical equipment 
    Remove and/or secure all hazardous materials and/or toxic substances 
Security  Direct all employees to report to their assigned areas/units. 
 In coordination with the Incident Commander, implement controlled 
access policies, plans, procedures at all entrances. 
 Send requests for additional resources to the Safety/Security Officer. 
Environmental Services  Take an inventory of supplies and make necessary arrangements for 
additional linen 
 Check status of extra beds, roll-away beds and cots 
 Collect soiled linen from all areas 
 Arrange for storage of soiled linen and trash 
 Arrange for trash and linen pick-up before and after the storm 
 Secure all trash cans, linen racks, etc. from outside of building 
 Arrange for biohazard waste pick-up before and after the storm 
 Disconnect all nonessential electrical equipment 
 Remove and/or secure all hazardous materials and toxic substances 
Surgical Materials  Take an inventory of supplies ensure enough supplies for in-house stock 
for the duration of four (4) days without supply delivery, report status to 
the Logistics Section Chief. 
Plant Services  Ensure that emergency utility systems (i.e., emergency generator, fuel 
tanks, back up water supply, HVAC, etc.) are fueled, functioning properly 
and can operate for four (4) days without supply delivery. 
 Ensure that all construction areas are secured to withstand increment 
weather. 
 Ensure that all entrances to the hospital are closed or not open (doors, fire 
doors, elevator hatches, windows). 
 Continually monitor and inspect buildings for structural damage. 
 Send requests for additional resources to the Logistics Section Chief. 
 
Recovery 
1. See Emergency Operations Plan (ECEP-001) 
 