 1 
 This Plan may be activated when an event suddenly or significantly occurs that: 
A. Disrupts the environment of care, (for example, damage to the buildings and/or grounds due to severe 
windstorms, tornadoes, or hurricanes.).  
B. Disrupts care and treatment, (for example loss of utilities- electricity, water, telephones - due to floods, riots, 
accidents, or emergencies within the hospital or in the surrounding community); or  
C. Changes or increases the demand for services (for example, infectious disease outbreak, bioterrorism attack, 
natural disaster, building collapse, or airplane crash in the community).  
 
Policy:  
Should an emergency condition or situation occur, is responsible for providing acute healthcare services within 
the hospital’s capacity and capability as appropriate to people affected by the event. Response actions may 
include, but are not limited to 
A. Maintaining existing operations 
B. Conserving resources and/or curtailing services 
C. Coordinating with community partners to ensure patient care and resource sharing when appropriate 
D. Obtaining additional resources from outside the hospital within the community or outside the local 
community 
E. Evacuating patients from the hospital in instances where the environment is not safe for patient care. 
 
Procedure: 
Authority to Activate the Emergency Operations Plan  
The Administrator on Call (AOC) or designee has the authority to activate or discontinue the hospital’s Incident 
Command System (ICS). Activation may also occur by joint decision between the Manager, Environmental 
Safety and the AOC.  
A. The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Chief Operations Officer (COO) will be notified as soon as possible 
whenever an emergency event plan is activated.  
B. The AOC/Incident Commander will notify the PBX page operator to announce the appropriate code three 
times to notify staff that the appropriate emergency event plan has been activated and will notify 
Marketing/Communications to issue the appropriate Mass Text/Lake Alert to all Team Members. Children’s 
hospital with notify team members via the VOALTE message system. (See ECEP012 for a current list of 
emergency event codes.)  
C. Activation of the Emergency Operations Plan is divided into the following categories to scale the hospital’s 
response appropriate to the emergency.  
1. Code ( ) Alert will be called after the Incident Commander (Administrator on Call) or designee has 
assessed the situation or event and has determined that the "Alert Stage" is needed prior to activation 
of the Emergency Event Procedures. When a Code Alert is called, departments will: 
i. Check and update the departmental phone list (Administration will check and update 
Directors, Department phone list).  
ii. Review department specific roles during emergencies.  
iii. Check communications devices i.e., charge cell phones/walkie-talkies.  
iv. Notify off-duty Staff of the Alert and informing them that they are on "stand by" and are to 
remain in town and be prepared to proceed to the hospital if called in.  
v.  Report status to the Command Center when finished. 
2. Code  2 
i. Announcement of an emergency code signals full activation of the emergency plan. See 
ECEP012 for a list of emergency codes.  
3. Code (Drill) 
i. Code ( ) Drill signals that an emergency plan exercise or drill is occurring.  
ii. During an emergency plan exercise, all departments will implement their emergency plan 
appropriate to the event. One exception is that personnel will not proceed to the Hospital 
when contacted. When staff call-out procedures are tested, the following information will be 
recorded for the drill evaluation and forwarded to the Safety Officer. 
1. How many employees were called? 
2. How many employees were contacted? 
3. How many employees would be able to report to the Hospital? 
iii. At the conclusion of the drill an all-clear announcement will be made.  
 
Incident Command  
When the decision has been made to activate the Emergency Operations Plan, the Administrator on Call (AOC) 
will establish an Incident Command Center. The AOC is designated as the Incident Commander and will assign 
the Incident Command Team positions to leaders available for the position at the time of emergency.  
A. The hospital Incident Commander is responsible for overall coordination of the hospital response to the event.  
B. The hospital uses an Incident Command System (ICS) that is compliant with the National Incident 
Management Structure (NIMS) for managing the hospital’s response to disaster events.  
C. See Appendix A for ICS organizational chart and description of roles.  
 
Response Procedures and Resources 
A. See also specific emergency event policies, plans, and procedures for the following:  
1. Evacuation (ECEP003) 
2. Code Gray - Severe Weather (Tornado ECEP-004; Hurricane ECEP005) 
3. Code Black - Bomb Threat (ECEP006) 
4. Code Red - Fire (ECEP007) 
5. Infectious Disease / Biological Terrorism / Pandemic Influenza (ECEP008) 
6. Code Purple – Loss of Utilities, Information Systems or Telecommunications (ECEP009) 
7. Code Orange - Chemical Contamination (ECEP010) 
8. Code Green - Radiation Exposure (Radiation Safety Plan) (ECEP013) 
9. Code Yellow - Mass Casualty Incident (ECEP016) 
10. Code Pink – Missing Person (ECSE001) 
11. Code Silver – Active Shooter / Hostage (ECSE019) 
12. Emergency Security Plan (ECEP011) 
13. Emergency Security Procedures (ECSE016) 
 
B. Notification of Emergency Event:   
When the decision to implement an emergency plan is made, the following will take place: 
1. PBX operator will be instructed to announce "Code “(color)" three times to alert staff within the  3 
building.   
2. Marketing/Communications will be instructed to issue the appropriate alert via the Mass Text/Lake 
Alert System/VOALTE system (Children’s Hospital) 
3. All departments will implement their respective departmental emergency checklists and, when 
appropriate, contact off duty staff to determine their availability to return to the hospital. 
4. All personnel on duty will remain within the hospital until released by their Department Head or 
designee. 
 
C. Communication During an Emergency Event  
1. The Public Information Officer is responsible for ensuring ongoing communication throughout the 
event.  
2. Internal Communication (to staff, patients, guests) 
i. Staff are notified of an emergency event or plan activation by the following 
1. Overhead announcement of an emergency code to alert.  
2. Notification through a departmental call tree. 
3. Ongoing communication is provided through Team Member Alerts, email 
communication, Mass Text/Lake Alert System and scheduled leadership and 
departmental briefings. 
4. A Disaster Information Line is provided for staff to hear pre-recorded information 
about the event and actions they should take.  
5. In the event of a Code Purple, refer to ECEP009: Information Systems and/or 
Telecommunications Failure – Responsibility Matrix 
ii. Patients and Guests are informed of an emergency event by hospital leadership through direct 
communication (scripting provided to staff) or information published through internal 
communication vehicles (for example: Currents / Lake Link or electronic bulletin boards).  
1. During emergency event plan exercises, staff will advise guests that the alert is a “test 
of the hospital’s emergency plan.”  
3. External Communication  
i. Communication with external authorities is managed through the hospital command center.  
ii. Response to Media requests is the responsibility of the Public Information Officer. 
iii. The Logistics group will proactively contact vendors and supply distributors to ensure an 
uninterrupted supply chain.  
iv. Coordination with other healthcare organizations is the responsibility of the Liaison Officer. 
See the Louisiana Hospitals Regional Emergency Response Plan.  
4. Communications Equipment 
i. Each department is responsible to ensure that communications equipment assigned to the 
department is always operational and charged. Equipment includes but is not limited to 
cellular telephones, pagers, PDA’s. 
ii. Telecommunication Information Systems maintains radios to be deployed to the Incident 
Command Center to support communication when appropriate.  
iii. Radios:  
1. LWIN 700 MHz radio is available for external communication 
2. Handheld radios (walkie-talkies) are available for assignment when necessary. The  4 
Motorola Capacity Plus Radio System is available for use by Plant Services, 
Security, Housekeeping and Nutrition Services.  The Emergency Departments at both 
the Regional Medical Center and Lake Livingston also utilize their own handheld 
radios for daily and emergency use.  The Respiratory Care Department has a radio for 
use to communicate with the Emergency Department during an emergency. 
D. Resources and Assets 
1. The hospital maintains an adequate inventory to sustain operations for at least four (4) days operation.  
i. When additional resources are needed, the request will first be directed to internal sources 
such as existing contracted agreements and relationships. Resource specific contracts are in 
place in key resource areas including Nutritional Services, Pharmacy, Materials Management 
and Facilities. 
ii. The decision to request additional supplies, medication, food/water, or facility supplies from 
external sources such as the Parish or State will be made by the Incident Commander and 
Logistics Chief based on data supplied by the resource areas.  
a. nd tracking requests made through these avenues. 
b. The hospital will notify the Region 9 HDRC when supplies are received.  
2. Any supply, equipment item or other resource shared with another healthcare facility 
or community agency will be tracked to ensure proper financial accounting and/or 
return of the equipment. 
2. Materials Management  
i. Upon plan activation, Materials Management will assess current inventory and contact 
distributors for additional supplies as needed.  
1. Contact information for vendors is maintained by Materials Management.  
2. A Disaster Supply Order is maintained at the hospital’s primary distributor and is 
available for delivery on request.  
3. A Disaster Treatment Cart is maintained in Materials Management for immediate 
delivery to the Emergency Care Unit when needed.  
ii. Materials Management will monitor utilization of patient care supplies and report status to the 
Command Center (Logistics Chief) as requested. Immediate notification will be made should 
any key supply item be identified as in short supply without pending restock.  
iii. A cache of personal protective equipment (N-95 respirators) is maintained in Materials 
Management for use during a disaster response to protect employees. The decision to access 
the cache is the responsibility of the Logistics Chief. 
3. Pharmacy  
i. Upon plan activation, Pharmacy will assess current inventory and contact distributors for 
additional supplies as needed.  
1. Contact information for vendors is maintained by Pharmacy.  
2. Agreements with primary distributors are in place to provide additional medications 
and pharmaceutical supplies when needed.  
ii. Pharmacy will monitor utilization of medications and report status as requested to the 
Logistics Chief. Immediate notification will be made should any key medication be in 
identified short supply without pending restock.  
iii. A cache of medications used for prophylaxis during a biological event is maintained in 
Pharmacy for hospital use. Medications are rotated to ensure minimal loss when the 
expiration date is reached.  5 
4. Linen Services  
i. Upon plan activation, Linen Services will assess current inventory and contact distributors for 
additional supplies as needed.  
1. Contact information for vendors is maintained by Linen Services  
ii. Linen Services will monitor utilization of supplies and report status as requested to the 
Logistics Chief. Immediate notification will be made should supplies be identified in short 
supply.  
1. Staff will be advised to conserve linen use in any event where supply is limited, or 
delivery of support supplies is delayed.  
iii. A Disaster Linen Cart containing back-up linens for immediate delivery to the Emergency 
Care Unit when needed. 
5. Nutritional Services 
i. Upon plan activation, Nutritional Services will assess current inventory and contact 
distributors for additional supplies as needed 
1. Contact information for vendors is maintained by Nutritional Services. 
ii. Nutritional Services will monitor utilization of food and water and report status as requested 
to the Logistics Chief. Should food and/or water supplies become depleted, immediate 
notification will be made.  
6. Equipment and supplies are available for decontamination of victims exposed to chemicals and 
radiation. 
i. A decontamination team is trained to respond to external emergencies involving 
contamination with chemical or radiation events.  
ii. See ECEP010 – Chemical Contamination (Code Orange) Plan 
iii. See ECEP013 – Radiation Contamination (Code Green) Plan 
 
E. Security and Safety 
1. The Safety and Security Officer is responsible for implementing appropriate safety and security 
measures during emergency event plan activation. 
2. The decision to activate Secured Access procedures will be approved by the Incident Commander in 
consultation with the Safety and Security Officer. 
i. See also Emergency Security Plan (ECEP011) and Emergency Security Procedures 
(ECSE016).  
ii. All staff MUST always wear an OLOL photo identification badge, especially in an 
emergency event. If Secured Access has been implemented, the badge is required to enter to 
the facility.  
iii. Visitor access may be restricted and will require registration depending on the level of 
Secured Access implemented.  
iv. Vehicle access may be restricted with non-emergency traffic redirected when necessary.  
1. Access for emergency services vehicles and patients seeking care for an emergency 
medical condition will not be restricted.  
3. Additional security resource needs will be communicated to the Safety and Security Officer when 
identified.  
i. If additional staff is needed to implement the security plan, staff from the Environmental 
Services Department will be assigned to support security whenever possible.  6 
ii. Community-based law enforcement support may be requested through the Mayor’s Office of 
Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness (MOHSEP) 
1. Community-based law enforcement support received will be assigned and monitored 
by the Safety and Security Officer.  
2. Requests for the OLOLRMC, Children's Hospital, Lake Ascension, and/or North ED 
campus will be directed to the Region 2 HDRC. 
3. Requests for the OLOL-Livingston campus will be directed to the Region 9 HDRC.  
4. Special attention will be made to ensure the security of children and other vulnerable groups.  
i. See Child Safety and Security (ECSE015) and OrgClin018 for identification and supervision 
policy. 
ii. If a child is unattended, efforts will be made to contact the appropriate parent/guardian to 
identify the child.  
iii. When necessary, a separate area will be established to temporarily house children until they 
can be reunited with parent/guardian.  
                          
F. Staff  
1. All employees are essential and will be assigned to assist in the event response until released by the 
Incident Commander or his/her immediate supervisor.  
i. Disaster Staffing Teams are designated to support an extended response. See Disaster 
Staffing (ECEP-014). 
2. Personnel Pool 
i. The Incident Commander and/or Logistics Section Chief have the authority to activate the 
Personnel Pool. The Incident Commander will determine where the Personnel Pools will be 
located depending on the situation and available space. 
ii. Human Resources is responsible for coordinating the personnel pool.  
iii. All staff called in will report to the Personnel Pool. 
Exception:  
1. In a Mass Casualty Incident, staff from the following departments, are directed to 
respond to their unit/area until given further instructions: Critical Care Units, 
Emergency Care Unit, Laboratory, Pharmacy, Physical Therapy, Radiology, 
Respiratory Care, and Perioperative Services. (See also ECEP016 Mass Casualty 
Incident). 
2. Managers from these areas are responsible for evaluating the need for staff during a 
Mass Casualty Incident and releasing staff for other assignment as quickly as 
possible. 
iv. If a department or service area is suspended by the Incident Commander, those staff will 
report to the appropriate Personnel Pool for assignment. 
v. Staff assignments are made based on identified needs as well as the person’s skills and 
abilities.   
3. Physicians 
i. Members of the Medical Staff and employed Physicians will report to the Medical Staff 
Office or Command Center for assignment.  
ii. Emergency credentialing of volunteer physicians will follow procedures defined by the 
Medical Staff Bylaws, Governmental Proclamations, and Executive Orders.  7 
iii. Physicians are required to wear an OLOL issued identification badge during their assignment.  
1. Volunteer physicians will be provided a temporary badge by the Medical Staff 
Office.  
4. Volunteers 
i. The Incident Commander in coordination with the Operations Section Chief, Planning 
Section Chief and Medical Staff Specialist will determine if volunteer medical professionals 
or non-medical volunteers will be included in the hospital’s response.  
ii. Volunteer assignments will be managed through the Personnel Pool and Medical Staff Office 
(physicians and Licensed Independent Practitioners). 
iii. Whenever possible, volunteer medical professional’s credentials will be verified prior to 
assignment. See also Volunteer Practitioners Policy (ECEP-015) 
iv. Volunteers are required to wear an identification badge issued by Our Lady of the Lake 
during their assignment. 
5. Family Support and Dependent Care 
i. The decision to offer family support (lodging) and dependent care will be made by the 
Incident Commander. Dependent Care will only be available as a last resort for staff that is 
unable to make prior arrangements for children during an emergency event.  
ii. Support in the form of lodging will be available to staff members’ immediate family when 
appropriate.  
6. Psychosocial Support / Critical Incident Stress Debriefing 
i. A Psychosocial Support Team will be available to support staff, patients, victims and family 
of patients/victims when appropriate. Key staff members have been trained in Critical 
Incident Stress Management procedures to facilitate psychosocial support activities.  
ii. Leadership is responsible for monitoring staff during a response and requesting the 
Psychosocial Support Team when needed.  
 
G. Utility Systems and Physical Environment 
1. Plant Services will ensure that emergency utility systems (i.e., emergency generator, fuel tanks, back 
up water supply, HVAC, etc.) are fueled, functional, and maintained appropriately. 
i. Emergency electricity is available through back-up generators. (See ECUS003). Generator 
support is prioritized for critical areas through a uniquely identifiable (red) receptacle.  
1. A current list of all areas supplied by emergency power is maintained in Plant 
Services. 
2. Fuel for generators is stored in diesel tanks.  
3. Agreements are in place with a fuel vendor to provide additional fuel when 
requested. 
ii. Water for equipment and sanitary purposes is provided by Baton Rouge Water Company. 
1. Disruption of water/sewer services will trigger water conservation procedures. 
2. Personal care kits will be used to provide for patient hygiene needs. 
3. Waterless products will be used for patient and staff hygiene.  
iii. HVAC is not supported with emergency generator power at some locations. 
1. Loss of HVAC will be compensated with placement of temporary HVAC units (spot 
coolers) in critical areas.   8 
2. Requisitions for temporary HVAC units will be coordinated through the Incident 
Command Center. 
iv. Medical Gas and Vacuum systems are supported with additional tanks of portable gasses 
through agreement with the hospital’s medical gas vendor. Portable suction units are 
available through Central Supply. 
v. Hazardous Materials and Wastes will be stored in a secure location during any plan 
activation. 
1. Plant Services is responsible for management of hazardous materials and wastes. 
2. Upon plan activation, Plant Services will contact the hospital’s waste vendor to 
request additional containers or collection as needed.  
3. Additional security may be assigned to monitor storage areas housing hazardous 
materials and waste if needed.  
a. Incidents of inappropriate access to the storage area will be reported 
immediately to the Safety and Security Officer in the Command Center.  
vi. Information Systems (electronic medical record system, telecommunications, etc.) are 
coordinated by FMOLHS Information Systems. 
1. The Incident Command center will coordinate with FMOLHIS to ensure operation of 
information systems necessary for hospital operations. 
2. Downtime procedures will be used should the hospital experience a loss of 
information systems.  
 
H. Patient Care Operations 
1. An Operations Chief is assigned to coordinate clinical activities including patient scheduling, triage, 
assessment, treatment, admission, transfer and discharge.  
2. The Incident Commander in consultation with the Medical Staff Specialist and Operations Section 
Chief will determine the extent to which patient care operations will be modified to respond to the 
emergency event.  
3. The Incident Commander is responsible for notifying the Louisiana Department of Health 
(LDH), Health Standards Division if the hospital exceeds licensed bed capacity as a result of the 
event. (See Appendix C for a sample letter). 
4. Bed Capacity  
i. For community-wide events, the OLOLRMC, Children's Hospital, and OLOL Ascension will 
report bed capacity to the Parish and State using the State’s web-based resource tracking tool 
as requested. This information is submitted to assist the Regional Hospital Coordinator in 
managing patient flow within the community. 
1. The Beds Coordinator/House Manager is responsible for updating information at 
established intervals (usually every 8-12 hours) or as often as necessary to 
communicate an accurate picture of hospital resources.  
2. Capacity information reported will include the OLOL-Lake Livingston and North ED 
campus. 
ii. The following will be considered to increase capacity for an influx of victims, if needed. (See 
Appendix D for additional information.) 
1. Evaluating existing patients for potential discharge to home or an alternate care 
facility. (See also alternate care facility below.) 
2. Canceling or rescheduling elective surgical procedures.  9 
3. Converting treatment areas for use as overflow patient care areas.  
4. Canceling or rescheduling routine imaging orders to accommodate disaster victims. 
iii. Additional patient care areas may be opened as overflow for the ED or other care areas at the 
direction of the Incident Commander and/or Operations Section Chief (See Appendix D) 
1. Alternate care areas at the OLOL-Livingston campus and North ED campus may be 
identified to support operations on that campus. These areas may include the 
Community Room or other conference room space.  
a. The decision to open additional patient care areas at the OLOL Livingston 
campus and/or the North ED campus will be coordinated through the 
Incident Command Center at OLOLRMC. 
 
5. Perioperative Services / Procedure Areas 
i. Perioperative Services is responsible for evaluating scheduled surgical procedures to 
determine those that may be rescheduled or cancelled as appropriate to the event. The number 
of scheduled procedures and Operating Rooms available will be reported to the Operations 
Section Chief as soon as possible, and as often as requested throughout the event. 
ii. The Incident Command, Operations Section Chief and Medical Staff Specialist will 
determine the extent of any changes to scheduled services or procedures.  
iii. Staff not assigned to work in surgical areas due to cancelled procedures or reduced case 
volume is to report to the Personnel Pool for reassignment to other care areas as needed.  
6. Inpatient Care Areas (Patient Care Units) 
i. Department managers will evaluate current patients to identify any patients that may be 
discharged to make additional beds available for incoming patients. This information will be 
reported to the Operations Chief as soon as possible.  
ii. Managers will also evaluate staffing and release any staff not needed to maintain current 
census to the Personnel Pool for reassignment. As staffing needs are identified, the manager 
will request support from the Personnel Pool. 
7. Clinical Support Areas (Pharmacy, Laboratory, Blood Bank, Imaging and Respiratory Care) 
i. All areas will complete an inventory of supplies, scheduled services, and capacities and report 
status to the Operations Section Chief as soon as possible and as often as requested 
throughout the event. 
ii. The Incident Command, Operations Section Chief and Medical Staff Specialist will 
determine the extent of any changes to scheduled services or procedures.  
 
iii. Morgue 
1. The Laboratory/House Manager is responsible for monitoring capacity within the 
hospital morgue and alerting the Command Center when necessary.  
2. Mortuary support for the OLOLRMC campus, Children's Hospital and the North ED 
campus (in Baton Rouge) will be requested from the East Baton Rouge Parish 
Coroner’s Office and/or through the East Baton Rouge Parish Mayor’s Office of 
Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness when necessary. 
3. Support for Lake Ascension campus will be requested through the Ascension Parish 
Coroner’s Office when necessary. 
4. Support for the OLOL-Livingston campus (in Walker) will be requested through the 
Livingston Parish Coroner’s Office when necessary.   10 
8. Care of Vulnerable Populations (For Example: Pediatrics, Elderly, Sensory Impaired, Non-English 
Speaking)  
i. Special care will be taken to ensure the safety of vulnerable patients received during a 
disaster response.  
ii. See OrgClin005 (Deaf and Hearing-Impaired Services), PC05 (Deaf Talk Video Phone), and 
OrgClin10 (Foreign Language Interpreters) for support procedures for deaf/hearing impaired 
or non-English speaking patients 
 
I. Evacuation 
1. The hospital’s primary strategy is to shelter in place.  
2. The Incident Commander is responsible for determining when the environment can no longer support 
patient care and evacuation is required.  
3. If evacuation of the hospital is required or if capacity needs dictate, patients may be transferred to an 
alternate care facility. Agreements are in place within FMOLHS for alternate care facilities should 
evacuation to out of state facilities be required.  
4. The Liaison Officer will assist the Incident Commander in coordinating transfer of patients to an 
alternate care facility outside of the hospital.  
5. The Liaison Officer will coordinate with the Region 2 and/or Region 9 Hospital Designated Regional 
Coordinator to facilitate movement of patients within the State. Whenever possible, patients will be 
transferred to hospitals within the same Region or within Louisiana instead of moving to out of state 
facilities. Patients will be directed to facilities within FMOLHS before seeking placement in other 
facilities within Louisiana or in another state.  
6. See also Evacuation Policy (ECEP003) 
 
Recovery 
A. Patient Care Operations 
1. The Incident Commander will notify the PBX page operator when to announce an “All Clear” of the 
appropriate code called to notify staff that the emergency event plan has been deactivated.  
2. The Incident Commander will gradually deactivate HICS positions and staff will resume normal daily 
operations including re-scheduling elective procedures and returning all areas to the pre-event 
function.  
3. The Incident Commander will determine when to deactivate the Personnel Pools and all staff will be 
released.  
B. Physical Plant / Facility 
1. Plant Services will assess the hospital building for structural damage, if necessary. If structural 
damage has occurred, Plant Services will ensure that the area is safe for use before it is repopulated. 
Interim Life Safety Measures (see ECLS001) will be implemented when necessary. 
2. In the event Utility service was interrupted, Plant Services will ensure the service is repaired and 
returned as soon as possible.  
3. Documentation of expenses related to Utility service failure will be submitted to the Finance Section 
Chief.  
C. Financial 
1. The Finance/Administration Section Chief is responsible for coordinating tracking and documentation 
of all emergency event expenses. Each department is responsible for ongoing tracking of expenses 
related to the emergency event and submitting these documents to the Finance/Administration Section  11 
Chief as soon as possible following the event.  
2. Personnel Expenses will be compiled by Payroll in coordination with Department Managers.  
3. Equipment Expense for any equipment purchased or rented for use during the event response or 
recovery phase must be clearly documented and submitted to the Finance/Administration Section 
Chief. No equipment will be purchased or rented without prior approval from the Incident 
Commander.  
4. Materials / Supplies for any supplies purchased for use during the event response or recovery phase 
must be clearly documented and submitted to the Finance/Administration Section Chief. No supplies 
will be purchased without prior approval from the Incident Commander.  
5. Sheltering expenses for any citizens provided shelter during a disaster are to be submitted to the 
Finance/Administration Chief.  
6. Risk Management and Claims will investigate any workers compensation, general or professional 
liability claims as appropriate.  
D. Information Technology 
1. See also FMOLHS IS Disaster Recovery Plan   12 
Appendix A: Incident Command System 
A. Incident Command System (ICS) 
1. The Administrator on Call (AOC), or designee, will act as the Incident Commander during plan 
activations.  
2. The Incident Commander is responsible for assigning ICS positions to the most appropriate senior staff 
member available for the position at the time of the emergency event. (See also ICS Organizational Chart) 
3. The Incident Commander will determine which ICS positions will be activated and deactivated depending 
on the nature of the event.  
4. The Command Center will be established in an area designated by the Incident Commander.  
5. The Incident Command management team will consist of the following positions listed below. Hospital 
leaders assigned to these roles are responsible for completing all tasks defined in the position’s Job Action 
Sheet.  
6. All assigned an ICS position will operate in twelve (12) hour shifts for the duration of the activation 
period. 
Position: Assign to: General Responsibilities (See also Appendix 
B.):  
Incident Commander Administrator on Call, House 
Manager, CEO, COO 
Organizing and directing the overall strategy for 
the hospital’s response including management 
and support activities. 
Public Information 
Officer  
Corporate Communications, 
other appropriate senior 
leader 
Acting as the conduit for information to internal 
and external stakeholders, including staff, 
visitors and families, and the news media, as 
approved by the Incident Commander. 
Liaison Officer VP Business Development or 
other appropriate senior 
leader 
Functioning as the contact person for 
representatives from other agencies. The Liaison 
Officer will work in coordination with the 
Incident Commander and other responding 
agencies to obtain additional resources from 
community resources. 
Safety Officer Manager, Environmental 
Safety, Director of Security, 
or other appropriate senior 
leader 
Oversight of general safety and security 
operations during the event and has the 
authority to stop/halt any operations that poses 
immediate threat to life and health. 
Hospital Designated 
Regional Coordinator 
Regulatory Safety Officer Serve as liaison between Region 2 hospitals 
and community response agencies.  
Medical/Technical 
Specialist 
Depends on the type of 
incident and situation 
The Medical/Technical Specialist will advise 
the Incident Commander on issues relating to 
their specialty as pertinent to the event. 
Operations Section 
Chief 
VP Patient Care Services, 
House Manager, other 
appropriate senior leader 
Developing and implementing tactics to carry 
out the objectives established by the Incident 
Commander and organize, assign, and supervise 
Staging, Medical Care, and Business Continuity 
Branch resources.  13 
Position: Assign to: General Responsibilities (See also Appendix 
B.):  
Planning Section Chief VP Planning/Business 
Development, VP Human 
Resources, House Manager, 
or other appropriate senior 
leader 
Oversight of all incident-related data gathering 
and analysis regarding incident operations and 
assigned resources. The Planning Section Chief 
will also develop alternatives for tactical 
operations, conduct planning meetings, and 
prepare the Incident Action Plan (IAP) for each 
operational period 
Logistics Section Chief VP Ancillary Services, VP 
Professional Services, or 
other appropriate senior 
leader 
Organize and direct operations associated with 
maintenance of the physical environment and 
with the provision of human resources, 
materials, and services to support the incident 
activities.   
Infrastructure, Security, Hazardous Materials, 
Vendor agreements to obtain additional patient 
care supplies, pharmaceuticals, nutritional 
supplies, or facility resources will be 
coordinated through the Logistics Section 
Chief. 
Finance/Administration 
Section Chief 
Chief Financial Officer, 
Controller or VP Finance, 
other appropriate senior 
leader 
Monitor the utilization of financial assets and 
the accounting for financial expenditures and 
supervise the documentation of expenditures 
and cost reimbursement activities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  15 
B. Incident Command Organizational Chart 
 
 
Incident Commander 
Liaison Officer 
Medical/Tech. Specialist(s) 
Safety / Security Officer 
Public Information Officer 
Operations Section Chief 
Hospital Designated Regional 
Coordinator 
Finance/Admin Section 
Chief 
Logistics Section Chief 
Planning Section Chief 
Response roles for managing 
personnel time; procurement; 
compensation; cost 
Response roles for 
Communications (equipment); 
Staff support; Personnel Pool; 
Infrastructure (Physical Plant, 
EVS, Nutritional); Security 
Response roles for managing 
resources Patient Tracking; 
Equipment/Material Tracking; 
Documentation Unit 
Response roles for patient 
care operations (inpatient, 
outpatient, ambulatory); Decon 
Team; Business Continuity  16 
Appendix B: ICS Position and Department Specific Responsibilities Roles and Responsibilities 
A. Incident Commander  
1. Direct the management and use of OLOL resources to respond to the event. Includes responsibility 
for Children's Hospital, OLOL North ED and OLOL-Livingston campus resources. 
2. Activate the appropriate disaster plan and ICS roles for the event.  
3. Complete an initial situation assessment and assign ongoing resource assessment and reporting to 
appropriate hospital leaders. 
4. Ensure timely reporting of changes in hospital operating status to appropriate regulatory agencies. 
(See Louisiana Hospital Licensing Standard, Section 9335 M.) 
B. Public Information Officer 
1. Develop and/or conduct regular status update messages, briefings, and forums to ensure that timely, 
appropriate and accurate information is provided to staff, hospital patients, and guests during any 
emergency. 
2. Monitor news reports (television, radio, and internet) for information about the event during the 
response.  
3. Respond to requests for media for information related to the event. 
C. Safety / Security Officer 
1. Oversee response operations to ensure safety and security during the event. 
2. Take action to stop any response operations that pose an immediate threat to life and health. 
3. Oversee Security Department staff and coordinate security operations. 
4. Implement the hospital access control plan as appropriate to the event.  
5. Respond to security issues and concerns 
6. Coordinate with community law enforcement agencies assigned to support the hospital. 
D. Liaison Officer 
1. Serve as the primary contact person for representatives from external agencies. 
2. Respond to requests from other agencies and coordinate with external agencies to obtain additional 
resources when necessary.  
E. Medical Staff Office / Technical Specialist (Note: Role may include multiple people depending on the type 
and scope of event.) 
1. Advise the Incident Commander on issues relating to their specialty when appropriate to the event. 
2. Serve as liaison between Medical Staff Office and the hospital Incident Commander for managing the 
role of Medical Staff (employed and non-employed physicians) and other Licensed Independent 
Practitioners. 
F. Operations Section Chief 
1. Develop and implement strategy and tactics to carry out response objectives established by the 
Incident Command team.   
2. Areas reporting to the Operations Section Chief:  
i. Patient Care Services: Coordinate and provide inpatient care services as appropriate during 
the disaster response and recovery periods. 
1. Emergency Care Unit (Adult, Treatment Center, Pediatric, Livingston and North ED) 
a. Implement appropriate triage procedures to effectively manage incoming 
victims.  17 
b. Coordinate and provide emergency care as appropriate.  
2. Perioperative Services (Pre-Op, OR (all departments), PACU) 
a. Provide surgical services as appropriate during the disaster response and 
recovery period. 
b. Evaluate scheduled surgical procedures to determine those that may be 
rescheduled or cancelled as appropriate to the event. 
c. Report the number of scheduled procedures and Operating Rooms available 
to the Operations Section Chief as soon as possible, and as often as requested 
throughout the event. 
ii. Clinical Support Areas (Pharmacy, Laboratory, Blood Bank, Imaging and Respiratory Care) 
1. Complete an inventory of supplies and scheduled services and report status to the 
Operations Section Chief as soon as possible and as often as requested throughout the 
event. 
2. The Incident Commander in consultation with the Department Leader and Operations 
Section Chief will determine the extent to which departmental operations will be 
modified to respond to the emergency event. 
3. Staff not assigned to work in a clinical support area due to cancelled procedures or 
reduced procedure volume is to report to the Personnel Pool for reassignment to other 
care areas as needed.  
G. Planning Section Chief 
1. Oversee incident related data gathering and analysis. Develop alternatives for tactical operations and 
prepare the Incident Action Plan.  
2. Areas reporting to the Planning Section Chief: 
i. Access Services and Health Information Management 
1. Implement disaster registration and patient tracking procedures. 
2. Provide information about patient census, admissions and discharges as requested to 
the Incident Command Team. 
ii. Patient Logistics / Bed Control:  
1. Complete an initial and ongoing assessment of available hospital capacity for 
admitting patients and reporting to the Planning Section Chief as soon as possible, 
and as often as requested throughout the event. 
2. Participate in decision-making related to modifying patient care operations and 
opening of additional patient care areas to accommodate the flow of patients related 
to the disaster.  
3. Report hospital bed and service capacity through the web-based resource tracking 
tool provided by the State and according to the schedule established by the Hospital 
Designated Regional Coordinator and/or State (usually every 8-12 hours). Capacity 
reporting to include Children's Hospital, OLOL-Livingston campus and North ED 
campus resources. 
H. Logistics Section Chief 
1. Organize and direct operations associated with maintaining the physical environment and with 
provision of human resources, materials and services to support response activities. 
2. Areas reporting to the Logistics Section Chief: 
i. Facility Support Areas (Plant Services, Housekeeping, Information Systems,)  18 
1. Plant Services  
a. Ensure all emergency utility systems are fueled, functional and maintained 
appropriately.  
b. Ensure adequate supplies of fuel (for building operation and fleet/critical 
transportation vehicles), water for building operations and other utility 
resources are available.  
c. Complete an assessment of fuel and other utility resources and report status 
to the Logistics Section Chief as soon as possible and as often as requested 
throughout the event.  
d. Monitor utilization and report issues or concerns to the Logistics Section 
Chief.  
e. Maintain contact with vendors to ensure timely resupply when needed.  
f. Ensure the security of hazardous materials and wastes throughout the event.  
2. Housekeeping 
a. Provide Housekeeping services to support patient care operations throughout 
the event. 
b. Facilitate collection of biohazard waste bins (if necessary) to maintain safe 
work environment. 
3. Information Systems  
a. Ensure operation of hospital information systems, telecommunication 
systems and electronic medical record. 
b. Complete an assessment of resource capacity and report status to the 
Logistics Section Chief as soon as possible and as often as requested 
throughout the event.  
c. Monitor utilization and report issues or concerns to the Logistics Section 
Chief.  
d. Maintain contact with vendors to ensure timely response to system issues 
when identified.  
ii. Non-Clinical Support Areas (Materials Management, Surgical Materials, Linen, Nutritional 
Services, Transport) 
1. All non-clinical support areas will complete an inventory of supplies and scheduled 
services and report status to the Logistics Section Chief as soon as possible and as 
often as requested throughout the event. 
2. The Incident Commander in consultation with the Department Leader and Logistics 
Section Chief will determine the extent to which departmental operations will be 
modified to respond to the emergency event 
3. Staff not assigned to work in a non-clinical support area due to cancelled procedures 
or reduced volume is to report to the Personnel Pool for reassignment to other care 
areas as needed.  
4. Materials Management and Surgical Materials 
a. Ensure adequate supplies are available to support ongoing patient care 
operations throughout the event. 
b. Monitor utilization and report status to the Logistics Chief as requested. 
c. Maintain contact with vendors to ensure resupply when needed.   19 
5. Linen Services 
a. Ensure adequate linen supplies are available to support ongoing patient care 
operations throughout the event. 
b. Monitor utilization and report status to the Logistics Chief as requested. 
Recommend implementation of conservation measures when appropriate. 
c. Maintain contact with vendors to ensure resupply when needed.  
6. Nutritional Services 
a. Ensure adequate supplies of food and water are available to support ongoing 
patient care operations and staff support throughout the event. 
b. Monitor utilization and report status to the Logistics Chief as requested. 
Recommend implementation of conservation measures when appropriate. 
c. Maintain contact with vendors to ensure resupply when needed.  
7. Transport 
a. Ensure adequate equipment is available and staged to support ongoing 
patient care operations. 
b. Monitor utilization and report status to the Logistics chief as requested.  
c. Request additional staffing support from the Personnel Pool as needed.  
8. Human Resources 
a. Operate the hospital Personnel Pool to manage assignment of staff to 
essential tasks as needed during the event.  
b. Ensure timely credentialing of clinical volunteers and manage their 
assignment to essential tasks as needed during the event. (Note: Medical 
Staff Office is responsible for physician and LIP volunteers.) 
c. Manage assignment of non-clinical volunteers to essential tasks as needed 
during the event.  
I. Finance / Administration Section  
1. Monitor the utilization of financial assets and the accounting for financial expenditures and supervise 
documentation of expenditures and cost reimbursement activities.  
2. Areas reporting to the Finance / Administration Section Chief:  
i. Payroll 
ii. Accounting / Financial Operations 
iii. Risk Management / Worker’s Compensation 
iv. Purchasing 
J.  Department Head Responsibilities  
1. All departments and employees are essential and will assist in the event response until released by the 
Incident Commander.  
2. Each Department Head is responsible for a complete understanding of the role of his/her Department 
and training each employee in their assigned role during an emergency.  
3. Department heads are to be available to fill roles on the Leadership Team as assigned by the 
Administrator on Call.  
4. Department Heads are responsible for keeping a current list of their employees and phone numbers 
and distributing revised lists as appropriate. 
5. The Department Head or designee will initiate the call tree for their respective departments when  20 
notified to do so by Administration. When call list is completed a report of number of employees 
reached is to be reviewed by the Department Head or designated representative, and forwarded to 
Administration with the following:  
i. The number of successful contacts made in the department/unit.  
ii. The person reporting. 
  21 
Appendix C: Notification to LDH of Exceeding Licensed Capacity (Use hospital letterhead.) 
 
DATE 
 
 
Louisiana Department of Health 
Health Standards Division 
 
 
VIA FACSIMILE 225-342-0157 
 
 
Re. Hospital Licensing Standards, Section 9335 M.  
 
Dear Sir or Madam,  
 
Please be advised that due to an influx of patients related to (NAME OF DISASTER/STORM), Our Lady of the 
Lake Regional Medical Center has temporarily exceeded its licensed bed capacity as follows. 
 
Licensed Beds: NUMBER (as of DATE) 
 
Total Beds Exceeding Licensed Beds: NUMBER (as of DATE / TIME) 
 
For additional information, contact Administration at 225-765-8866.  
 
 
 
Stephanie G. Manson 
Chief Operating Officer 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center  22 
Appendix D: Disaster Surge Capacity 
When necessary to accommodate an influx of patients in a disaster situation, the Incident Commander may direct 
additional care areas are opened within the hospital and in non-traditional areas on the hospital campus. The 
hospital will coordinate with other hospitals in Region 2 for patient placement in large-scale community-wide 
disasters. Tier 1 facilities will accommodate higher acuity patients, and Tier 2 hospitals will be used for lower 
acuity patients within the hospital’s capability and capacity. For example, all surge areas at OLOLRMC may be 
used for “critical care” (as defined by the HHS Grant) and lower acuity patients directed to Tier 2.  
 
Resources 
Hospital beds licensed but not currently staffed are available within 24 hours for immediate response to an influx 
of patients. 
Additional beds may be created in perioperative care areas and by doubling occupancy in renovated patient 
rooms. 
Non-traditional areas may be used for lower-acuity patients.  
Surge Locations OLOLRMC  and Children’s Hospital Campuses 
Department Location Acuity Level Estimated Bed 
Count1 
Licensed Beds (not currently staffed) 
• Critical Care  High / Critical Care2 2 
• Inpatient – Adult  Moderate / High 20 
• Rehabilitation  Moderate / High 29 
• Psychiatric  Moderate / High 8 
    
Additional beds for higher acuity / critical care patients can be created in pre-op and post-op areas. 
• St. Mary’s Admission Unit   High / Critical Care 25 
• St. Mary’s Admission Tower  High / Critical Care 14 
• Post Anesthesia Care Unit – Main  High / Critical Care 17 
• Post Anesthesia Care Unit – Tower  High / Critical Care 15 
Additional inpatient areas for moderate to high acuity patients can be created by making the following areas 
double occupancy / semi-private areas.  
• Orthopedics  Building 1, Floor 6 Moderate / High 30 
• Cardiology 2  Building 2, Floor 4 Moderate / High 36 
• Medicine 2 Building 2, Floor 5 Moderate / High 36 
• Surgical Trauma Unit  Building 2, Floor 6 Moderate / High 36 
Non-traditional areas can be converted to patient care space in the following locations.  
• Auditorium Building 2, Floor 1 Low 25 
• Graduate Clinical Education 
Building 
5220 Essen Lane Low 50 
Beds available at Children’s Hospital    
Pre/Post - CH 8300 Constantine  18 
PACU - CH 8300 Constantine  10 
    
  TOTAL  361 
 
1The decision to open surge beds is made by the Incident Commander. Bed counts in this table are estimates provided for planning 
purposes only. Actual surge beds will depend on the type of event, available resources including staffing, patient care supplies, status of 
physical environment, facility resources (fuel, water, gasses, etc.) and regulatory requirements.  
2 “Critical Care” for disaster surge capacity is defined as having one (1) electrical outlet, one (1) 50 PSI oxygen outlet, one (1) 50 PSI air 
outlet and one (1) suction outlet or portable suction outlet. See Health and Human Services (HHS) Hospital Preparedness Program for 
additional information.   23 
Equipment / Supplies OLOLRMC 
Patient beds are available through vendor relationships (Hill-Rom and Stryker) 
Stretchers may be used for patient beds. 
Temp Beds and Cots, located in the Storage Building, Disaster Response Supply Rooms 1 and 2 (Rooms 102 and 
104) 
 
Appendix E – Designated Emergency Operations Areas OLOL Ascension Campus 
FUNCTION LOCATION 
INCIDENT COMMAND CENTER Administration 
 
PUBLIC MEDIA/PRESS INFO. Suite 3010 Conference Room, Plaza 2 
Alternate – Front Water Fountain, parking in front of 
HWY 30 Orthopedic Suite 
PERSONNEL POOL 
Clinical/Non-clinical 
7am-5pm Visitor Information Desk – First Floor, Plaza 
2 
5pm-7am Back Loading Dock Hall outside of BioMed 
FAMILY AND VISITORS Outpatient Waiting  
 
TRIAGE Emergency Dept. (Ambulatory Entrance) 
Green Level – ICU Waiting Room 
OUTSIDE COMMUNICATION Incident Command Center/800 MHz Radio/ ESF 8 
Portal 
CRITICAL VICTIMS-Immediate Life Threatening 
(life-threatening hemorrhaging, sucking chest 
wounds, respiratory distress, open fractures, etc.) 
Emergency Dept.  
Space for __17___victims 
SERIOUS VICTIMS-Delayed Treatment (moderate 
lacerations w/ minor bleeding, closed fractures of 
major bones 
Pre-op Holding Area 
Space for __7___victims 
 
MINOR INJURY VICTIMS-Minimal treatment 
(small lacerations, closed fractures of small bones, 
etc.) 
Recovery Room  
 (Space for __20___ victims) 
MORGUE #1 Morgue (large cooler w/ 2 shelves) 
Up to 4 victims   
 
MORGUE #2 Back (east) entrance to OR area  
(Refrigerator Truck if needed)  24 
DISCHARGES Outpatient Area 
TRANSFERS (Outside) Emergency Department (Ambulance Entrance) 
INTENSIVE CARE ICU Area 
 
SURGERY/RECOVERY Operating Room/RR/ ASC 
 
MED/SURG UNIT Med/Surg 2nd Floor 
 
STAFF SLEEPING QUARTERS Cath Lab Waiting Room and areas designated by IC 
and Administrative Supervisors 
 
SPECIAL NEEDS SHELTERS DRC Region 2 
Ascension Parish Medical Needs Registry 
http://specialneeds.apgov.us/ 
Ascension Parish –OHSEP (225) 450-1208 
O2 Mobile Trailer 
“MASH” Fast Track Unit Auditorium 
 
Bereavement Area for Mass Casualty 
 
Cath Lab Waiting Room 
 
 
 