POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL Manual Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter Hazardous Materials and Waste 
Subject Liquid Medical Waste Disposal and Packaging Section  
Date of Origination October 1, 2004 Supersedes  
Date of Last Revision October 1, 2004 Serial Code ECHM026 
Date of Last Review 9/12/2022 
 
PURPOSE: 
This policy specifies the packaging, disposal and/or solidification, and removal of liquid biohazard waste 
generated at Our Lady of The Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC).  
 
POLICY:  
Liquid biohazard waste generated at OLOLRMC will be disposed into sanitary sewer, solidified, or packed with 
absorbent material prior to transport to an offsite waste processing facility.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Perioperative Services: Liquid biohazard waste generated in surgery (main and tower) will be disposed into 
the sanitary sewer system.  
1. Don the appropriate personal protective equipment (gloves, gown, and face shield or goggles and mask). 
2. Suction fluid from the suction canister using the Aqua Box or the Stryker Neptune system.  
3. Carefully remove the suction wand.   
4. Cap all suction canister ports.  
5. Place empty canister in proper biohazard waste container.  
6. Wash your hands.  
 
B. Patient Care Areas: Containers with liquid biohazard waste generated in all other patient care areas will be 
disposed as follows: 
1. Suction Canisters 
a. Don appropriate personal protective equipment (gloves) before beginning process. 
b. After disconnecting the device from the patient, place one solidifier packet into the canister containing 
liquid biohazard fluid and securely close all ports.  
c. Allow the liquid to solidify.  
d. Place the suction canister in the proper biohazard waste container. 
e. Wash your hands.  
 
2. All other containers with greater than 100 cc of liquid biohazard waste. 
a. Put into a clear trash bag. 
b. Add solidifier packet to clear bag and securely close bag. 
c. Place clear bag into proper biohazard waste container.   
d. Wash your hands.  
 
C. Laboratory or Blood Bank: Containers with liquid biohazard waste generated in the Laboratory and Blood 
Bank will be disposed as follows:  
1. Urine collection containers may be disposed as non-regulated medical waste.  
2. When possible, pour liquid biohazard waste into sanitary sewer system.  
a. Wear appropriate personal protective equipment (gloves, gown, and face shield or goggles and mask).  
b. If it is not possible to dispose the liquid biohazard waste into the sanitary sewer, tightly close the 
container and place it in a red bag.  
c. Securely close the red bag and place in a proper bio waste container.  
d. Add solidifier to all large gray carts and red biohazard waste disposal bins before leaving the lab. 
e. Wash your hands.  
 
 D. Housekeeping will add solidifier or absorbent material to large gray carts, red biohazard waste disposal bins 
and all other biohazard waste shipping containers; if upon inspection visible bloody drainage is noted, prior to 
transport to the offsite waste handling facilities.  
 
E. Offsite Areas:  Powdered solidifier will be added to all liquid biohazard waste containers containing greater 
than 100cc of liquid.   
1. Add powdered solidifier to container. 
2. Tightly cap and seal the container.    
3. Place container into a labeled biohazard transport box with a red liner. 
 
   
 