POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Hazardous Material and Wastes 
Subject:  Hazardous Material and Wastes Management Section:  A 
Date of Origination:  October 1995 Supersedes: HMW 4001 
Date Last Revised: 11/15/2012 Serial Code:  ECHM001  
Date Last Reviewed: 9/12/2022 
 
POLICY: 
Hazards associated with handling hazardous materials will be communicated to team members involved in activities that 
include handling hazardous materials. It is the responsibility of leadership to ensure that the proper information is 
obtained and disseminated to the appropriate employees. Every employee is responsible to follow safe practices as 
outlined in the Safety Data Sheets or operating procedures. 
 
PURPOSE: 
To recognize the potential threats that hazardous material and wastes poses to human health and the environment. To 
establish, implement, monitor and document evidence of an ongoing program for the management of hazardous material 
and wastes. To ensure that there is minimal risk to patients, personnel, visitors and the community environment within the 
confines of the hospital. 
 
OBJECTIVES: 
• To develop a system that addresses the identification of hazardous material and wastes from the point of entry into the 
hospital to the point of final disposal. 
• To develop a system for managing hazardous material and wastes safely after identification. 
• To ensure policies and procedures related to various hazardous material and wastes are reviewed, revised and 
approved by the Environment of Care Committee. 
• To enhance adequate supervision of hospital personnel on hazardous material and wastes. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Chemical Hazardous Material - A substance which by reason being explosive, flammable, poisonous, corrosive, 
oxidizing, irritating or otherwise harmful is likely to cause internal or external injury to humans or the environment. 
 
Infectious Hazardous Material - Any material possessing a significant potential for contagion or cross-infection. 
 
Radioactive Hazardous Material - Any material capable of giving off radiant energy in the form of particles or rays 
such as alpha, beta and gamma rays. 
 
Gaseous Hazardous Material - Any substance which may be dispersed through the air and act as a poison, irritant or 
asphyxiate. 
 
Physical Hazard - Sharps, pointed objects, pressurized containers such as aerosol cans, gas bottles, etc. 
 
ANNUAL REVIEWS: 
Annual reviews shall be conducted by the Environment of Care Committee with each department to check management 
techniques of hazardous materials for labeling, isolation, ventilation and possible substitution of less hazardous agents. 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES RELATING TO CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL HAZARDS: 
Policies and procedures relating to chemical and physical hazards shall be reviewed by the Environment of Care 
Committee, and by the Infection Control Committee for infectious hazards as often as necessary or at least every three 
years. Recommendations, conclusions and actions of these committees are reported in the form of Environment of Care 
Committee Reports as often as necessary and at least once per year via the Environment of Care Annual Report.  
 
TRAINING: 
All persons required to handle hazardous chemicals or materials will be provided with appropriate orientation, equipment 
and on the job training. Each department shall be responsible for training each individual handling hazardous material and 
wastes. 
 
LABELING: 
Each department will be responsible for identifying and labeling all hazardous materials and wastes within their 
department/area. Upon ordering these materials, the Department Director initiating the order will inform Materials 
Management that hazardous materials are being ordered. Materials Management shall develop guidelines for receiving, 
identifying and delivering these materials to their destination. 
All drums, buckets, jugs, pails or any other container containing hazardous chemical substances will have a clear, 
complete, conspicuous and durable label identifying the chemical used and appropriate hazard warnings. 
 
SAFETY DATA SHEETS: 
A safety data sheet (SDS) is to be obtained for every chemical used in the hospital and identified as hazardous.  
SDS are available to all team members through Lakelink in the Featured Lakelink Destinations section.  
A master file of all safety data sheets will be kept in Materials Management. 
 
STORAGE AND HANDLING: 
Hazardous chemicals will be stored in appropriately labeled containers maintained for this purpose. Regular inspections 
will be made of the storage site to ensure that there are no leaking or spilled containers. If a spill or leak is found the 
following actions will be taken: 
• Before attempting to clean up any hazardous chemical spill or splash, know what the chemical is. 
• Follow the directions according to the established procedures for cleaning up that kind of chemical spill or leak. 
• Evacuate all personnel from the area. 
• Extinguish all flames if there are any. 
• Ensure adequate ventilation. 
• If a fire occurs, set off the fire alarm. 
• Wait by the spill area, well out of danger, until help arrives.  Avoid tracking through the spill. 
• Obtain appropriate protective safety equipment. 
• Complete a Safety Event Report on the spill or leak. 
 
NOTE: Plant Services Department and Housekeeping Department will be responsible for clean-up of large spills or leaks 
that will require additional personnel and equipment. 
 
(Note: In the event that a hazardous waste is generated as a result from the treatment of a patient suspected or confirmed 
to be suffering from Creutzfeltd-Jakob Disease, refer to the Surgical Services Policy SOP040, Creutzfeltd-Jakob Disease 
Guidelines for Suspected CJD cases in the operating room for guidelines for proper handling and disposal. 
 
In the event that a hazardous waste is generated as a result from the treatment of a patient suspected or confirmed to be 
suffering from the Ebola Virus, Infection Control Policy IC2013, Special Communicable Disease Management Plan, 
Appendix B: Disposal of Infectious Waste from an Ebola Case, for guidelines for proper handling and disposal.) 
 
Materials which ignite easily under normal conditions (flammable) are considered fire hazards and will be stored in a 
cool, dry, well ventilated storage space, away from areas of fire hazard. Highly flammable materials will be kept in an 
area separate from oxidizing agents (material susceptible to spontaneous heating; explosives, etc.) The storage area for 
flammables will be supplied with fire fighting equipment, either automatic or manual. There will be "no smoking or 
striking matches" signs posted in and around the storage area.  
Oxidizers will not be stored close to liquids of low flash point.  
Acids and acid fume sensitive materials will be stored in a cool dry, well ventilated area, preferably wooden.  
Materials which are toxic as stored or which can decompose into toxic components from contact with heat, moisture, 
acids or acid fumes will be stored in a cool, well ventilated place out of the direct rays of the sun. Incompatible toxic 
materials will be isolated from each other.  
Corrosive materials will be stored in a cool, well ventilated area (above their freeze point). The containers will be inspected at regular intervals to ensure they are labeled and kept closed. Corrosives will be isolated from other materials. 
Protective clothing and equipment will be available for use when handling these materials. 
 
DISPOSAL: 
Disposal of small amounts of liquid chemical wastes (60cc, 2 oz.) may be disposed by diluting 1 part chemical to 100 
parts water and flushed down the sewer system. These amounts shall be diluted and flushed down the sewer at varying 
times during the day. 
In diluting chemicals for flushing down the sewer system, always add the 1 part chemical to the 100 parts water. Never 
add the water to the chemical container. 
Wear rubber gloves, fume mask, and/or other safety equipment as required when preparing liquid chemicals for disposal. 
Small amounts of pathological waste containing hazardous chemicals shall be placed into a red garbage disposal and 
thoroughly ground while adding copious amounts of water and flushed down the sewer. 
No empty drums, buckets, jugs, pails, or any other container that has held toxic or corrosive materials will ever be reused 
for anything. 
The Hazardous Waste Coordinator is responsible for assuring that proper permits are obtained for disposal of all 
hazardous chemical waste generated at the facility. 
A certification of disposal will be obtained from the receiver for all hazardous chemicals disposed of off-site. 
 
 
 