POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual: Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Hazardous Material and Wastes 
Subject: Hazardous Materials and Waste, Plant Service 
Department 
Section:  
Date of Origination: October 1, 1995 Supersedes:  HWM 4022 
Date of Last Revision: February 2, 2000 Serial Code: ECHM022 
Date of Last Review:  9/12/2022   
 
HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS 
The following hazardous chemicals are in use in the Plant Services Department at Our Lady of the Lake Medical Center: 
Oxygen Acetylene Alcohol 
Propane Petroleum Oil Housekeeping Chemicals 
Paint/Paint Thinner Diesel Fuel Water Treatment Chemicals 
Cleaning Solvent Drain Opener Cleaning solvent 
Natural Gas Gasoline Contact cement 
 
PRECAUTIONS IN HANDLING: 
Fire or Explosion: May ignite combustibles (wood, paper, oil, etc.). Mixture with fuels may explode. Container may 
explode in heat or fire. Vapor explosion hazard indoors, outdoors or in sewers. 
Health Hazards: Contact with liquid may cause frostbite. Vapors may cause dizziness or suffocation. Fire may produce 
irritation or poisonous gases. 
Fire: Small fires: dry chemical or CO2. Move container from fire area if you can do so without risk. Stay away from ends 
of tanks. Cool containers that are exposed to flames with water from the side until well after the fire is out. 
Emergency Action: Keep unnecessary people away. Stay upwind; keep out of low areas. Isolate hazard area and deny 
entry. Wear self-contained breathing apparatus and full protective clothing. Isolate for 1/2 mile in all directions if tank or 
tank car is involved in fire. 
Large fires: Water spray, fog or foam. Move container from fire area if you can do it without risk. Stay away from ends 
of tanks. Cool containers that are exposed to flames with water from the side until well after fire is out. For massive fire in 
cargo area, use unmanned hose holder or monitor nozzles. If this is impossible, withdraw from area and let fire burn. 
Withdraw immediately in case of rising sound from venting safety device or discoloration of tank. 
Spill or Leak: No flares, smoking or flames in hazard area. Stop leak if you can do it without risk. Use water spray to 
reduce vapors. Small spills: Take up with sand, or other noncombustible absorbent material, then flush area with water. 
Large spills: seal area alert emergency team. 
FIRST AID 
Move victim to fresh air; call emergency medical care. If not breathing, give artificial respiration. If breathing is difficult, 
give oxygen. In case of contact with material, immediately flush skin or eyes with running water for at least 15 minutes. 
Remove and isolate contaminated clothing and shoes.  
OSHA REGULATIONS FOR HANDLING HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS 
SEE OSHA GENERAL INDUSTRY SAFETY AND HEALTH STANDARDS (29CF1910) OSHA 2260 
1. PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT (OSHA SUBPART 1): 
Application. Protective equipment, including personal protective equipment for eyes, face ... extremities, protective 
clothing, respiratory devices ... shall be provided, used, and maintained ... wherever it is necessary by reason of 
hazards of processes or environment, chemical hazards, radiological hazards ... in a manner capable of causing injury 
... through absorption, inhalation or physical contact." 
2. EYE AND FACE PROTECTION: 
"General. (1) Protective eye and face equipment shall be required where there is a reasonable probability of injury ... 
In such cases, employers shall make conveniently available ... No unprotected person shall knowingly be subjected to 
a hazardous environmental condition." American National Standard for Occupational and Education Eye and Face 
Protection Z87.1-2015. 
3. MEDICAL SERVICES AND FIRST AID (OSHA SUBPART K): 
"Where the eyes or body ... may be exposed to injurious corrosive materials, suitable facilities for quick drenching or 
flushing of the eyes and body shall be provided within the work area for immediate emergency use." 
4. INFORMING CONTRACTORS: 
It is the responsibility of Our Lady of the Lake Medical Center to provide contractors the following information: 
• Hazardous chemicals to which they may be exposed while on the job site. 
• Precautions the personnel may take to lessen the possibility of exposure by using appropriate protective measures. 