Hazardous Materials & Wastes Management Plan, 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Hazardous Materials and Waste 
Subject: Hazardous Materials and Wastes Management Plan   
Date of Origination:  January 1, 1997 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised:  1/1/2013 Serial Code:  ECHM000 
Date Last Reviewed: 09/12/2023 
 
OBJECTIVE and SCOPE  
The hospital manages risks related to hazardous materials and wastes. (EC.02.02.01) 
The hospital has a written plan for managing hazardous materials and waste. (EC.01.01.01.5) 
 
The Hazardous Materials and Waste Management Plan is established to safely control hazardous wastes used, stored or 
generated by the facility. The Plan applies to all locations and entities where OLOLRMC conducts business, and is 
compliant with local, state and federal regulations.  
 
PROCESSES 
The hospital maintains a written, current inventory of hazardous materials and waste that it uses, stores or generates. The 
only materials that need to be included on the inventory are those whose handling, use and storage are addressed by law 
and regulation. (EC.02.02.01.1) 
 
Criteria are established for the identification and inventory of Hazardous Materials and Waste used or generated by each 
department. An inventory of Hazardous Materials is completed annually. A master list of products is maintained by 
Materials Management. (See ECHM001, ECHM005) 
 
The hospital has written procedures, including the use of precautions and personal protective equipment, to follow in 
response to hazardous material waste spills or exposures. (EC.02.02.01.3) These procedures are implemented in response 
to hazardous material waste spills or exposures. (EC.02.02.01.4) 
 
The hospital provides appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) and spill kits for use when handling hazardous 
materials or waste. Response to spills and exposures are guided by organization wide policy and procedure. Employees 
are oriented to this policy during departmental orientation procedures. Minor spills may be addressed by department 
personnel. Major spills (greater than two (2) liters of fluid or highly toxic, biohazard, radioactive, or flammable 
substances) are addressed by emergency response personnel. (See ECHM008)  
 
The hospital minimizes risks associated with selection, handling, storing, transporting, using and disposing hazardous 
chemicals, radioactive materials and hazardous gasses and vapors, the risks of selecting and using hazardous energy 
sources, and the risks of disposing hazardous medications (EC.02.02.01.5-9); levels of hazardous gasses and vapors are 
monitored to determine they are in safe range. (EC.02.02.01.10) 
 
The selection, handling, storage, use and disposal of hazardous materials from receipt, through use and generation to final 
disposal is guided by Hazardous Materials and Wastes policies and procedures, Infection Control policies and relevant 
local, state, and federal regulations. The Hazardous Materials Coordinator is responsible for overseeing these processes. 
All hazardous waste at OLOLRMC is disposed of by a licensed contract waste disposal service. Documentation including 
hazardous materials and waste manifests are maintained by the Hazardous Materials Coordinator. Chemical waste is 
managed by Laboratory and Radiology department processes; chemotherapeutic waste is managed with Patient Care 
Services and Pharmacy department processes. Radioactive waste is managed through Patient Care Services and 
Radiology/Nuclear Medicine department processes. Infection Control, Patient Care Services, and Housekeeping manage 
medical waste, including proper disposal of sharps. All clinical areas are responsible for proper disposal of medical waste 
or infectious waste including sharps. Guidelines for safe use of lasers in the intra-operative setting are established and 
team members are trained to support and maintain a safe operating environment during the use of lasers. (See ECHM001, 
ECHM003, ECHM004, ECHM007, ECHM022, ECHM024, SOS019, IC2006, IC2007, IC2010; OrgOps/HR/E/019) Hazardous Materials & Wastes Management Plan, 2 
 
Harmful hazardous gases and vapors such as ethylene oxide, formaldehyde, xylene, and anesthetic waste gases are 
monitored on a regular basis. Documentation is maintained by the user department as follows: Laboratory - formaldehyde, 
xylene; Surgery-anesthetic waste gases, nitrous oxide, formaldehyde; Sterile Process Decontamination, Materials 
Management/Central Supply- ethylene oxide. Plant Services coordinates with a contracted service to complete regular 
testing of ventilation systems. Action is taken to remedy identified deficiencies when applicable. Stored medical gases are 
secured to control access. (See also policies and procedures for individual departments monitoring and disposal of 
hazardous gases and vapors; SSA016) 
 
The hospital has the permits, licenses, manifests and safety data sheets required by law and regulation. (EC.02.02.01.11) 
 
Current documentation including permits, licenses, and hazardous waste manifest are maintained by the Hazardous 
Materials Coordinator. Documentation includes, but is not limited to:  
• Annual chemical inventory to local emergency response officials (Right to Know Unit) 
• Hazardous chemical disposals report to Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality 
• Discharge Permits and Reports, East Baton Rouge Parish Environmental Department 
• Permits and Reports to Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality, Underground Storage Division 
• Hazardous waste manifests 
• Infectious waste disposal manifests 
• Solid waste disposal date 
 
SDS information is available for all employees and each department is responsible for maintaining SDS for each item 
used or generated in that department. Materials Management assists departments in obtaining SDS for items when 
applicable. Materials Management maintains a master copy of SDS information for all products used or generated in the 
facility. (See ECHM001, ECHM005) 
 
The hospital labels hazardous materials and waste. Labels identify the contents and hazard warnings. (EC.02.02.01.12) 
 
The Hazardous Materials Coordinator is responsible to oversee the effective labeling and storage of hazardous materials 
and wastes prior to transport from the facility for disposal. Hazardous materials and waste are labeled according to 
appropriate regulations. Hazardous materials are stored in a designated, secure area prior to transportation by the licensed 
waste disposal contractor removes the materials from campus. (See ECHM001, ECHM003) 
 