ECLS-012 (7085) 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Acute Care Physical 
Medicine (7085) 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 (7085) 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: December 20, 2017 Review Date: March 5, 2024 
Revision Date: July 14, 2021 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Primary Physical Medicine Department has exits located at the automatic doors at 6-West 
(Orthopedic unit), main department entrance between 6-West and 6-South, and door exiting 
small gym at crosswalk from 6-West and 6-South.  4th Floor satellite therapy gym exit doors (2 
each) are located at crosswalk from 4-West and 4-South. 
• The department does not have a separate smoke compartment but is part of the St. Mary’s Tower 
smoke compartment designated by the double smoke doors located at the end of 6-South A-hall.  ECLS-012 (7085) 
Page 2 of 3 
4th Floor satellite therapy gym is part of the St. Mary’s Tower smoke compartment designated by 
the double smoke doors located at the end of 4-South A-hall.    
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• Department manager, supervisor, senior therapists, charge therapists or designee will confirm 
automatic fire door closes at “Equipment Room”  
• Department manager, supervisor, senior therapists, charge therapists or designee will insure that 
hallways are clear in the adjacent halls surrounding department 
• All available physical medicine staff on duty will assist with moving patients and visitors to 
safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Department manager, supervisor, senior therapists, or charge therapists on duty will ensure all 
employees are accounted for 
• All available physical medicine staff will ensure that all patients are accounted for 
• Department manager, supervisor, senior therapists or charge therapists will ensure that 
department is empty.  (This position will mark the door/door frame with chalk to indicate the 
room is empty.) 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
There are no medical gas shut off valves located in the primary Physical Medicine Department on the 
6th floor. There are no medical gas shut off valves located on the 4th floor satellite gym.  
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Department wheelchairs may be used for patient transport and evacuation.  Clean wheelchairs 
are stored in “Equipment Room”.  Patients brought to gym setting are a mix of partially 
ambulatory and ambulatory for evacuation purposes.  The treating therapist assigned to the 
patient will determine those that need assistance for mobility and also what level of assistance. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• There are three (3) fire extinguishers for the primary physical medicine department and are 
located in large gym, small gym, and reception area across from front desk (4th floor satellite 
gym has fire extinguishers located in the main hall of 4-West outside of the gym area). Manual 
pull stations are located outside of primary department at the stairwells of 6-West Orthopedics 
and 6-South A-hall STU (4-South stairwell for 4th floor satellite gym). 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• No more than twelve (12) portable oxygen tanks will be located in the department, either in 
patient use or in storage rack located in Supply Room 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary horizontal route will exit to 6-South (STU) A-hall beyond double fire doors (4-South A-
hall beyond double fire doors for 4th floor satellite gym). 
• Secondary horizontal evacuation route will extend away from fire area towards St. Mary’s Tower 
for both primary department area and 4th floor satellite gym. 
• Primary vertical evacuation will exit via stairwells at 6-South A-hall (4-South A-hall for 4th floor ECLS-012 (7085) 
Page 3 of 3 
satellite gym) and 6-West (4-West for 4th floor satellite gym).  Evacuation will progress to 1st 
floor of parking garage 1. 
• Secondary vertical evacuation will exit via stairwells located 6-South B & C (4-South B & C for 
4th floor satellite gym) halls and 6-East stairwell (4-East stairwell for 4th floor satellite gym).  
Evacuation will progress to 1st floor of parking garage 1. 
 