 
 
ECLS-012 4830_Department Code RED Safety and Response Plan for Mid City Pharmacy 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Department Code RED Safety and Response Plan for 
Mid City Pharmacy 
PAGES:  3 
 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
ECLS-012 4830 (07/19/2018) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 07/19/2018   
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
05/17/2020 
POLICY NUMBER:  
ECLS-012 4830 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions that indicate the 
presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present by addressing aspects of fire 
prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the 
event of a fire. 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow OLOLH’s written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all 
in the proper response to fires.  
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction of unit manager 
or designee. 
Each OLOLH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency Operations Plan 
(ECEP001) and the OLOLH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide the preparation and response in 
the event of a fire. 
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
5/17/2020 9:33 AM 
 
 
 
ECLS-012 4830_Department Code RED Safety and Response Plan for Mid City Pharmacy 
2 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments. 
 
• There are a total of 20 illuminated EXIT signs in the main hallways on the first floor of Mid City Clinic.  There 
is one EXIT sign within Mid City Pharmacy near the door by the patient pick up window.  EXIT signs nearest 
to the pharmacy are located in the main hallway near the patient pick up window which directs to the front 
door of the building, and upon exiting the pharmacy door near the drop off window and turning left, there is an 
EXIT sign which directs to the back door of building. 
• Neither Mid City Pharmacy nor any other departments in the building have smoke compartments. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response. 
(Mid City Pharmacy’s normal operating hours are Monday-Friday 7:30AM-4:45PM and closed Saturday-Sunday) 
 
• All available staff will clear the hallway of any equipment or obstacles. 
• The staff members working pick up and drop off windows or assigned designee will close the windows, and 
the pharmacist(s) or assigned designee will make sure both doors leading out of the pharmacy are closed. 
• The staff member working the cash register/pick up or assigned designee will help evacuate patients and 
visitors in the waiting area to safety.  The pharmacist(s) and/or Patient Assistance Program (PAP) technician 
will help evacuate patients they are assisting in the offices to safety.  The patients and visitors will be told, 
“The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety”. 
• The pharmacist(s) or assigned designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities. 
• The pharmacy manager, pharmacist(s) on duty, and the technician supervisor will ensure all employees are 
accounted for. 
• Pharmacist(s), technicians, and cashier will collectively ensure all patients and visitors are accounted for. 
• The technician supervisor or assigned designee will ensure each room/office within the pharmacy is empty and 
mark the door/door frame with chalk to indicate the room is empty. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments (horizontal 
and vertical evacuations). 
 
• There are no special patient transporting devices at Mid City Pharmacy. 
• All patients and visitors are anticipated to be fully ambulatory.  In the case a patient or visitor arrives in a 
wheelchair, uses a cane, walker, crutches, or has any form of limited mobility the staff member working pick 
up or assigned designee will assist them in evacuating. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
 
• There is one fire extinguisher within the four walls of Mid City Pharmacy.  It is located on the wall 
immediately to the right when entering the main pharmacy area from the cashier/pick up area. 
• There are a total of nine fire extinguishers located in the hallways on the first floor of the building.  The one 
closest to the pharmacy is located on the exterior wall to the left when approaching the pick up window. 
• There are a total of six manual pull stations on the first floor of the building.  The closest one to the pharmacy 
is located across from the pharmacy between Urgent Care and the front entrance to the building. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
 
• Only pharmacy associates have badge access into the pharmacy/secured area.  If Plant Services or Security 
needs access into the pharmacy, the Pharmacy Manager or Pharmacist-in-Charge shall stand by to allow 
access. 
  
 
ECLS-012 4830_Department Code RED Safety and Response Plan for Mid City Pharmacy 
3 
 
  The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
 
• Mid City Pharmacy will only utilize horizontal evacuation routes since it is located on the first floor of the 
building. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route will be to exit the pharmacy through the door nearest to the cash 
register, then follow the exit signs by taking a right into the hallway, then a left out the main entrance of the 
building.  If fire or smoke is near the front entrance of building, the evacuation route will be to turn left upon 
exiting the pharmacy, and then turn right down the hallway near Urgent Care check-in, pass Family Practice 
and follow exit sign to turn right to exit the building.  All team members, patients, and visitors will go to the 
furthest end of the parking lot. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route will be utilized if fire or smoke is surrounding the door leading out 
of the pharmacy nearest to the cash register.  In this case, the route will be to exit through the door by the drop 
off window.  Option 1 is to turn left and at the end of hall, use keypad to enter code (only known by 
employees), take a right then a left and exit the building.  Option 2 is to turn left and then take another left at 
end of hall, followed by a right down the hall between Diabetic Foot and Wound Care and Lab, and exit the 
building.  All team members, patients, and visitors will go to the furthest end of the parking lot.  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• PH.2444_Environmental Safety 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 