ECLS001 
Page 1 of 3 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HEALTH 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section: Fire Prevention 
  
Title: 
  
Interim Life Safety Measures (ILSM) 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS001 
Supersedes #:   
Date of 
Origination: 
July 1997 Review Date: 10/31/2024 
Revision Date: 10/31/2024   
      
  
 
PURPOSE: 
When building code deficiencies are identified and cannot be immediately corrected or during 
renovation or construction activities, the safety of patients, staff, and visitors coming to the hospital’s 
facilities is diminished. Our Lady of the Lake Health (OLOL) will proactively identify administrative 
actions to be taken if these scenarios arise. 
  
DEFINITIONS: 
Interim Life Safety Measures (ILSMs) are a series of life safety actions intended to temporarily 
compensate for significant hazards posed by existing National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 101, 
2012, Life Safety Code (LSC) deficiencies identified when performing preventative maintenance of life 
safety systems, during construction or renovation activities, and when life safety code deficiencies 
cannot be immediately corrected. 
  
POLICY: 
OLOL requires implementation of Interim Life Safety Measures in or adjacent to all construction areas 
and throughout buildings with existing LSC deficiencies. To ensure a high level of safety during all 
construction activities and to meet the provisions of the Interim Life Safety Measures as set forth by the 
Joint Commission. ILSM applies to all staff, including construction workers. 
  
PROCEDURES: 
ILSMs are intended to provide a level of fire protection comparable to that described in applicable 
occupancy chapters of the NFPA 101 -2012. Each action must be documented through written policies 
and procedures. Frequencies for inspections, testing, training, and monitoring are established by the 
organization.   Activities reviewed will become ILSM activities if the activity in some manner impairs 
the following: 
1. The exiting requirement(s), 
2. Fire detection and suppression systems, 
3. Fire / smoke barriers for greater than the supervised work shift, and/or 
4. Increased fire hazards. 
5. Other life safety feature deficiencies 
  
Actions to be taken will be based on Interim Life Safety Measures Application Matrix. 
  
1. Whenever a construction or renovation project at OLOL or Affiliates receives approval, a Life 
Safety Assessment (LSA) will be completed with an analysis of potential hazards as well as ECLS001 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
mitigation procedures and other requirement(s) determined to be put in place, indicating whether 
Interim Life Safety Measures (ILSM), if any, will occur. 
2. Once the Life Safety Assessment (LSA) has been completed, the Safety Officer or designee in 
coordination with the Plant Services Director or designee will determine what is necessary to 
temporarily compensate for any life safety hazards posed to buildings and occupants. The 
evaluation will include: 
a. Code Deficiencies 
b. Construction related deficiencies. 
c. Maintenance or repairs. 
3. Any changes to the plan will be communicated immediately to the Safety Officer and/or 
Plant Services Director or designee and a new ILSM plan issued. 
4. When ILSM is required, Plant Services will develop the work plan and communicate the ILSM 
requirements needed to the appropriate department leadership or designee and/or contractors, and 
will verify that the ILSM measures are properly implemented. 
5. If the fire alarm system is out of service more than 4 hours in a 24-hour period or sprinkler system 
is out of service more than 10 hours in a 24-hour period, the fire department and/or other 
emergency response groups will be notified. The notification and fire watch times will be 
documented on the Interim Life Safety Measure form. Fire Watch procedure per Louisiana State 
Fire Marshals office 
6. A risk assessment will be completed for partial system shutdowns to determine if a Fire Watch or 
a Daily Fire Inspection should be used. 
7. Daily inspections will be performed on the means of egress in any area undergoing construction, 
repair, or improvement to ensure egress is free of obstructions. The activity will be documented. 
8. As determined by the LSA: 
a. Temporary construction partitions may be used 
b. Increased surveillance of area will be provided 
c. Additional fire-fighting equipment and training provided to compensate for impaired 
structural or compartmental fire safety features will be provided, as needed 
d. Staff will be educated to promote awareness of the building deficiencies, construction 
hazards, and temporary measures implemented in the affected areas 
e. Storage, housekeeping, and debris-removal practices are observed 
f. During ILSM the facility will conduct one (1) fire drill per shift per quarter 
g. An ILSM Posting will be filled out and issued to the affected departments and posted in the 
area(s) affected 
h. Alternate routes of egress will be attached and posted as needed to the ILSM Posting 
i. Monthly testing on temporary systems will be performed and documented 
j. Other appropriate measures may be performed as required by the LSA 
 
9. ILSM Documentation will be maintained in Plant Services and communicated to the EOC 
Committee. 
  
  
REFERENCES: 
Joint Commission, Life Safety.01.02.01 Standards 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 101-2012: 9.6.1.6; 9.7.6 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 25-2011: 15.5.2 
  
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS ECLS001 
Page 3 of 3 
 
ECLS001A Attachment – Requirements for a Daily Fire Inspection 
ECLS001B Attachment – Requirements for a Temporary Fire Watch 
ECLS001C Interim Life Safety Measures Matrix ECLS001 
Page 4 of 3 
 ECLS001 
Page 5 of 3 
 
 