ECLS006 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section: Life Safety 
Title: 
Flame Resistance Requirements for 
Bedding, Furnishings, Decorations, and 
Treated Finishes 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS006 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: July 1997 Review Date: 9/12/2022 
Revision Date: 01/29/2020 
 
PURPOSE: 
To specify the minimum flame-resistant requirements acceptable to the hospital for bedding, 
furnishings, decorations, and treated finishes. 
 
POLICY: 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) will address the flame resistance requirements 
for bedding, furnishings, decoration, and treated finishes at all locations were OLOL operates. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
OLOL shall purchase and use only bedding, furnishing, decorations and treated finishes that meet or 
exceed the following: 
A. Furnishings and Decorations in Means of Egress 
1. No furnishings, decorations, or other objects shall be so placed as to obstruct exits, access 
thereto egress therefrom, or visibility thereof. 
2. Hangings or draperies shall not be placed over exit doors or otherwise located as to conceal 
or obscure any exit. Mirrors shall not be placed in or adjacent to any exit in such a manner as 
to confuse the direction of exit. 
3. There shall be no obstruction by railings, barriers, or gates that divide the open space into 
sections appurtenant to individual rooms, apartments, or other uses. Where the authority 
having jurisdiction finds the required path of travel to be obstructed by furniture or other 
movable objects, the authority may require that they be fastened out of the way or may 
require that railing, or other permanent barriers be installed to protect the path of travel 
against encroachment. 
 
B. Flame Resistance Requirements for Bedding, Furnishings, Decorations, and Treated Finishes  
1. Draperies, curtains, including cubicle curtains and shower curtains, along with similar 
furnishings and decorations shall be flame resistant. These materials shall be certified by 
their manufacturer to be tested and comply with NFPA 701, Standard Methods of Fire Tests 
for Flame Propagation of Textile and Films.  
2. Bedding, furnishings, and decorations shall be flame resistant and meet B.1 above. 
3. Furnishings or decorations of an explosive or highly flammable character shall not be used. 
4. Fire retardant coatings shall be maintained to retain the effectiveness of the treatment under 
service conditions encountered in actual use. ECLS006 
Page 2 of 2 
5. Combustible decorations are prohibited unless flame-retardant. 
Exception: 
Combustible decorations of such limited quantities that a hazard of fire developed or 
spread is not present, such as photographs and paintings are allowed. 
6. Christmas trees not effectively flame-retardant treated, ordinary crepe paper decorations, and 
pyroxylin plastic decorations may be classed as highly flammable and are not allowed to be 
used in the facility. 
7. Wastebaskets and other waste containers shall be of noncombustible or other approved 
materials. 
8. Newly introduced upholstered furniture shall be certified by the manufacturer in accordance 
with NFPA-260, Standard Methods of Tests and Classification System for Cigarette Ignition 
Resistance of Components of Upholstered Furniture.  
REFERENCES 
Joint Commission Environment of Care - Life Safety 02.01.70 
National Fire Protection Agency 101-2012; NFPA 260-2009; NFPA 701-2010 
 