Page 1 of 6  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Environment of Care 
Title: Secured Access Plan Policy Reference #: ECSE020 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: December 29, 2016 Last Review Date: 09/30/2021 
Last Revision Date: 12/3/2021  
 
Hospitals and Healthcare Settings provide a critical community service.  In keeping with our mission, it is  
imperative that we provide a safe and secure environment for our patients and families, team members, 
all healthcare workers and the community.   To that end, the following guidelines are offered to ensure that 
our plant and physical environment are secure.  Escalating Secured Access protocols maybe implemented 
for the safety of our patients, guests, and team members. Our normal mode of operations during nights 
and weekends is  a Level 1 – Secured Access. Incidents in our community, such as those listed below may 
require us to initiate higher levels of Secured Access. i.e. 
 
1. Community Disaster (Plant explosion or fire) 
2. A significant adverse event in the community 
3. Area Business robbery or shooting (suspect seen heading toward our facility. 
4. Community Civil Unrest 
5. Domestic or Workplace Violence Incident (involving a weapon) 
6. Severe Weather Event 
 
Licensed Offsite Facilities will follow individual site operating procedures. 
 
OBJECTIVE 
To coordinate response that would minimize the risk to hospital operations, including the care of patients, 
and provide for the safety of employees, visitors and guests. 
 
EMTALA: 
 At no time will patients be restricted from accessing the ED for patient care.  Only in the event of a 
catastrophic event (bomb threat/active shooter/physical damage to the environment, etc .) in the ED, will 
OLOL ED go on divert. 
• The determination to go on divert will be made through collaboration with the House 
Manager/Supervisor and the Administrator on -call (AOC), including representative of the service not 
available (See Policy ADM-02, Diversion of Emergency Services Transport) 
•  
Secured Access Protocols 
Security will follow the protocols listed below. 
 
Level 1 Secured Access 
This access level requires Security to lock all doors (except the ED Entrances of all three hospitals and 
offsite ED locations (LIV/NBR) and Main Entrance at the Main hospital) to all campus facilities after normal 
hours of operation. Security will ensure all doors equipped with badge access are functioning properly. 
This is our standard Secured Access level that we practice daily after normal hours of operation. This 
Secured Access level can be implemented at any time deemed necessary by Security in conjunction with 
House Manager/Supervisor and the Administrator on Call. 
 Page 2 of 6  
Level 2 Secured Access 
• This is the second highest Secured Access Level and will require Security to lock all   doors to all 
campus buildings and/or post a Security person or designated staff at the following doors noted in 
attached spreadsheet 
 
• Secured Access Level 2 can be implemented by Security in conjunction with the on-site House 
Manager/ED Charge Nurse. The House Manager/ED Charge Nurse will immediately update the 
Administrator–On-Call       (AOC) for affected facility describing the event and why Level 2 Secured 
Access was initiated. 
 
Level 3 Secured Access 
• This is the highest Secured Access Level. In Order to Implement Level 3 Secured Access, 
collaboration between security, house manager, ED charge nurse, AOC, and Senior Leadership for 
affected facility will take place to ensure awareness of critical situation. This level may require the 
support of a personnel pool which will be contacted/initiated by Security and/or House Manager. 
o Personnel pool may consist of personnel from other support services within the facility. 
(i.e., EVS, Plant Services, etc.) 
 
• Security will immediately provide the personnel with a Security radio, a Security vest and an 
armband. 
 
• In addition to securing all doors mentioned above, Level 3 Secured Access will require the issuing 
of armbands or temporary IDs to all individuals entering the facility. This access level can only be 
setup by Security in conjunction with the House Manager/ED Charge Nurse/AOC.  
 
• It is critical that all employees wear their ID badges. This is the only item that will allow Team 
Members access into the facility. 
 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Security 
 
1. If any of the above events occur, the AOC of the affected facility may immediately order the 
facility to proceed to Level 3 Secured Access. 
 
2. If Secured Access is ordered, security dispatch at the main campus (225 -765-8825) will be 
contacted to activate the “Lake Alert” (Rave) system by texting  “(Name of Campus) Secured 
Access Level 1, 2 or 3.”   Example: “Ascension Campus Secured Access Level 2”. 
 
3. Security/ Designee should contact PBX to announce via the overhead paging system 3 times: 
 
“Attention All Departments: A community event has been reported. Please activate Secured 
Access procedures. Guests and visitors please await further instructions from a Team Member.” 
 
4. The AOC will open the command center (if necessary). 
a. A decision will be made to allow or suspend patient visitations and what to do with 
visitors and guests already in the facility. Page 3 of 6  
 
5. Announcements and alerts for offsite locations will be directed to on-duty PBX staff, Vault 
communications, nursing unit control desk, or any staff location designated by the affected 
facility 
 
Hospital Employees 
1. All Team Members on duty should stay in their work area and await instructions from their 
supervisor. 
 
2. Personnel arriving to work will be identified by means of identification badges and will enter the 
buildings at the Team Members entrances or designated campus entrance for the affected site.  
 
3. Team Members should note if anyone other than a Team  Member enters behind them. If such 
a person enters, Security should be contacted immediately. 
 
4. Scheduled Team Members should bring necessary clothing and toiletries and expect to remain 
at the 
hospital for the duration of the emergency if indicated. 
 
5. Temporary changes in shift assignments may be instituted. 
 
6. Temporary room and board may be provided for on-duty and incoming personnel if the situation 
indicates. 
 
7. Emergency supply kits may be available for sites needing security arm bands, temporary IDs, 
maps, sign-in logs, etc. 
 
Community Events 
Should a disturbance occur in the community, OLOLRMC may be affected by an increase in 
casualties from encounters with law enforcement. 
 
1. Upon notification, the AOC should be immediately contacted and determine if the command 
center should be activated and/or if the facility should go to any form of Secured Access. If 
Secured Access is ordered, the above Security procedures will be followed. 
a. If the Secured Access Level is less than Level 3, Security will operate at Secured Access 
Levels 1 or 2 and man the above entrances and redirect any patient (casualty) through 
the main ED Entrance. 
 
2. The Hospital Emergency Response Team (HERT) team may be activated to assist potential 
incoming patients. 
 
3. Patients (casualties) will be provided continued care and observation, and Security Services will 
provide direct security supervision in the Emergency Department. 
 
 
 
 
 Page 4 of 6  
 
Secured Access Plan - Points of Entry 
Location 
Level 2 Secured Access Level 3 Secured Access 
* Secure all doors to campus buildings, AND/OR 
* Post security/designated team members at affected 
doors 
*Highest level of secured access 
*Collaboration with Security, House Manager, ED lead, AOC, 
Senior Leader for affected campus 
*Require issue of armbands and/or temp IDs 
 
◊ - indicates location for personnel to be stationed to issue arm 
bands and/or temp IDs 
Main Campus 
1.      Main Entrance near the Information Desk 1.   ◊ Main Hospital Entrance (near the information desk) 
2.      Garage 2 Level 2 2.   ◊ Garage 1 Level 2 (Badge Access) 
3.      MOB 1 Entrance 3.    ◊ MOB 1 Entrance (Badge Access) 
4.      MOB 2 Entrance 4.   ◊ MOB 2 Entrance (Badge Access) 
5.      Employee Entrance near laundry 5.  ◊ MOB 2 Exit to LCA and Garage 3 (Badge Access)   
6.      Loading Dock 6.      Employee Entrance near laundry (Badge Access) 
7.      ED Hallway between ED and Garage 2 7.      Loading Dock (Badge Access) 
8.      ED ambulance entrances of Pediatrics and 
Emergency Department. 
8.   ◊ ED Hallway between ED and Garage 2 (Badge Access) 
9.    ED Pedestrian (Main) Entrance. 9.      Emergency Department Entrance. 
  10.  ◊ Hospital Entrance from MOB 1 by CCU Waiting 
(Badge Access)   
  11.  ◊ Hospital Entrance from MOB 1 by Auditorium and 
Oasis  (Badge Access) 
  
Children's 
Hospital 
1.      Main Entrance near the Information Desk ◊ ED Pedestrian (Main) Entrance 
2.      ED Ambulance Entrance   
3.      ED Pedestrian (Main) Entrance.   
4.      Staff Entrance 
 
Secured Access Plan - Points of Entry Page 5 of 6  
Location 
Level 2 Secured Access Level 3 Secured Access 
* Secure all doors to campus buildings, 
AND/OR 
* Post security/designated team 
members at affected doors 
*Highest level of secured access 
*Collaboration with Security, House 
Manager, ED lead, AOC, Senior Leader for 
affected campus 
*Require issue of armbands and/or temp IDs 
 
◊ - indicates location for personnel to be 
stationed to issue arm bands and/or temp IDs 
Main 
Campus 
1.      Main Entrance near the 
Information Desk 
1.   ◊ Main Hospital Entrance (near the 
information desk) 
2.      Garage 2 Level 2 2.   ◊ Garage 1 Level 2 (Badge Access) 
3.      MOB 1 Entrance 3.    ◊ MOB 1 Entrance (Badge Access) 
4.      MOB 2 Entrance 4.   ◊ MOB 2 Entrance (Badge Access) 
5.      Employee Entrance near laundry 5.  ◊ MOB 2 Exit to LCA and Garage 3 
(Badge Access)   
 
6.      Loading Dock 6.      Empl
oyee 
Entrance 
near 
laundry 
(Badge 
Access) 
 
7.      ED Hallway between ED and 
Garage 2 
7.      Loading Dock (Badge Access) 
8.      ED ambulance entrances of 
Pediatrics and Emergency 
Department. 
8.   ◊ ED Hallway between ED and Garage 
2 (Badge Access) 
9.    ED Pedestrian (Main) Entrance. 9.      Emergency Department Entrance. 
  10.  ◊ Hospital Entrance from MOB 1 by 
CCU Waiting (Badge Access)   
  11.  ◊ Hospital Entrance from MOB 1 by 
Auditorium and Oasis  (Badge Access) Page 6 of 6  
  
Children's 
Hospital 
1.      Main Entrance near the 
Information Desk ◊ ED Pedestrian (Main) Entrance 
2.      ED Ambulance Entrance   
3.      ED Pedestrian (Main) Entrance.   
4.      Staff Entrance 
  
Ascension 
Campus 
1.      ED Ambulance Entrance ◊ ED Pedestrian (Main) Entrance 
2.      ED Pedestrian (Main) 
Entrance.   
3.      Entrance A (Badge Access)   
4.      Entrance B   
5.      Loading Dock/Staff Entrance 
(Badge Access) 
  
Livingston 
Campus 
1.      ED Ambulatory Entrance next 
to Security Desk 
1.  ED ambulatory entrance 
2.      Ambulance Entrance 2.  ◊ ED Pedestrian (Main) Entrance 
3.      MOB Entrance 3.  ◊ MOB entrance 
    
      
North 
Baton 
Rouge 
(NBR) ED 
and 
Urgent 
Care 
1.      Physician Tower Main 
Entrance  
1.     ◊  Physician Tower Main Entrance 
2.   Physician Tower Rear Entrance 2.   Physician Tower Main Entrance 
3.  Urgent Care Main Entrance 3.    ◊  Urgent Care Main Entrance 
4.  Urgent Care Rear Entrance (Badge 
Access) 
4.      Urgent Care Rear Entrance (Badge 
Access) 
5.     ED Main Ambulatory Entrance 5.    ◊  ED Main Ambulatory Entrance 
6.      Ambulance Entrance (Badge 
Access) 6.      Ambulance Entrance (Badge Access) 
 