Page 1 of 17 
 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Security Management 
Subject:  Code PINK Missing Person Plan Section:  A 
Date of Origination:  July 1997 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised:  12/08/2021 Serial Code:  ECSE001 
Date Last Reviewed:  11/15/2022 
 
DEFINITION:  
Pediatric- any minor under the age of 18 years.  
• Infant – child ages less than one (1) year. 
• Toddler – child ages one (1) to four (4) years. 
• Child - ages five (5) to eleven (11) years. 
• Adolescent - ages Twelve (12) to seventeen (17) years. 
 
Adult - any person of at least the age of 18 years.  
 
Missing Person - any adult patient or visitor, including Mental/Behavioral Health patients, who are not 
able to be located when last seen on property or property affiliated with Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center. This includes Missing Patients; any patient noted to be absent (AWOL) from the ward 
or department without prior arrangement. 
 
Vulnerable Adult Patient - A patient aged 16 or over who is unable to safeguard his or her personal 
welfare, property, or financial affairs, and is in need of care and attention arising out of age, illness, 
mental disorder, alcohol or drug intoxication, or is substantially handicapped by any disability.  
 
Against Medical Advice (AMA) –  
a. When a patient decides to leave a facility after being informed of and appreciating the risks of 
leaving without completing treatment. 
b.  ED patient chooses to leave prior to treatment completion and provider has not informed of risks 
(Fully competent patients are legally able to discharge themselves without completing treatment.)  
•  Note: Unless the patient is on a legal hold or has a medical condition where their departure 
would present a significant risk to the patient or others, the departure will be considered AMA, 
not an elopement. (refer to policy ADM-10 Patient Leaving the Hospital Against Medical Advice 
(AMA) 
 
Elopement – When a patient (one that is on a legal hold or has a medical condition that would present 
a significant risk to the patient or others) wanders away, walks away, runs away, escapes, or otherwise 
leaves an around the clock care setting, including the emergency department, unsupervised, Page 2 of 17 
 
unauthorized, unnoticed, and/or prior to their scheduled discharge. (refer to policy OC047 Elopement) 
 
 
Types of Legal Status (cannot leave facility AMA) 
1. Order of Protective Custody (OPC) 
2. Valid Physician’s Emergency Certificate (PEC) 
3. Valid Coroner’s Emergency Certificate (CEC) 
4. Judicial Commitment for Mental Health or Substance Abuse Treatment (JC) 
5. Formal Voluntary Admission (FVA) 
6. Non-Contested Admission  
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish a process to outline response steps when notification of a missing person within the 
campuses of OLOL and Clinics is called. To ensure that all appropriate hospital personnel and outside 
agencies are notified promptly and are appropriately following established protocol to: 
• reunite the missing child with family or designated caretaker as quickly as possible. 
• locate an adult patient or visitor who has been reported missing as quickly as possible. 
 
Note: For an elopement situation, see policy OC047 Elopement. 
 
This policy will outline the Response Plan to expedite the return of the infant/child with family or 
designated caretaker when a Code Pink-Infant/Child is called or in the case of Code Pink-Adult, 
expedite the return of the patient/visitor to a safe environment. 
 
POLICY: 
Pediatric Patients: 
All employees will follow the notification protocol when it is suspected that a child is 
missing/abducted. The policy applies to both missing children admitted as patients to the hospital as 
well as visitors. 
 
MITIGATION STRATEGIES-PEDIATRIC PATIENTS: 
  
1. For all pediatric patients, the primary caregiver will be issued an armband that matches the child's 
armband upon admission to the Emergency Department, Same Day Surgery, or an inpatient 
department. 
2. Parent(s) or the primary caregiver(s) are instructed not to release the child unless the hospital 
team member has a clearly visible hospital identification badge.  Only a hospital team member 
who possesses a clearly visible hospital badge on their person or the banded primary caregiver 
shall transport the child. 
3. Presentation of the primary caregiver's admission band will be required before the child is 
discharged to any person. 
4. Prior to discharge, crosscheck the ID bands of the child and primary caregiver and original band 
holder; this allows for staff to assist with the monitoring process. Page 3 of 17 
 
 
Behavioral Health Patients in the Emergency Department or Acute Medical Care Setting: 
All employees will follow the notification protocol when it is suspected that an adult has eloped. (See 
also policy OC047 Elopement) 
 
MITIGATION STRATEGIES – Behavioral Health Patients 
Mitigation strategies include but are not limited to: 
• Placement on secure units when medically cleared or stabilized 
• Observation/Monitoring of patients at high risk for self-injury 
• Patients at risk for injury to self, others, or who are gravely disabled that have not yet been 
evaluated by the Psychiatric Consult Team, patients who may be on suicide precautions. 
• Patient with a Physicians Emergency Certificate (PEC), Coroners Emergency Certificate (CEC), or 
under a Judicial Commitment will have green scrubs and armband. 
o Note that patients on an inpatient psychiatric unit (GBC, 1- North, Adolescent, and St 
Clare) are not required to wear green scrubs. 
 
 
PROCEDURE – Pediatric (17 years or younger):  
 
The following actions will be initiated immediately when there is a suspicion of a missing person under 
18 years of age. 
 
1. Call the operator and request a Code PINK. 
Give the operator the following information. 
• Caller’s name 
• Location from where the child is reportedly missing  
• A brief description of the child that will include at least the following information: 
o Height, weight, hair and eye color 
o Age 
o Race 
o Gender 
o Clothing and shoes  
 
2. The Code Pink will be announced by: 
• OLOL Hospital by the PBX Operator. 
• OLOL Children’s Hospital by the PBX Operator and Voalte CH Code Pink Team. 
• OLOL Ascension by the paging system from any telephone.   
 
The Code PINK will be announced as “Code PINK, AGE, RACE, GENDER, and DESCRIPTION” 
 
3. The description will include at least the following information:  
• Physical description of the child including: Height, weight, hair and eye color 
• Age Page 4 of 17 
 
• Race 
• Gender 
• Clothing and shoes 
• Code PINK Infant for ages less than one (1) year. 
• Code PINK Toddler for ages one (1) to four (4) years. 
• Code PINK Child for ages five (5) to twelve (12) years. 
• Code PINK Teen for ages thirteen (13) to seventeen (17) years. 
 
4. The PBX Operator will contact hospital Security and the House Manager/Supervisor to notify of a 
Code PINK and relay the following information. 
• Physical description of the child including: Height, weight, hair and eye color 
• Age 
• Race 
• Gender 
• Clothing and shoes 
• Caller’s name 
• Location from where the child is reportedly missing  
• A brief description of the child, including what they are wearing, approximate age, gender and 
race.  
• Give the child’s first and last name if known. 
 
5. The Security Dispatch will contact Marketing Communications Department, to request that a Lake 
Alert be issued with the information provided to all Team members while dispatching Security 
Representatives and On Duty Police Officers.  On duty police officers, in turn, will contact the 
appropriate law enforcement agency and provide information a noted in section 4 of this policy.  
 
  Baton Rouge (OLOL Hospital and Children's Hospital) 
 
City Police  
 
389-3800 
EBRP Sheriff’s Office 389-5186 
Louisiana State Police  
 
OLOL Ascension 
 
Ascension Parish 
Sheriff's Office 
Louisiana State Police 
754-8500 or 1-800-969-2059 
 
 
 
621-8300 opt 1 for dispatch 
 
754-8500 or 1-800-969-2059 
 
 
 
6. Security Services and appointees will post all major entrances/exits as identified: 
  Page 5 of 17 
 
 A.  OLOL Hospital 
 
• Main Hospital Entrance (near the information desk) 
• Garage 1 Level 2 
• MOB 1 Entrance 
• MOB 2 Entrance 
• Employee Entrance near laundry 
• Loading Dock 
• ED Hallway between ED and Garage 2 
• Emergency Department Entrance. 
• Hospital Entrance from MOB 1 by CCU Waiting (During daytime hours only) 
• Hospital Entrance from MOB 1 by Auditorium and Oasis (During daytime hours only) 
• MOB 2 Exit to LCA and Garage 3 (During daytime hours only) 
 
 B.  Children's Hospital (see attached map) 
 
• Main Hospital Entrance (near the Reception Desk) 
• Stair 1 Ground Exit 
• Stair 4 Ground Exit 
• Stair 7 Ground Exit 
• Employee Entrance near Loading Dock 
• Loading Dock 
• Exit to Trash/Waste Area 
• Emergency Department Ambulance Entrance 
• Emergency Department Walk-in Entrance  
• Conference hall Exit 
• Courtyard Exit 
• MOB Main Exit 
• MOB Side Exit 
• MOB Employee Exit 
 Day Shift (6am – 4pm) Designated Post and Observers  
Map 
Location Observations Point Personnel Responsible 
1 Main Hospital Entrance (near the Reception 
Desk) Customer Service Representative / Security  
2 Stair 1 Ground Exit Security/ ED/ Admissions 
3 Stair 4 Ground Exit Nutritional / Gift Shop/ MOB Staff/Surgery 
4 Stair 6 Ground Exit Materials/Facilities  
5 Stair 7 Ground Exit Facilities/ Bio Medical/ Environmental Services 
6 Employee Entrance  Materials / Facilities/ Lab 
7 Loading Dock Materials/Facilities/ Environmental Services Page 6 of 17 
 
8 Exit to Trash/Waste Area EVS Staff 
9 Emergency Department Ambulance Entrance ED Staff/Customer Service Representative/ Lab 
10 Emergency Department Walk-in Entrance  ED Staff/ Admissions 
11 Double Glass Doors leading to Kid’s Exterior 
Play Area and Courtyard Exit Nutritional Care Staff 
12 Conference Room Hall Exit EVS staff/Foundation 
13 MOB Main Exits (Side and Employee Exit) 1st floor staff/MOB leader 
 
After-hours (4 pm – 6am) Designated Post and Observers 
Map 
Location Observations Point Personnel Responsible 
1 Main Hospital Entrance (near the Reception 
Desk) Imaging Staff 
2 Stair 1 Ground Exit ED Admissions 
3 Stair 4 Ground Exit Surgery 
4 Stair 6 Ground Exit PICU Staff 
5 Stair 7 Ground Exit EVS 
6 Employee Entrance Lab 
7 Loading Dock EVS 
8 Exit to Trash/Waste Area EVS (Rover) 
9 Emergency Department Ambulance Entrance ED Staff 
10 Emergency Department Walk-in Entrance ED Admissions 
11 Double Glass Doors leading to Kid’s Exterior 
Play Area and Courtyard Exit Respiratory 
12 Conference Room Hall Exit Respiratory 
13 MOB Main Exits (Side and Employee Exit) Security 
 
The noted areas will be manned by designated department staff at the time of activation during 
normal business hours through 8:00 p.m. All available staff is expected to assume the required 
locations  
 
 C.  OLOL Ascension 
   
  First Floor 
   Observation Point    Personnel Responsible 
Main Hospital Entrance/Entrance 1 Administration/Environmental Services 
Outpatient/Visitor/Entrance 2 Admissions/Imaging 
Cafeteria Outside Entrance Administration Suite located by Cafeteria 
Loading Dock  Materials Management/Environmental 
Services 
Emergency Room (Ambulance)  ER Staff Page 7 of 17 
 
Emergency Room (Visitor/Patient) 
Entrance 
Admissions 
Physician Entrance (near ICU) ICU Staff 
ICU/Surgery waiting area and Stairwell 
Exit 
Lab 
Parking Lot (ED/Outpatient/Front 
Hospital 
Plant Operations/Security/Supervisors 
 
  Second Floor 
   Observation Point    Personnel Responsible 
Service Elevator Med/Surg Staff 
 To Patient/Visitor Elevator/Stairwell Case Mgt/Shift Supervisor (Surg) 
Surgery Hall (228-243) Stairwell Surgery Staff 
Med 1 Hall (200-210) Stairwell Med/Surg Staff 
Med 2 Hall (211-227) Stairwell Social Workers/Med/Surg Staff 
Med 3 Hall Stairwell Staffing Coordinators/Shift Supervisor 
Med/Surg 
Telemetry Hall (260-269) Stairwells Telemetry Staff/Hospital Medicine Adm. 
Assistant  
Telemetry Elevator/Stairwells (270-279) Pharmacy 
 
D. Person gone missing from Lake Livingston Campus, North Baton Rouge ED Campus, MOB Clinic or a clinic 
not located at the Main Campus on Hennessy Boulevard. 
 
1.  Call "911" to notify police of a Missing Person. 
 
2.  Supply 911 operator with the following information: 
a. Location from where the person is reportedly missing  
b. Caller's name and affiliation. 
c. A brief description of the person that will include as much of the following information as possible: 
o Height, weight, hair and eye color 
o Age 
o Race 
o Gender 
d. Clothing and shoes 
 
3. Notify on-site Security via telephone or radio of Code Pink Infant/Toddler/Child/Teen 
 
4. Notify the Clinic Manager and or Director of the missing person  
 
5. Call the House Manager @ 5-8828 at Main Campus to inform them that you have a Missing Person. 
 
It is critical that all employees wear their ID badges. This is the only item that will get you into the facility. Page 8 of 17 
 
 
7. All team members will immediately  
• Search all stairwells, elevators, supply or storage areas and public restrooms. (See also Code 
PINK Department Assignments document.) 
• Assess all visitors attempting to leave their area/unit for the possibility that they may have a 
child hidden on their person or in some belongings that they are carrying. 
• Assess all visitors observed attempting to leave the hospital with a child in their care and 
ask them to remain in the hospital until the issue is resolved. The following explanation shall 
be given: "We are currently conducting an emergency preparedness exercise.  This is to 
ensure our ability to respond to an emergency event for the safety of our patients, visitors 
and Team Members. Please remain here in the building until we conclude our exercise in a 
short time.  Thank you for your cooperation!" 
8. If a Team Member suspects that they may have encountered the abductor, he/she will immediately 
notify Security to report the last know location of the abductor. 
9. The House Manager/Supervisor will notify the Administrator on Call (AOC) of the event.  
10. The PBX will repeat the Announcement every 60 seconds for the first 5 minutes and then every 5 
minutes thereafter or immediately when additional information is available / until the Code is 
Cleared. 
11. On-duty Law Enforcement will coordinate efforts as required. Law Enforcement will meet with the 
child’s parents/guardian keeping them advised of all efforts.  
 
12. When the child is located, the House Manager/Supervisor or Administrator on Call will authorize 
the “All Clear” announcement by the operator to stop the code.  
 
13. Until the child has been located, the House Manager/Supervisor will notify the AOC every 10 
minutes with an update of the event.  
 
14. As necessary, the AOC will activate the hospital’s Incident Command System including but not 
limited to the following positions: 
• Incident Commander 
• Public Information Officer 
• Safety/Security Officer 
 
(See also ECEP001, Emergency Operations Plan.) 
 
15. The House Manager/Supervisor will notify Corporate Communications for potential media requests 
related to the event.  
• Corporate Communications will issue all public statements. 
• Any employee who receives an inquiry about a “Code PINK” will forward that request to 
Corporate Communications for response.  
 Page 9 of 17 
 
16. The House Manager/Supervisor will notify Pastoral Care for family and team member support if 
needed.  
 
17. Parents/Guardians of the missing child will be asked to remain on the unit/premises in case 
additional information is needed from them to assist security and/or police. A Team Member will 
remain with the parents/guardians throughout the "Code PINK".   
 
18. All staff will remain on the unit until authorities complete questioning. Team members are asked to 
refrain from discussing the incident. 
 
 
Task Bar 
 
 
Department  
 
Responsibilities 
Comment 
  
 
PBX Operator 
 
• Receive Descriptive Information 
• Announce “Code Pink” 
• Notify Security Dispatch 
• Contact House 
Manager/Supervisor  
• Repeat Announcement 
**PBX can also contact 
additional departments as 
instructed by the AOC/House 
Manager/Supervisor /Incident 
Commander. 
Security 
 
• Receive Descriptive Information 
• Dispatch Security and On Duty 
Law Enforcement 
• Contact Communications for 
issuance of a  Lake Alert 
• Immediately Initiate Search  
• Contact Security 
Director/Manager 
• Contact Incident Command  
 
 
House 
Manager/Supervisor  
 
• Notify Administrator on Call 
(AOC) 
• Communicate with Parents/ 
Guardian 
• Notify Pastoral Care 
 
Administrator On 
Call  
AOC 
 
• Activate Incident Command 
System to include Incident 
Commander, Public Information 
Officer, Safety and Security 
Officer, House 
Manager/Supervisor  
 Page 10 of 17 
 
Safety 
 
• Become part of Incident 
Command System as needed 
 
Risk Management 
 
• Become part of Incident 
Command System as needed 
 
Marketing / 
Communications 
 
• Become part of Incident 
Command System as needed 
• Respond to Media Request 
• Issue Public Statements 
• Issue Code Alerts 
 
 
Team Members 
• Assume designated Post  
• Actively Search Facility, 
including: 
• Stairwells 
• Elevators  
• Supply Closets 
• Storage Areas 
• Public Restrooms 
• Man all exits to prevent 
patients/visitors from leaving 
Concurring with your work 
facility policy. 
 
 
 
 
 
  Page 11 of 17 
 
Procedure – Adult 
 
When an adult patient is on a legal hold or has a medical condition that would present a significant risk 
to the patient or others and cannot be located, the following actions will be initiated immediately: 
 
All announcements through PBX will use plain language.  
 
A) Person gone missing from Lake Livingston Campus, North Baton Rouge ED Campus, MOB Clinic, or a clinic 
not located at the Main Campus on Hennessy Boulevard. 
 
1.  Call "911" to notify police of a Missing Person. 
 
2.  Supply 911 operator with the following information: 
a. Location from where the adult is reportedly missing  
b. Caller's name and affiliation. 
c. A brief description of the adult that will include as much of the following information as possible: 
o Height, weight, hair and eye color 
o Age 
o Race 
o Gender 
d. Clothing and shoes 
 
3. Notify on-site Security via telephone or radio of Code Pink-Adult. 
 
4. Notify the Clinic Manager and/or Director of the missing person 
 
4. Call the House Manager @ 5-8828 at Main Campus to inform them that you have a Missing Person. 
 
B) For person gone missing from Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center the Main Hospital, MOB 
(Medical Office Building) 1 or 2, Ascension Campus (including MOB 1 and MOB 2), or Children's Hospital 
(including the attached MOB). 
 
19. (Main Campus & Children's Hospital) Call 5-3333 and request a Code Pink - Adult. 
i. At the Regional Campus - If the patient is currently under psychiatric legal status and or 
forensic patient the overhead page will be Code Pink Adult PEC  
ii. At the Children’s Campus – If the patient is currently under psychiatric legal status and or 
forensic patient the overhead page will be Code Pink PEC  
19.20.  
Give the operator the following information. 
• Caller’s name 
• Location from where the patient is reportedly missing  
• A brief description of the patient that will include at least the following information: 
o Height, weight, hair and eye color 
o Age 
o Race 
o Gender 
o Clothing and shoes  Page 12 of 17 
 
o  
20.21. (OLOL Hospital only) PBX Operator will announce the "Code Pink - Adult, Age, Race, Gender and 
Description."   
21.22. (OLOL Ascension only) "Code Pink - Adult, Age, Race, Gender and Description" will be 
announced via paging system from any telephone by entering *71 and making the announcement. PBX 
operator will also be called and instructed to call 911.  
22.23. (OLOL Children's Hospital only) "Code Pink - Adult, Age, Race, Gender and Description" will be 
communicated through use of Voalte Phone. 
 
23.24. The description will include at least the following information:  
• Physical description of the patient including: Height, weight, hair and eye color 
• Age 
• Race 
• Gender 
• Clothing and shoes 
 
24.25. The PBX Operator will contact hospital Security and the House Manager/Supervisor to notify 
them of the Code Pink - Adult and relay the following information: 
 
• Physical description of the patient including: Height, weight, hair and eye color 
• Age 
• Race 
• Gender 
• Clothing and shoes 
• Caller’s name 
• Location from where the patient is reportedly missing  
• A brief description of the patient, including what they are wearing, approximate age, gender and 
race.  
• Give the patient’s first and last name. 
 
25.26. Security will issue a RAVE alert text message "Code Pink - Adult: (Unit Name) is currently in Code 
Pink - Adult Condition.  Initiate Code Pink - Adult procedures immediately."  Security will issue 
additional RAVE text alert messages as more information becomes available. 
26.27. The Security Dispatch will contact all Security Officers and on duty law enforcement officers via 
radios. All will began the search for the missing patient. Mobile patrols will also be searching for the 
patient. 
 
27.28. Security Services and appointees will post all major entrances/exits as identified: 
  
 A.  OLOL Hospital 
 
• Main Hospital Entrance (near the information desk) 
• Garage 1 Level 2 
• MOB 1 Entrance 
Formatted: Indent: Before:  1.5",  No bullets or numberingPage 13 of 17 
 
• MOB 2 Entrance 
• Employee Entrance near laundry 
• Loading Dock 
• ED Hallway between ED and Garage 2 
• Emergency Department Entrance. 
• Hospital Entrance from MOB 1 by CCU Waiting (During daytime hours only) 
• Hospital Entrance from MOB 1 by Auditorium and Oasis (During daytime hours only) 
• MOB 2 Exit to Louisiana Cardiology Associates and Garage 3 (During daytime hours only) 
 
 
B.  OLOL Ascension 
 
First Floor 
    
Observation Point    Personnel Responsible 
Main Hospital Entrance/Entrance 1 Administration/Environmental Services 
Outpatient/Visitor/Entrance 2 Admissions/Imaging 
Cafeteria Outside Entrance Administration Suite located by Cafeteria 
Loading Dock  Materials Management/Environmental Services 
Emergency Room (Ambulance)  ER Staff 
Emergency Room (Visitor/Patient) Entrance Admissions 
Physician Entrance (near ICU) ICU Staff 
ICU/Surgery waiting area and Stairwell Exit Lab 
Parking Lot (ED/Outpatient/Front Hospital Plant Operations/Security/Supervisors 
 
 
  Second Floor 
   Observation Point    Personnel Responsible 
Service Elevator Med/Surg Staff 
Patient/Visitor Elevator/Stairwell Case Mgt/Shift Supervisor (Surg) 
Surgery Hall (228-243) Stairwell Surgery Staff 
Med 1 Hall (200-210) Stairwell Med/Surg Staff 
Med 2 Hall (211-227) Stairwell Social Workers/Med/Surg Staff 
Med 3 Hall Stairwell Staffing Coordinators/Shift Supervisor Med/Surg 
Telemetry Hall (260-269) Stairwells Telemetry Staff/Hospital Medicine Adm. Assistant
  
Telemetry Elevator/Stairwells (270-279) Pharmacy 
 
 
C. Children's Hospital 
 
• Main Hospital Entrance (near the Reception Desk) 
• Stair 1 Ground Exit 
• Stair 3 Ground Exit 
• Stair 4 Ground Exit Page 14 of 17 
 
• Stair 7 Ground Exit 
• Employee Entrance near Loading Dock 
• Loading Dock 
• Exit to Trash/Waste Area 
• Emergency Department Ambulance Entrance 
• Emergency Department Walk-in Entrance 
• Double Glass Doors leading to Kid’s Exterior Play Area/Accordion Door at MOB 
 
  Observation Point     Personnel Responsible 
Main Hospital Entrance (near the Reception 
Desk) 
Customer Service Representative / Security  
Stair 1 Ground Exit ED Staff/Admissions/Security 
Stair 3 Ground Exit Pastoral Care 
Stair 4 Ground Exit Nutritional / Pharmacy/ Gift Shop/ MOB 
Staff 
Stair 6 Ground Exit Materials/Facilities/ Environmental Services 
Stair 7 Ground Exit Facilities/ Bio Medical 
Employee Entrance  Materials / Facilities/ Lab 
Loading Dock Materials/Facilities/ Environmental Services 
Exit to Trash/Waste Area EVS Staff 
Emergency Department Ambulance 
Entrance 
ED Staff/Customer Service Representative/ 
Lab 
Emergency Department Walk-in Entrance ED Staff/Admissions/Security 
Double Glass Doors leading to Kid’s Exterior 
Play Area/ Accordion Door at MOB 
Nutritional Care Staff 
 
After-hours (8p-6a) Designated Post and Observers  
 
Main Hospital Entrance (near the Reception 
Desk) 
Imaging Staff 
Stair 1 Ground Exit ED Staff 
Stair 3 Ground Exit EVS 
Stair 4 Ground Exit Med/Surg 
Stair 6 Ground Exit Critical Care Unit 
Stair 7 Ground Exit EVS 
Employee Entrance Laboratory 
Loading Dock EVS 
Exit to Trash/Waste Area EVS (Rover) 
Emergency Department Ambulance 
Entrance 
ED Staff 
Emergency Department Walk-in Entrance ED Staff 
Double Glass Doors leading to Kid’s Exterior 
Play Area/ Accordion Door at MOB 
Security 
 
It is critical that all employees wear their ID badges. This is the only item that will get you into the facility. Page 15 of 17 
 
 
28.29. All team members will immediately  
• Search all stairwells, elevators, supply or storage areas and public restrooms. 
29.30. If a Team Member suspects that they may have encountered the missing person, he/she will 
immediately notify Security to report the last known location of the patient. 
30.31. The PBX will repeat the Announcement every 60 seconds for the first 5 minutes and then every 
5 minutes thereafter, or immediately when additional information is available until the “All Clear” 
announcement by the operator to stop the code.  
31.32. Security will issue a RAVE Text Alert "Code Pink - Adult: All Clear" when the missing person is 
located, or to suspend the search for the missing person. 
32.33. When or if the missing person is found, they should be asked to return to the facility for their 
safety. If the missing person is one who has a court ordered hold or PEC, minimal force can be used to 
get the missing person back safely. When possible, there should be a minimum of 2 persons restraining 
the missing person.  
33.34. The unit where the missing person eloped from will file an incident report. 
34.35. Security will document their search efforts. 
 
C) For person gone missing from the Tau Center 
 1.  Notify Security Dispatch at 765-8825 of the Missing person 
2. Call "911" to notify police of a Missing Person. 
A. Supply 911 operator with the following information: 
▪ Location from where the adult is reportedly missing  
▪ Caller's name and affiliation. 
▪ A brief description of the adult that will include as much of the following information 
as possible: 
▪ Height, weight, hair and eye color 
▪ Age 
▪ Race  
▪ Gender 
▪ Clothing and shoes 
3. The front desk personnel at the Tau Center, or the inpatient Charge Nurse after hours, will make an 
overhead announcement stating, “Code Pink-Adult (or Adolescent) three times and then when the 
patient is returned will call an “all Clear”.  
4. Security will issue a RAVE alert text message "Code Pink - Adult: (Unit Name) is currently in Code 
Pink - Adult Condition.  Initiate Code Pink - Adult procedures immediately."  Security will issue 
additional RAVE text alert messages as more information becomes available. 
5. The Security Dispatch will contact all Security Officers and on duty law enforcement officers via 
radios. All will begin the search for the missing patient. Mobile patrols will also be searching for the 
patient. 
 
6. Security Services and appointees will dispatch additional officers to the Tau Center and surrounding 
areas as needed 
 Page 16 of 17 
 
7. The nurse will call the emergency contact on the PEC\CEC or in the emergency medical record to 
notify them of the missing person.  
 
Task Bar 
 
 
Department  
 
Responsibilities 
Comment 
  
 
PBX Operator 
 
• Receive Descriptive Information 
• Announce “Code Pink - Adult” 
• Notify Security Dispatch 
• Contact House Manager 
• Repeat Announcement 
 
**PBX can also contact additional 
departments as instructed by the 
House Manager. 
Security 
 
• Receive Descriptive Information 
• Dispatch Security and On Duty Law 
Enforcement 
• Immediately Initiate Search  
• Contact Security Director/Manager 
 
House 
Manager/Supervisor 
• Update family on the status of the 
missing person 
 
 
Team Members 
• Actively Search Facility, including: 
• Stairwells 
• Elevators  
• Supply Closets 
• Storage Areas 
• Public Restrooms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References:  
 
CM.07.001 Mental Health Legal Status 
https://fmolhs.sharepoint.com/sites/TeamLink/Policy/FMOLHS/Operations/Care%20Management/CM.07.0
01_Mental%20Health%20Health%20Legal%20Status%20(01.20.2021).pdf 
 
U. S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2015). Plain Language: A Promising Strategy for Clearly 
Communicating Health Information and Improving Health Literacy. Rockville: Office of Disease Prevention 
and Health Promotion.  
 
United States Department of Homeland Security. (2006). Plain Language Frequently Asked Questions (FAQS). 
Washington: Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
 
 Page 17 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix A  
PBX Plain Talk example: 
 
Code Pink Pediatric Example: 
A three-year-old toddler is missing from the ED 
 
PBX will announce: 
Code Pink Toddler, Main ED, Code Pink Toddler, Main ED, Code Pink Toddler, Main ED 
“3-year-old black male toddler wearing black sweatpants and white puppy patrol t-shirt last seen with 
an elderly white male wearing blue jean jacket near the ED ambulance bay 
If seen notify the nearest employee or Security.” 
 
Code Pink Adult Example: 
A PEC/CEC patient is missing from his room on a medical floor.  
 
PBX will announce: 
“Code Pink Adult Med 5. Code Pink Adult Med 5. Code Pink Adult Med 5” 
“45-year-old white male in green paper scrubs is missing from Med 5, last seen in stairwell near 
Chapel. If seen notify the nearest employee or Security.” 
 