POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Safety Management 
Subject:  Environment of Care Committee Section:  A 
Date of Origination:  October 1996 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised:  12/15/05 Serial Code:  ECSF003 
Date Last Reviewed: 09/12/2022 
PURPOSE 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center is committed to providing a safe, functional, and 
effective environment for patients, employees, and other individuals. In pursuit of this, our 
Environment of Care Committee leads by monitoring and providing guidance with administering 
the Environment of Care Program encompassing the main facility and offsite locations.  
Objectives of the Environment of Care Program are to: 
• Reduce and control environmental hazards and risks;  
• Prevent accidents and injuries;  
• Maintain safe conditions for patients, visitors, and employees  
POLICY 
The Environment of Care Committee includes representation from Administration and 
supervisory personnel from clinical and support services. Non-supervisory employees are also 
encouraged to participate in the activities of the Environment of Care Program. All members of 
the Environment of Care Committee are appointed by Administration. 
Responsibilities of the Environment of Care Committee 
The Environment of Care Committee and its members meet at least quarterly to address safety 
and other issues related to managing the environment of care. 
The Environment of Care Committee will inform itself of standards for safety incorporated in the 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI), General Acute Care Hospital Regulation of the 
State Department of Health, Code of Federal Regulations Title 29, Occupational Safety and 
Health Act (OSHA), and The Joint Commission standards. 
The Environment of Care Committee will develop written policies and procedures to improve 
safety practices within OLOLRMC and off site locations.  
The Environment of Care Committee coordinates and assists in the development of 
department/service safety rules and practices. All departmental safety policies and procedures 
will be reviewed as frequently as necessary, but at least every three years by the department and the Environment of Care Committee. The Environment of Care Committee makes periodic 
inspections of OLOLRMC premises, including construction sites for the purpose of assuring 
compliance with safety policies. Regular compliance with safety objectives is to be observed. 
Written records of inspection are maintained and corrective actions documented for identified 
risks. Environmental safety risk assessment surveys will be conducted and are reported to the 
Environment of Care Committee, with follow-up action documented. Ongoing hazard 
surveillance program including response to product safety recalls will be maintained and 
reported through the Environment of Care Committee. The Environment of Care Committee 
reviews a summary report of accidents or injuries to patients, visitors and/or personnel. Summary 
reports of incidents include an evaluation of the incident, conclusions, recommendations and 
actions taken. 
The Environment of Care Committee reviews reports of all fire drills, and reviews the reports of 
the regular testing and preventative maintenance of the fire alarm system. The committee 
monitors equipment and utility preventative maintenance and inspection procedures as well as 
education and training of users to protect against failure or user error. 
The Environment of Care Committee oversees organization-wide educational activities related to 
the environment of care in order to improve the safety of patients, visitors and staff. Educational 
programs based on industry standards and literature reviews are continually adapted to reflect 
organizational experience and evaluation of effectiveness of training programs. The Environment 
of Care Committee assures the maintenance, review and reporting of such records are consistent 
with its goals. The objectives, scope, performance, and effectiveness of the Safety Program are 
evaluated annually. Evaluation includes all areas of the Environment of Care Program including 
Safety Management, Security, Hazardous Materials and Waste management, Emergency 
Preparedness, Life Safety, Medical Equipment, and Utilities Management. The Environment of 
Care Committee will: 
• Meet at least quarterly and record its activities.  
• Disseminate information from the committee meetings organization-wide that will be 
sent through the Performance Improvement system.  
• Report to the Board and Administration on incidents, accidents and or trends that may 
compromise the safety of patients, staff, or visitors. 