 ECUS031 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HEALTHREGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section: Utilities Management 
Title: Utilities Failure - Generator 
Policy 
Reference #: ECUS031 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 2018 Review Date: 12/27/2022 10/31/2024 
Revision Date: 02/26/20, 10/31/24 
 
 
POLICY: 
If the emergency generator power system should fail, Our Lady of the Lake Health Regional Medical 
Center will implement interim life safety measures to protect patients, staff, and visitors. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. Each emergency generator system is tested and inspected based on NFPA® 110 standards, state 
requirements, and manufacturer recommendations.  If a generator/Emergency Power Supply 
System should fail during a test, or during actual operations, or at other times, it will be repaired 
as quickly as possible.  (If it cannot be returned to service and pass the monthly test within the 
same 12-hour shift, a backup generator will be brought in and connected for use until the primary 
generator can be repaired and pass the test). 
 
2. A risk assessment will be performed, based on factors such as other available connected 
generators within the system that could take over the same load, the time to repair the engine, 
and the availability of replacement generators.  Additional factors include the ability to move 
patients to areas not affected by the failure, and the potential consequences’consequences of the 
failure.  If the system cannot be repaired within a few hours, a backup generator will be required 
and installed. 
 
3. Once that generator is installed, it will be tested with the existing emergency power system 
components in place, andplace and must pass the monthly test as required.  This generator must 
remain in place until the prime generator is ready to return to service, andservice and has passed 
the test.  Only after the prime generator is tested can the backup generator be removed from 
service.   
 
4. If the prime generator provides power to the Operating Rooms and other emergency areas, these 
areas must not be used until an operating, tested generator is in place.  As soon possible, patients 
should be moved from areas served by the failed generator to areas served by an operating 
generator until a functional generator is in place. 
 
5. The repaired generator must be tested, and pass test, following appropriate repairs and/or prior to 
disconnection and removal of the backup emergency generator.  The backup emergency 
generator must be tested on a monthly schedule just as the primary set until the installed 
generator is back in service and tested.  ECUS031 
Page 2 of 3 
 
6. Whether the Incident Command System (ICS) is implemented will depend on the coverage of the 
damaged generator and the ability of other generators to take up the load of the failed generator.  
If significant services or section of the hospital are affected, the ICS should be activated until the 
backup generator is in place and tested. 
 
REFERENCES: 
Joint Commission, Environment of Care (EC).02.05.07 
Element of Performance (EP) 4, weekly inspections 
EP 5. Monthly testing for at least 30 minutes 
EP 6. Monthly testing with a dynamic load of at least 30% 
EP 9. Every 36 months, test for a minimum of four continuous hours 
EP 10. Every 36 month test uses a dynamic or static load of at least 30% ECUS031 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power and generator failure. 
Determine extent of the problem,  
location, and circuits involved. 
Determine needs of critical care and OR patients. 
If needed, evacuate patients that need support  
to an area of the facility that has power.  
Evaluate estimated time of repairs.   
 
 