 ECUS038 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HEALTH REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section: Utilities Management 
Title: Utilities Failure – Sewage 
Policy 
Reference #: ECUS038 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 2018 Review Date: 10/31/202412/27/2022 
Revision Date: 10/31/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide a safe physical environment for patients, staff, and visitors at all Our Lady of the Lake 
Health Regional Medical Center (OLOL) network locations. 
 
POLICY: 
When OLOL experiences a localized or facility widefacility-wide sewage disruption, Plant Services will 
direct repair/replacement activities to resume normal operations with sustained reliability in a timely 
manner. 
 
Plant Services follows standard procedures in their efforts to resume sustained delivery of sewage from 
the facility. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
In response to a sewage blockage or disruption, localized failure or facility widefacility-wide, Plant 
Services will: 
• Locate the source of the problem and ensure patient, staff, and visitor safety as needed. 
• Expedite needed repairs in house, utility company employees or via approved, outside vendor). 
• Notify affected departments, Hospital Administration, House Manager, and Infection Control of 
issue issues and approximate down timedowntime. 
• After disruption is removed, Infection Control will evaluate to ensure compliance with infection 
prevention practices and the effectiveness of remediation measures. 
 
If proper sewage flow cannot be restored in a reasonable time frame, the Incident Command Center may 
be activated.  The mission of the Incident Command Center is to safely manage the operations of the 
facilityfacility's operations during a Utilities Failure and minimize time to restore service.   
  ECUS038 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sewage Blockage or Overflow. 
 
Determine the extent of the problem.  
Locate source of the problem.  
Repair can be made quickly.  
If needed, provide impacted 
areas with temporary supplies. 
 
Call Plant Services Dispatch, 5-8292.   
Plant Services will respond immediately. 
Repair cannot be made quickly. 
If needed, provide impacted 
areas with temporary supplies 
with additional facilities 
available outside. 
 
If necessary, contact licensed 
contractor for assistance. 
 
Notify the impacted 
departments, Administration, 
House Manager, and Infection 
Control 
Infection Control will assess to 
ensure proper contaminant 
removal. 
 
Notify the impacted departments, 
Administration, House Manager, 
and Infection Control 
Infection Control will assess to 
ensure proper contaminant 
removal. 
 
 