 ECUS039 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HEALTH REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section: Utilities Management 
Title: Utilities Failure – Medical Gas/Vacuum 
Policy 
Reference #: ECUS039 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2018 Review Date: 10/31/202412/27/2022 
Revision Date: 10/31/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide a safe physical environment for patients, staff and visitors at all Our Lady of the Lake Health 
Regional Medical Center (OLOL) network locations. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of any failure or disruption of a piped medical gas/vacuum system, Plant Services will direct 
repair/replacement activities to resume normal operations with sustained reliability in a timely manner. 
 
Testing and maintenance is conducted by the licensed vendor on an annual basis to ensure the piped 
medical gas/vacuum systems and alarms are functional. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
▪ In response to a failure of a piped medical gas/vacuum system, Plant Services will inspect 
functionality of the system, controls, distribution system, valves, and (as needed) the end user 
equipment to determine the extent of the problem. 
▪ Plant Services will expedite needed repairs in house or via the approved outside vendor. 
▪ Notify the affected department, Hospital Administration, House Manager, and Respiratory of issue 
issues and approximate down timedowntime. 
▪ If the facility’s piped medical gas/vacuum system cannot be restored in a reasonable time frame, the 
Incident Command Center may be activated, as deemed appropriate by the Hospital Administration 
and the House Manager.  The mission of the Incident Command Center is to safely manage the 
operations of the facility during a piped medical gas/vacuum system failure and minimize time to 
restore service.   
 
 
  ECUS039 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Medical gas/vacuum system is down. 
 
Determine the extent of the problem.  
Call Vendor(s), if needed  
 
When needed, system will be  
re-certified by licensed vendor 
Expedite needed repairs 
Notify the impacted departments, 
Administration, House Manager, and 
Respiratory 
 
 