1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Manual: Environment of Care Section: Utilities Management 
Title: Water Management Plan Reference #: EC-WMP 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 01/30/2018 Review Date: 05/19/19 
Revision Date: 07/16/21; 05/19/21; 11/02/20; 
06/09/20; 09/03/19; 08/21/18 
 
Purpose: 
The purpose of the Water Management Plan (WMP) is  
• to perform a thorough assessment of the delivery methods of potable and domestic hot water systems to 
establish and maintain a utility systems management program and 
• to reduce the risk of hospital acquired illness by preventing and controlling waterborne healthcare associated 
infections through an inter-disciplinary approach of system design, system inspection, and clinical 
surveillance.  
 
The most common microorganisms that are associated with waterborne healthcare-associated infections are 
Pseudomonas, Acinetobacter, Moraxella, Aeromonas, Xanthomonas, Legionella, Aspergillus, Fusarium spp., and 
atypical (nontuberculosis) mycobacteria.   
 
Policy 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) is mandated to develop and adhere to policies and procedures 
that inhibit microbial growth in building water systems that reduce the risk of growth and spread of legionella and 
other opportunistic pathogens in water.   
 
Legionnaires’ disease is a serious type of pneumonia caused by bacteria called Legionella that live in water.  
Legionella can make people sick when they inhale contaminated water from building water systems that are not 
adequately maintained. 
 
Program Elements 
A. Water Management Team (WMT) 
 
1. WMT Members include: 
• Director of Plant Services 
• Director of Facilities Management 
• Infection Control Nurse 
• Manager of Regulatory Safety 
• Contractor Plant Manager 
• Plant Services Manager 
• Regulatory Outcomes Analyst 
• Plant Services Master Plumber 
• Water Testing Specialists 
 
2. WMT will: 
• Be familiar with the building water systems 
• Identify  
o Control Points: Locations in the building water system where a control measure can be 
applied  2 
o Control Measures: Actions performed in building water systems to limit growth and 
spread of waterborne pathogens, such as heating, adding disinfectant, or cleaning 
o Control Limits: The maximum value, minimum value, or range of values that are 
acceptable for the control measures that is monitored to reduce the risk for waterborne 
pathogen growth and spread 
o Water source: the points at which water exits from all potable and non-potable building 
water systems, fixtures, and equipment 
• Identify and take Corrective Actions  
o Actions taken to reestablish control when monitoring or measurement values are outside 
control limits 
• Monitor and document program performance 
• Communicate with pertinent departments within the facility and outside the facility, as needed 
• Oversee the program 
• Access necessary resources to implement changes 
• Eliminate dead legs and stagnant water, where possible 
o Dead legs:  Piping that is subject to low or no flow due to design or decreased water use 
such as capped pipes or unused faucets 
o Stagnation:  When water does not flow well; areas of stagnant water encourage biofilm 
growth and reduce temperature and level of disinfectant 
 
B. Building Water Systems  
 
1. Building Water Systems include hot and cold potable water systems and non-potable water systems in the 
building or on the site.   
• Potable water:  Hot or cold water intended for human consumption, such as drinking, bathing, 
showering, hand washing, teeth brushing, food preparation, and maintaining oral hygiene 
• Non-potable water:  Water not intended for human consumption 
 
2. Building water system components may include: 
• Local or point-of-use temperature mixing valves 
• Water storage tanks 
• Eye wash and safety showers 
• Faucets with flow restrictors 
• Electronic or sensor faucets 
• Floor drains 
• Expansion tanks 
• Backflow / cross connection prevention 
 
3. The water system’s flow diagrams including text descriptions and information regarding the applicable 
control points for these locations are found in Appendix 2.   
• These Control Points may include: 
o Building Water Systems 
o Cooling Towers 
o Emergency Showers and Eyewashes 
o Ice Machines 
o Condensate Trays 
o Decorative Fountains 
o Scheduled or unscheduled water disruptions 
o Sink Faucets/Shower Heads 
o Humidifiers   
 
 
 3 
Location Physical Address 
Lake Imaging 7135 Perkins Road, Baton Rouge, LA 
LSU Health BR Medicine Clinics 5131 O’Donovan Drive, Baton Rouge, LA 
LSU Health BR Mid City Clinic  1401 North Foster Drive, Baton Rouge, LA 
LSU Health BR Perkins Surgical 9032 Perkins, Baton Rouge, LA 
Medical Office Building I and II 7777 Hennessy Blvd, Baton Rouge, LA 
OLOL Advanced Outpatient Wound Clinic 7301 Hennessy Blvd, Suite 103, Baton Rouge, LA 
OLOL Children’s 8300 Constantine Blvd, Baton Rouge, LA 
OLOL Children’s Medical Office Building 8200 Constantine Blvd, Baton Rouge, LA 
OLOL Livingston 5000 O’Donovan Blvd, Walker, LA 
OLOL North Baton Rouge ED  
LSU Health BR North Clinic 5439 Airline Highway, Baton Rouge, LA 
OLOL Regional Medical Center 
(Main, SMT, HVI) 5000 Hennessy Blvd, Baton Rouge, LA 
Outpatient Pediatric Physical Medicine 8415 Goodwood Blvd, Baton Rouge, LA 
St. Ann IOP 5120 Dijon Drive, Suite A, Baton Rouge, LA 
Tau Mental and Behavioral Health  8080 Margaret Ann Drive, Baton Rouge, LA 
  
C. Potable Water System Monitoring 
 
1. Preventative Measures 
• No aerators on faucets in patient rooms and nursing units. Where aerators are present, scheduled 
cleaning by department and included in plant services zone inspection; replaced as necessary.  
• Shower heads and handheld showers are cleaned by housekeeping during room turn over and 
included in Plant Services zone inspection; replaced as necessary. 
 
2. Monitoring Control Limits and Control Measures 
• Hot water temperature at water source:  Water heaters are set to deliver a maximum temperature 
of 120°F 
• Free chlorine at water source:  A minimum of 0.2 ppm free chlorine should be maintained at 
water sources to prevent the growth and spread of Legionella and other waterborne pathogens  
• Visual inspection of cleanliness  
• pH:  The pH will be monitored as a means of monitoring fluctuations in water quality.  
Disinfectants are most effective within a narrow range (approximately 6.5 to 8.5) 
• Heterotrophic Bacteria: Microorganisms that use organic carbon as food and are found in every 
type of water.  Useful for operational monitoring of the efficacy of treatment processes including 
disinfection. 
• Pseudomonas:  An opportunistic pathogen that can grow in water at very low nutrient 
concentrations.  Elevated numbers may indicate the development of a bacterial layer on surfaces 
within the building water distribution system. 
• Nontuberculous Mycobacteria (NTM): An opportunistic pathogen that can form difficult-to-
eliminate biofilms (a group of microorganisms embedded in slime, that adhere to a moist surface. 
• Environmental testing for microorganisms such as Legionella 
 
3. Frequency of monitoring and routine sampling 
• Sampling frequency – Quarterly, scheduled, or non-scheduled disruptions, based on risk 
• Sampling locations – A minimum of 10 random sites should be tested quarterly 
• Sampling methods – Water samples will be tested as defined by the CDC 4 
• Who will take the samples – Southwest Engineers representative 
 
4. Responding to detections of microorganisms in water sample(s) - If found during environmental 
validation testing, notification and corrective actions will be sent to the following: 
a. Plant Services Director 
b. Infection Control  
- InfectionControlDept@fmolhs.org, (225) 765-8864, pager (225) 378-4407 
 
Potable Water Systems 
Parameter to be 
Monitored Control Limit Probable Corrective Actions 
pH 6.5 – 8.5 • Adjust accordingly with acid or base, if needed 
Free chlorine at 
water source  
 
≥ 0.2  ppm 
• Increase flushing time and re-test. 
• Determine free chlorine level of water entering the building from municipal. If 
low, contact municipal.  
Temperature at hot 
water source 105° F - 120° F • Ensure water heater functioning properly.  
• Check system for cold water intrusion into hot water line.  
Visual inspection of 
cleanliness 
No visible slime, 
mud, sediment, 
mold, mildew, 
buildup, or scale 
• Physically remove solids. Wash area with soapy water and disinfect with 200 
ppm chlorine solution. (1tbsp. Bleach/gal water). 
• Replace shower head/faucet. 
Legionella 
≤ 1 CFU/mL or 
None Detected 
• Continue WMP 
> 1 CFU/mL • Test other water sources around the positive test site. 
> 10 CFU/mL 
• Review the sample collection, handling, and testing procedures to confirm that 
the results are not due to errors. 
• Confirm that system equipment is in good working order and functioning as 
intended. 
• Review assumptions about operating conditions, such as the physical and 
chemical characteristics of the water supplied to the building. 
• Re-evaluate fundamental aspects of the WMP, including the analysis of 
hazardous conditions, cleaning, and maintenance procedures, chemical 
treatment, and other aspects of the Program that could affect results of 
Legionella testing. 
• If review or re-evaluation of the WMP indicates deficiencies, adjust the WMP 
as necessary. 
• Consider whether remedial treatment is needed. 
Heterotrophic 
Bacteria 
> 500 – 10,000 • Flush most water sources in the area for at least five (5) minutes 
> 10,000 • Flush most water sources in the area for at least five (5) minutes 
• Review sampling result trends to determine if further remedial action is required 
E.coli / total 
coliforms 
Negative or  
< 1 CFU/mL 
• If detected an immediate investigation should take place starting with: 
• the collection of more samples upstream and downstream from the original 
sample location 
• possible remedies: 
o concentrations of disinfectant can be increased,  
o service tanks can be chlorinated, or  
o main lines flushed 
Pseudomonas 
speciation 
Negative or  
< 1 CFU/mL 
• Flush most water sources in the area for at least five (5) minutes 
• Re-test within six (6) months 
Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa 
Negative or  
< 1 CFU/mL 
• Flush most water sources in the area for at least five (5) minutes 
• Re-test within six (6) months 
Nontuberculous 
Mycobacterium 
(NTM) 
Negative or  
< 1 CFU/mL 
• Flush most water sources in the area for at least five (5) minutes 
• Re-test within six (6) months 
 
 5 
D. Non-Potable Water System Monitoring 
5. Preventative Measures 
• All cooling towers are treated with oxidizing biocide for microbiological control 
 
6. Monitoring Control Limits and Control Measures 
• Free chlorine or bromine:  Approximately .15 - .35 ppm free chlorine or bromine should be 
maintained to prevent the growth and spread of Legionella and other waterborne pathogens  
• Visual inspection of cleanliness  
• Environmental testing for microorganisms such as Legionella 
 
7. Frequency of monitoring and routine sampling 
• Sampling frequency – Quarterly, scheduled, or non-scheduled disruptions, based on risk 
• Sampling locations – A minimum of 10 random sites should be tested quarterly 
• Sampling methods – Water samples will be tested as defined by the CDC 
• Who will take the samples – Southwest Engineers representative 
 
8. Responding to detections of microorganisms in water sample(s) - If found during environmental 
validation testing, notification and corrective actions will be sent to the following: 
• Plant Services Director 
• Infection Control  
o InfectionControlDept@fmolhs.org, (225) 765-8864, pager (225) 378-4407 
 
Cooling Towers and Evaporative Heat Exchangers 
Parameter to be 
Monitored Control Limit Probable Corrective Actions 
Free Chlorine or 
Bromine   
 
.15 - .35  ppm 
• Increase flushing time and re-test. 
• Determine free chlorine level of water entering the building from 
municipal. If low, contact municipal.  
Visual inspection of 
cleanliness 
No visible slime, 
mud, sediment, 
mold, mildew, 
buildup, or scale 
• Physically remove solids.  
• Increase amount of biocide to disinfect. 
 
Legionella 
≤ 10 CFU/mL or 
None Detected 
• Continue WMP 
> 10 CFU/mL 
• Review the sample collection, handling, and testing procedures to 
confirm that the results are not due to errors. 
• Confirm that system equipment is in good working order and 
functioning as intended. 
• Review assumptions about operating conditions, such as the physical 
and chemical characteristics of the water supplied to the building. 
• Re-evaluate fundamental aspects of the WMP, including the analysis 
of hazardous conditions, cleaning, and maintenance procedures, 
chemical treatment, and other aspects of the Program that could affect 
results of Legionella testing. 
• If review or re-evaluation of the WMP indicates deficiencies, adjust 
the WMP as necessary. 
• Consider whether remedial treatment is needed. 
≥ 1000 CFU/mL 
• Complete above actions in addition to: 
o Increase amount of biocide 
o Retest system in 3-7 days 
 
 
 6 
E. Clinical Awareness 
1. Higher waterborne pathogen risk areas are identified.  These higher risk areas constitute control locations 
or points in the system where a control measure may be desirable. 
 
The Water Management Team has reviewed the following:  
• The history of documented hospital-acquired infections.  
• Areas in the hospital where high risk patients are likely to be housed and treated and have determined 
that the following four risk group areas exist:  
 Highest Risk: Invasive procedure areas and critical care units  
 
 Medium-High Risk:  Patient care units and minimally invasive procedure areas 
 
 Medium Risk: Outpatient care areas  
 
 Low Risk: Non patient care areas 
 
• For patients who are identified in the “Medium-High” and “Highest” risk categories due to medical 
diagnosis, special precautions must be taken to minimize the risk of contracting waterborne 
pathogens. Special patients, who are identified as extremely high risk due to their condition, will have 
individualized care plans that include specific treatment modalities to minimize patient harm.  
 
2. Responding to cases of Legionnaires’ disease - If diagnostic testing determines that any case of 
pneumonia is caused by any species of Legionella that is epidemiologically linked to the building:  
• Notification and reporting to Louisiana Department of Health in accordance with the Louisiana 
Sanitary Code. 
• Collect environmental water samples from the hot and cold-water distribution loops in at least the 
areas where the patient had contact with the building water distribution systems. 
• Perform corrective actions which may include decontaminating the building water systems 
• Re-validate with environmental testing 
• Review the WMP and revise, if necessary 
 
F. Program Review  
1. The Water Management Team will review the elements of your program at least annually. We will also 
review and revise the program when any of the following events occur:  
• Data review shows control measures are persistently outside of control limits  
• A major maintenance or water service change occurs, such as: New construction  
• Equipment changes (e.g., new hot tub chlorinator pump)  
• Changes in treatment products (e.g., disinfectants)  
• Changes in water usage (e.g., high and low season for hotel)  
• Changes in the municipal water supply  
• One or more cases of disease are thought to be associated with your system(s)  
• Changes occur in applicable laws, regulations, standards, or guidelines  
 
2. If an event triggers you to review and update your water management program, remember to:  
• Update the process flow diagram, associated control points, control limits, and corrective actions  
• Update the written description of your building water systems  
• Train those responsible for implementing and monitoring the updated program  
 
References 
ASHRAE 188: Legionellosis: Risk Management for Building Water Systems June 26, 2015.  ASHRAE: Atlanta. 
www.ashrae.org 
 
ASHRAE 12-2020: Managing the Risk of Legionellosis Associated with Building Water Systems March 30, 2020.  
ASHRAE: Atlanta. www.ashrae.org 7 
CMS S & C 17-30-Hospitals/CAHs/NHs REVISED 06.09.2017. Requirement to Reduce Legionella Risk in 
Healthcare Facility Water Systems to Prevent Cases and Outbreaks of Legionnaires’ disease (LD) 
 
CDC. Developing a Water Management Program to Reduce Legionella Growth & Spread in Buildings, A Practical 
Guide to Implementing Industry Standards.  June 5, 2017. Version 1.1 
 
CDC. Guidelines for Environmental Infection Control in Health-Care Facilities.  Recommendations of CDC and the 
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee.  2003.  Updated July 2019. 
 
 
  8 
Water System Interruption Record 
 
 
Date Occurred:   
Recorded By:  
Indication of Water 
System Interruption: 
 
 
Water System  
Interruption Location: 
 
 
Action Taken:  
  
  
  
Record Completed By:  
Date Completed:  
 
  9 
Corrective Action Record 
 
 
Date Initiated:   
Initiated By:  
Corrective Action Prompt:  
  
System Type & Location:  
  
Action Taken:  
  
  
  
Record Completed By:  
Date Completed:  
 
 
 
 
  10 
Appendix 1 
When you become aware of an issue that may cause an infection risk to 
our patients or employees, notify Infection Control by placing a RLDatix 
event.  
 
To place a RLDatix, select this destination: 
 
 
Placing a RLDatixwill allow prompt notification and documentation of 
follow up actions. After adding the department where the event has 
occurred, add Infection Control as “another department involved.”  
Please see screen shots below from RLDatix. 
A few examples that require Infection Control notification: (This list is not 
exhaustive) 
• HVAC shut down for an extended period of time  
• Chiller or boiler repair 
• Malfunctioning negative or positive pressure rooms 
• A sewer leak or back up of sewage  
• Water leaks 
• Ceiling failure  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For events that require immediate attention please call Infection Prevention at (225) 765-8864. 
  
11 
 
Appendix 2  
Water Flow Schematics and Text Descriptions 
 
 12 
 
13 
 
14 
 
15 
 
16 
 
17 
 
18 
 
 
Main Campus: Operational Management of Risk 
1. Hot Water Heating Systems: The hot water heating systems consist of quick flash steam heat exchangers 
which do not provide for the storage of hot water in St. Mary’s Tower and in Main.  HVI has a hot water 
heater/boiler. Water is circulated and returned through a series of balanced re-circulating pumps. The 
operation of these pumps is checked by Bernhard with repairs performed on a priority basis as necessary. 
Water is consistently returned to the heat exchangers, where it is mixed with fresh incoming water as 
necessary to provide for proper make-up. The recirculation system prevents the occurrence of dead-end 
piping legs, which leads to the stagnation and bacterial growth.  
 
2. Cooling Towers: There are seven cooling towers in Main, 2 in HVI, and 3 in the MOB.  Bernhard maintains 
the boiler and pump in each building with 2 backup steam buildings.  Per Infection Prevention policy: Water 
testing of cooling towers will be done based on CDC recommendations. 
 
3. Emergency Showers and Eyewashes: Emergency showers and eyewash stations are flushed weekly as a part 
of the Plant Services preventive maintenance program.  
 
4. Ice Machine: See Ice Machines policy for cleaning and maintenance procedures.  
 
5. Condensate Trays: HVAC condensate trays and evaporator pans are routinely inspected and treated with 
algaecide tablets to prevent algae growth.  
 
6. Decorative Fountains: No interior fountains are present within the hospital environment. One exterior "slide" 
fountain is located adjacent to the front lobby and main entrance.  One exterior fountain is located outside the 
Chapel.  Fountains are limited in aerosolization by its design. Water is treated with chlorine and changed 
regularly.  
 
7. The sinks/showers on all floors have a maximum water temperature of 120°F. 
 
 
  19 
 
20 
 
21 
 
22 
 
23 
 
24 
 
25 
 
26 
 
27 
 
28 
 
29 
 
30 
 
31 
 
32 
 
