eeg 01 1 
Departmental Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Neurophysiology 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Operational 
Subject: Services and Operation  
Date of Origination: May 9, 2007 Supersedes: EEG/CL/001-019 
                     EEG/OP/001 to 014 
Date of Last Revision: Serial Code:  EEG-01 
Date of Last Review:  Mar 9 2010  
 
 
Purpose:  
 
The purpose of this policy is to outline the services provided by the Neurophysiology department and the 
operation of this department. 
 
Policy:  
 
The neurophysiology department will be open Monday through Friday 0700-1700, excluding 
weekends and holidays.  There will be a technician on-call during all off duty hours.  Patient Care 
Services and the PBX operators can contact the on-call technician.  To initiate a call back of a technician  
the order for the test must be written as; STAT, ASAP, Call technician out, or specify that the test must  
be complete by a certain time. 
 
Neurophysiology provides both inpatient and outpatient services.  All outpatients must be registered by  
outpatient registration/admissions prior to service being provided.  In all instances no testing will be  
performed without a verified order. 
 
For inpatients, all routine tests ordered prior to 1600 on normal working days will be completed the same  
day.  Other tests that are not STAT will be completed by the following working day. 
 
The Neuromedial Center May utilize OLOLRMC neurodiagnostic equipment while monitoring Neuro - 
Surgical cases.  The Neuromedical Center is responsible for ensuring proper competency of he  
technicians and all technical support relating to these cases and the equipment involved. 
 
Procedure:  
 
The Neurophysiology Department Performs all testing in accordance with OLOL policies, procedures,  
manufacturer recommendations and in accordance with the American Society for Electro -Neuro- 
Diagnostic Technicians. The following tests are performed by this department: 
 
EEG 
Long Term Epilepsy Monitoring 
Intra-operative monitoring 
Visual Evoked Response (VER) 
Brainstem Auditory Evoked Response (BAER) 
Posterior Tibular/Peroneal Lumbar Somatosensory Evoked Potential (Lower SSEP) 
Median Nerve Somatosensory Evoked Potential (Upper SSEP) 
Electrical Cerebral Inactivity 
Hyperventilation Provocation 
Photonic Stimulation 
 