 
Policies and Procedures Manual  
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Neurophysiology 
Subject: Services and Operation 
Date of Origination: May 9, 2007 Supersedes: EEG/CL/001-019  
Date of Last Revision: July 15, 2020   EEG/OP/001-014 
Date of Last Review:  July 15, 2020 Serial Code: EEG-01 
         
PURPOSE:  
The purpose of this policy is to outline the services provided by the Neurophysiology department 
and the operation of this department. 
 
POLICY: 
I. Neurophysiology provides both inpatient and outpatient services for patients of any age.  
All outpatients must be registered by outpatient registration/admissions prior to service 
being provided. Prior to all testing, the order must be verified by the technician. 
II. The neurophysiology department will be open Monday through Friday from 0700-1630, 
excluding holidays, and from 0800-1200 on the weekend at main campus, and Monday 
through Friday from 0800-1630 at Children’s Hospital campus.  There will be a 
technician on-call during all off duty hours.  For after hours, the technician will come out 
to complete STAT EEG only. The EEG tech will be called out by the respiratory 
supervisor at each campus.  The supervisor should be contacted at 225-202-4578 for main 
campus and 225-281-3961 for Children’s Hospital campus. At main campus, routine 
studies ordered before noon on Saturday and Sunday will be completed within 24 hours.  
III. All EEGs ordered after regular hours as stated in I and II will be completed the following 
normal business day unless it is ordered STAT.  All STAT EEGs will follow the 
guidelines as established in policy EEG/CL/018.  
IV. To initiate a call back of a technician the order for the test must be written as STAT, at 
which time would follow policy EEG/CL/018. 
V. For inpatient, all routine tests ordered prior to 1600 on normal business days will be 
completed the same day.  Other tests that are not STAT will be completed the following 
working day. EEGs may also be interpreted by the consulting neurologist if different than 
the selected neurologist to interpret. All pediatric EEGs will be interpreted by the 
pediatric neurology group.  
VI. Carotid Studies are to be read by the neurohospitalist on duty that week. If there are any 
studies that have not been interpreted by the end of the week, those studies will be placed 
in the Medical Director’s designated box for review.  
VII. VER and other EP studies are routine and will be done during the week of normal 
business hours unless special arrangements are made.   
VIII. ECI (“brain death”) studies will be communicated by the EEG technician to the 
appropriate neurologist on duty for the week.  These studies are considered time sensitive, but will not be ordered as STAT.  However, will be given priority to other 
routine studies.  
IX. Pediatric EEG will include hyperventilation and photic stimulation, and all EEGs will 
include video.  The process for this procedure will be as follows: 
a. The EEG electrodes will be set up, and the EEG will run for a minimum of 2 minutes 
to determine a baseline.  
b. If the patient is greater than 2 years old, the technician will instruct the patient to 
hyperventilate by breathing fast and deep for three minutes.  Contraindications for 
hyperventilation includes patients diagnosed with sickle cell anemia and cardiac 
conditions. Hold test for an outpatient asthmatic child that carries inhaler with him. 
Hyperventilation will not be performed if contraindications exist.  
c. The normal EEG, without hyperventilation, will then be ran for a minimum of 90 
seconds.  
d. The technician will then turn the photic stimulator on for patients greater than 2 years 
old, this excludes any patient in the intensive care unit. If the child is inconsolable 
and the artifact cannot be reduced, then the photic stimulation will not be completed.  
e. The technician will make notes of the patients status on the EEG for reasons that any 
part of the study (hyperventilation or photic) cannot be completed as normal. 
 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
I. The neurophysiology department will perform all testing in accordance with OLOL 
policies, manufacturer recommendations and in accordance with the American Society 
for Electro-Neuro-Diagnostic Technicians while under the direction of the Medical 
Director for EEG.  
II. The following studies are services provided by the neurophysiology department: 
a. EEG 
b. Long Term Epilepsy Monitoring 
c. Intra-operative monitoring 
d. Visual Evoked Response (VER) 
e. Brainstem Auiditory Evoked Response (BAER) 
f. Posterior Tibular 
g. Median Nerve Somatosensory Evoked Potential (Upper SSEP) 
h. Electrical Cerebral Inactivity 
i. Hyperventilation Provocation 
j. Photic Stimulation 