 
Policies and Procedures Manual  
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Neurophysiology 
Subject: Services and Operation 
Date of Origination: May 9, 2007 Supersedes: EEG/CL/001-019  
Date of Last Revision: February 28, 2024   EEG/OP/001-014 
Date of Last Review:  February 28, 2024 Serial Code: EEG-01 
         
PURPOSE:  
The purpose of this policy is to outline the services provided by the Neurophysiology department 
and the operation of this department. 
 
POLICY: 
I. Neurophysiology provides both inpatient and outpatient services for patients of any age.  
All outpatients must be registered by outpatient registration/admissions prior to service 
being provided. Prior to all testing, the order must be verified by the technician. 
II. The neurophysiology department will be open Monday through Friday 0730-1600, and 
from 0800-1200 on the weekend and holidays.  There will be a technologist on-call 
during all off-duty hours.  For after hours, the technologist will come out to complete 
STAT EEG only.  All routine studies ordered before noon on Saturday and Sunday and 
on holidays will be completed the same day, unless specified otherwise by the neurologist 
III. All EEGs ordered after regular hours as stated in I and II will be completed the following 
normal business day unless it is ordered STAT.  All STAT EEGs will follow the 
guidelines as established in policy EEG/CL/018.  
IV. To initiate a call back of a technologist the order for the test must be written as STAT, at 
which time would follow policy EEG/CL/018. 
V. For inpatient, all routine tests ordered prior to 1600 on normal business days will be 
completed the same day.  Other tests that are ordered after 1600 that are not STAT will 
be completed by the following business day. EEGs may also be interpreted by the 
consulting neurologist if different than the selected neurologist to interpret. All pediatric 
EEGs will be interpreted by the pediatric neurology group.  
VI. Carotid Studies are to be read by the EEG Lab director.  
VII. VER and other EP studies are routine and will be done during the week of normal 
business hours unless special arrangements are made.   
VIII. ECI (“brain death”) studies will be communicated by the EEG technologist to the 
appropriate neurologist on duty for the week. These studies are considered time sensitive 
and will be given priority to other routine studies.  
IX. Pediatric EEG will include hyperventilation and photic stimulation unless 
contraindications exist.  The process for this procedure will be as follows: 
a. The EEG electrodes will be set up, and the EEG will run for a minimum of 2 minutes 
to determine a baseline.  b. If the patient is greater than 2 years old, the technologist will instruct the patient to 
hyperventilate by breathing fast and deep for three minutes.  Contraindications for 
hyperventilation includes patients diagnosed with sickle cell anemia and cardiac 
conditions. The technologist will also hold the HV test for an outpatient asthmatic 
child that carries inhaler with him. Hyperventilation will not be performed if 
contraindications exist.  
c. The normal EEG, without hyperventilation, will then be ran for a minimum of 90 
seconds.  
d. The technologist will then turn the photic stimulator on for patients greater than 6 
months old. If the child is inconsolable and the artifact cannot be reduced, then  
photic stimulation will not be completed.  
e. The technologist will make notes of the patient’s status on the EEG for reasons that 
any part of the study (hyperventilation or photic) cannot be completed as normal. 
 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
I. The neurophysiology department will perform all testing in accordance with OLOL 
policies, manufacturer recommendations and in accordance with the American Society 
for Electro-Neuro-Diagnostic Technologists while under the direction of the Medical 
Director for EEG.  
II. The following studies are services provided by the neurophysiology department: 
a. EEG 
b. Long Term Epilepsy Monitoring 
c. Intra-operative monitoring 
d. Visual Evoked Response (VER) 
e. Median Nerve Somatosensory Evoked Potential (Upper SSEP) 
f. Electrical Cerebral Inactivity 
g. Hyperventilation Provocation 
h. Photic Stimulation 
 