 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Neurophysiology 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Clinical 
Subject: Stat EEG 
Date of Origination: September 9, 2009 Supersedes:   
Date of Last Revision: May 23, 2023    
Date of Last Review:  May 23, 2023 Serial Code: EEG/CL-18 
         
Purpose:  
The purpose of this policy is to establish the requirements for obtaining a Stat EEG during 
standard business hours, after hours, and on a holiday. This policy will also define what 
constitutes a Stat EEG order. 
Policy: 
I. Hours of Operation 
 
A. EEG Standard Business Hours: 
a. Monday – Friday: 7:30 AM through 4:00 PM 
b. Saturday – Sunday: 8:00 AM through 12:00 PM 
c. Christmas Day, New Year’s Day, Good Friday, July 4th, 
Labor Day, and Thanksgiving: 8:00 AM through 12:00 PM 
 
B. EEG After Hours:  
a. Monday – Friday: 4:00 PM through 7:30 AM 
b. Saturday – Sunday: 12:00 PM through 8:00 AM 
c. Christmas Day, New Year’s Day, Good Friday, July 4th, 
Labor Day, and Thanksgiving: 12:00 PM through 8:00 AM 
 
II. Indications and Non-Indications 
 
A. Absolute Indication of Stat EEG 
The only legitimate and universally accepted indication for a Stat EEG is to evaluate 
the possibility of non-obvious status epilepticus or nonconvulsive status epilepticus 
(NCSE) because this type may in itself be harmful to the brain and affects prognosis. 
To justify a stat EEG, there should be a reasonable suspicion for NCSE, that is, not 
every patient with coma or unresponsiveness should be suspected of being in 
nonconvulsive status. 
 
 
 
 
 B. Other Indications Constituting a Stat EEG 
a. Management of status epilepticus. 
b. After treatment for seizure or status epilepticus, when the patient fails to wake up 
in the expected amount of time, if it is not explained by sedative medications 
(e.g., high-dose benzodiazepines).  
c. There is no clear underlying process (e.g., anoxic, or metabolic encephalopathy, 
stroke, or subarachnoid hemorrhage) that explains the coma or mental status 
changes. In this situation, there are often clinical clues, such as abnormal 
movements suggestive of seizure activity (muscle twitches or clonic jerking).  
d. For patients who are pharmacologically paralyzed. 
 
C. Following are not indications for STAT EEG 
a. The patient had a seizure and is recovering.  
b. The patient is clinically seizing.  
c. Abnormal mental status or coma that is readily explained (e.g., stroke, 
subarachnoid hemorrhage, intracerebral hemorrhage, or traumatic brain injury)  
d. Confirmation of brain death  
e. The patient needs to be discharged. 
 
III. Ordering a Stat EEG 
 
A. If a Stat EEG is ordered after hours: 
a. The attending physician inputs a Stat EEG order. 
b. The attending physician will contact neurology for approval of Stat EEG. 
c. Within the EEG order set, it will prompt the physician to select “yes” or “no” if 
neurology approved the Stat order. 
d. Once neurology has been contacted by the ordering physician, the on-call 
neurologist will contact the charge respiratory supervisor. 
e. The respiratory supervisor will contact the EEG technologist. 
f. The EEG technologist will notify neurology of completion. 
 
B. If a Stat EEG is ordered during business hours: 
a. The technologist will be notified via the EPIC input process and will perform the 
STAT within 2-hours from the order input time. 
b. If needed, the technologist can be contacted via office phone. 
c. The EEG technologist will notify neurology of completion. 
 
 
 
 
  
IV. Interpreting and Reporting: 
a. Urgent interpretation by a qualified neurophysiologist or neurologist should be 
prioritized. Reporting physician must read EEG within 1 hour of the study, 
preferably before disconnecting.  
b. Interpreters should promptly communicate findings of critical clinical 
significance, including seizures or emergent neurological conditions, to the 
ordering healthcare provider. 
c. Prelim report should be put on the same day of the study and comprehensive 
reports should be generated within 24 hours of the study including documenting 
key findings, clinical correlations, and recommendations for further management 
or intervention. 
 