 1 
MENINGOCOCCAL EXPOSURE EMPLOYEE INFORMATION 
 
 
 
Transmission of Neisseria meningitidis to hospital personnel taking care of patients with meningococcemia, 
meningococcal meningitis, or meningococcal lower respiratory infection is uncommon. 
 
Antibiotic prophylaxis (the taking of a specific antibiotic to minimize the risk of contracting this infection) is 
indicated for the following groups of people: 
 
1. Household contacts; parents and siblings 
2. Hospital personnel who intubated or administered mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. 
3. Hospital personnel who had intensive direct contact with respiratory secretions and who did 
not use proper protective precautions. 
 
CONTRAINDICATIONS:  
 
1. A history of previous allergic reaction to any of the prophylactic medications is a contraindication. 
Please notify ECU physician of any allergies. 
 
 2. Pregnant employees should report their condition to Employee Health and the ECU physician.  
Assessment will be provided in conjunction with their personal physician. 
 
OTHER PRECAUTIONS: 
 
 1. Rifampin may decrease the effectiveness of anticoagulant therapy of the Coumadin type.  If 
employee is on Coumadin this should be reported to the assessment nurse. 
 
 2. Rifampin may impair the effectiveness of oral contraceptives (birth control pills).  Alternate 
contraceptive methods may need to be considered. 
 
 3. Urine, feces, saliva, sputum, sweat and tears maybe colored red-orange by Rifampin.  Soft contact 
lenses maybe permanently stained. 
 
OTHER ADVERSE REACTIONS/SIDE EFFECTS: 
 
 1. Gastrointestinal disturbances such as heartburn, epigastric distress, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, gas, 
cramp, and diarrhea have been reported and are common in some patients receiving Rifampin. 
 
 2. Headaches, drowsiness, fatigue, menstrual disturbances, ataxia, dizziness, inability to concentrate, 
mental confusion, visual disturbances, muscular weakness, fever, pains in the extremities and 
generalized numbness have also been noted. 
 
 3. Hypersensitivity reactions have been reported.  Pruritus, urticaria, rash, pemphigoid reaction, 
eosinophilia, sore mouth/tongue and exudative conjunctivitis may occur in some allergic reactions. 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
 1. Physicians Desk Reference (PDR) 
   Rifadin (Merrell Dow) 
 
 2. Control and Prevention of Meningococcal Disease (1997, February 14) MMWR  Vol 46, No. RR-5. 