Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Employee Health 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: I 
Subject:  Employee Blood and Body Fluid Exposures  Section:  
Date of Origination:  September 4, 1998 Supersedes:  IC5006 
Date of Last Revision:  October 28, 2015 Serial Code:  EH1006 
Date of Last Review:    February 7, 2019                                                
_______________________________________________________________________ 
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish a uniform system, that is immediate and confidential, Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center has developed this policy and procedure for the prompt reporting, 
evaluation, counseling, treatment, and follow-up of occupational exposures that may place health 
care workers at risk for acquiring any bloodborne infection, including HIV, Hepatitis B, and 
Hepatitis C.  This system is part of the Exposure Control Plan and complies with the incident 
reporting requirements mandated by OSHA. 
 
POLICY: 
 
All exposures to blood and body fluids must be reported immediately and receive medical 
evaluation. 
For OLOL Employees and MDs: 
When the exposure occurs, the employee should notify their supervisor immediately, call 
Lake Line Direct (765-5253) to speak to the Nurse Navigator, complete a Safety Event 
form, and contact Employee Health department on the next business day for follow-up.   
For Non-OLOL Employees: Refer to the non-employee blood and body fluid policy 
(EH 1007). 
 
1. Healthcare workers (HCW*) sustaining exposures should immediately: 
a) For an eye splash, flush the exposed area with water, utilizing the eye wash 
station if nearby. Dispose of contacts. 
b) For a needlestick, cut, or splash to non-intact skin or mucous membrane, clean 
area with soap and water. There is no evidence that the use of antiseptics for 
wound care or expressing fluid by squeezing the wound further reduces the risk of 
HIV transmission.  However, the use of antiseptics is not contraindicated.  The 
application of caustic agents (bleach) or the injection of antiseptics or 
disinfectants into the wound is not recommended.  
 
2.  Healthcare workers are to immediately notify their supervisor.  
Employees are educated in Orientation and during ongoing job training, to report 
occupational exposures immediately after they occur, particularly because post-exposure 
prophylaxis is most likely to be effective if implemented as soon after the exposure as 
possible. 
 
3. Healthcare workers are to call Lake Line Direct (765-5253).  
 Team Members will need to have information about any patient involved in the exposure 
such as MR#, DOB, and location. The patient involved should remain in the facility to 
allow for appropriate testing if indicated. 
 The incident will be evaluated by the Lake Line Direct nurse navigator using current 
CDC recommendations and algorithms. A determination will be made about the 
significance of the exposure.  The source of the exposure is identified and tested for the 
presence of HIV antibodies. If the HIV antibody test is positive and the exposure is 
significant, then the nurse navigator will initiate the anti-retroviral prophylaxis process. 
All other lab tests on source patient and employee will be ordered by the navigator, 
processed and results released to the Employee Health Department for communication to 
the exposed worker.  These records are maintained confidentially with the safety event 
report.  These test results will not be disclosed or reported to anyone except the 
employee, without the employee’s written consent or when required by law.  These 
records will be maintained for the duration of employment plus 30 years in accordance 
with OSHA regulations. 
 
If it is determined the event requires medical evaluation for visible injury (suturing, 
wound care), the healthcare worker will be directed to the Emergency Department. 
 
4. Complete a Safety Event Report. 
     
 
5. Contact Employee Health (765-8750, Option 9) on the next business day for follow-
up. 
Employee Health will continue the employee follow-up until all testing and treatment is 
completed. 
 A Healthcare Professional's Written Opinion shall be provided to the employee within 15 
days of the completion of the evaluation.  This opinion will be limited to whether 
Hepatitis B vaccine is indicated for an employee and if the employee has received such 
vaccine (see EH1006e). 
 The team member is informed of maintaining confidentiality on the infectious status of 
the source individual. 
 
 
 
 
 
Exposure Management  
 
See Blood and Body Fluid Exposure Process Flow Chart 
 
Evaluation of exposure 
The exposure will be evaluated for potential to transmit HIV based on the type of body substance 
involved and the route and severity of the exposure.  Exposure to blood, fluid containing visible 
blood, or other potentially infectious fluid (including semen, vaginal secretions; and 
cerebrospinal, synovial, pleural, peritoneal, pericardial, and amniotic fluids) or tissue through a 
percutaneous injury (needlestick or other penetrating sharps-related event) or through contact 
with a mucous membrane are situations that pose a risk for bloodborne transmission and require 
further evaluation. 
 
For skin exposures, follow-up is indicated if it involves direct contact with a body fluid listed 
above and there is evidence of compromised skin integrity (dermatitis, abrasion, or open wound). 
However, if the contact is prolonged or involves a large area of intact skin, post-exposure follow-
up may be considered on a case-by-case basis or if requested by the employee. 
 For human bites, the clinical evaluation must consider possible exposure of both the bite 
recipient and the person who inflicted the bite.  If a bite results in blood exposure to either person 
involved, postexposure follow-up, including consideration of Post-Exposure Prophylaxis (PEP), 
should be provided. 
 
When the employee reports a significant occupational exposure and identifies that they have had 
either: 
 
• an exposure to a known HIV-infected patient; or 
 
• a high-risk exposure (e.g., deep injury with large diameter hollow needle previously in source 
patient’s vein or artery, especially involving an injection of source-patient’s blood) or an 
increased risk exposure to a larger volume of blood from a source patient whose HIV status 
is unknown or from an unknown source patient, 
 
The post-exposure prophylaxis procedure will be activated.  Post exposure prophylaxis should be 
initiated promptly, preferably within 1 to 2 hours post-exposure.   
 
If the HIV serostatus of the source person is unknown, the source person should be informed of 
the incident and tested for serologic evidence of HIV infection. HIV consent is not required from 
the source patient following an employee occupational exposure.  Confidentiality of the source 
patient will be maintained at all times. 
 
HIV-antibody testing of the exposure source shall be performed as soon as possible.  The rapid 
HIV-antibody test will be utilized for source patient testing. 
 
No cost will be incurred by the source patient for the Hepatitis and HIV testing.  No test results 
or any information concerning the testing of the source patient will be placed in the medical 
record of the patient.  If the HIV test results of the source patient are positive, and Hepatitis test 
results of the source patient are positive, and this information is not already in the patient’s 
medical record, Employee Health will notify the patients’ physician.  The physician will be 
responsible for notifying the source patient and providing any post-test counseling and follow-
up. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attachments: Blood/Body Fluid Exposure Process Flow 
 
 
 
 
 