ECLS-012  
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: RMC Emergency Department, 
T-Pod Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for RMC Emergency 
Department, 102-10314-2453 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 RMC 
Emergency Department 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: July 2018 Review Date:  
Revision Date: 1/25/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001)) to guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated EXIT signs are located by T-Pod Bed 15, T-Pod Bed 2 and T-Pod Bed 14. 
• No adjacent smoke compartments 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• The ED tech, nurse, or designee will clear the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving them 
to any available non-patient room.  
• The ED tech, nurse, or designee closes doors. ECLS-012  
Page 2 of 2 
• The ED tech, nurse, or designee confirms automatic fire doors closed. 
• The ED tech, nurse, or designee moves patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety.” 
• Available staff or designee prevents people from using elevator. 
• The ED tech, nurse, or designee assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities. 
• The ED charge nurse, nurse supervisor, or delegated staff member ensures all employees are 
accounted for. 
• The ED charge nurse, nurse supervisor, delegated staff member ensures all patients are 
accounted for. 
• The ED tech, nurse, or designee ensures each room is empty.   
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off: 
• Medical gas shut off valves are located outside the exit by T-Pod Bed 15 and across the hall from 
T-Pod Bed 12. The ED charge nurse and nurse supervisor have been trained to shut off the gas 
valves. The ED staff are trained to know who has authority to shut off the gas valves.  
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations): 
• Stretchers available on the designated hallway and wheelchairs located in the ED ambulatory 
entrance may be used for patient transporting during emergencies.   
• Patients in the ED are on stretchers or ambulatory. Assistance needed to evacuate includes 
stretchers and wheelchairs listed above.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguishers are located across the hall from T-Pod Bed 15, across the hall from T-Pod bed 
11 and next to T-Pod Bed 1. 
• Manual fire pull is located across the hall from T-Pod bed 4.  
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• All ventilators, BiPAP machines, light sources and monitors need to be turned off.  
• Combustible/flammable/oxidizing products used and stored include (1) hydrogen peroxide, (2) 
O2 tanks, (3) Sani Cloth Bleach, (4) Super Sani Cloths  
• Any patient located in the ED can be a special patient population including non-ambulatory.  
• Badge access required to enter department’s break room. Security has access who will need to 
assist The Code Red Team.  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is to exit the T-Pod located by Bed 14 into the back hall 
and take an immediate right to the HVI tower.  
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is to exit the T-Pod located by Bed 15 into the back 
hall and take and immediate left towards the Plaza.  
• T-Pod will only have horizontal evacuation. 