ECLS-012 (ENDOSCOPY/GI LAB 6216) 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: ENDOSCOPY/GI LAB Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Endoscopy/GI Lab 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 6216 
Endoscopy/GI Lab 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/14/2017 Review Date: 06/03/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions that 
indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present by 
addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s written 
Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction of unit 
manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide the 
preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated EXIT signs are located at the (1) end of the Radiology hall, (2) near ENDOSCOPY/GI LAB 
supply room, (3) at the intersection of RADIOLOGY/SMA and ENDOSCOPY/GI LAB halls, (4) at 
intersection of ENDOSCOPY/GI LAB and main hall, and (5) near OR 21. 
• Adjacent Smoke Compartments are located near (1) ENDOSCOPY/GI LAB manager’s office, (2) 
SMAU, (3) down the two Radiology halls, and (4) entering the OR near suite 19. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• The Endoscopy techs or designee will clear the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving them to ECLS-012 (ENDOSCOPY/GI LAB 6216) 
Page 2 of 2 
supply room or storage nook on back hall. Stretchers will be placed inside supply room and or nurses 
station. 
• The Endoscopy techs or designee closes doors and windows. 
• The RN’s or designee confirms automatic fire doors closed. 
• The RN’s or designee move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an 
emergency exercise to ensure your safety.” 
• The Endoscopy techs or designee prevents people from using elevator. 
• The RN’s or designee assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with sensory or 
mobility disabilities. 
• The nurse manager or designee ensures all employees are accounted for. 
• The nurse manager or designee ensures all patients are accounted for 
• The nurse manager or designee ensures each room is empty.  
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
Medical gas shut off valves are located outside of ENDO 1, ENDO 2, and ENDO 5 (MOR 20). 
ENDOSCOPY/GI LAB staff have been trained to know who has authority to shut them off. (Anyone can turn 
off the valve after the NURSE MANAGER or designee, House Manager, or Respiratory authorizes shutting off 
the medical gas. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments (horizontal 
and vertical evacuations) 
• Stretchers are available on the unit for patient transporting during emergencies and are stored on the 
hallways. 
• Patients in the ENDOSCOPY/GI LAB will all be on stretchers. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
•  Fire extinguishers (2) are located near the intersections of ENDOSCOPY/GI LAB hall and 
RADIOLOGY halls. 
• NO FIRE PULLS are located in these areas. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• All anesthesia machines, light sources, monitors, and endoscope washers need to be turned off. 
• Combustible/flammable/oxidizing products used and stored include (1)hydrogen peroxide, (2) 70% 
alcohol, (3) Aldahol (high level disinfectant), Steris System 1E S40 concentrate, (4) Super Sani Cloths, 
(5) Sani Cloth Bleach 
• All patients in this area will be on stretchers. 
• Badge access required to enter department near nurse manager’s office. Key pad entry to supply room 
door.   
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is to exit ENDO suites into main hall and take immediate right 
out to parking garage. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is to exit ENDO suites into main hall and take immediate left 
out to ER parking area. 
•  ENDOSCOPY/GI LAB will only have horizontal evacuation. 
 
 