¥ FRANCISCAN

MISSIONARIES

OF OUR LADY

HEALTH SYSTEM
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: SUBJECT: Point-of-Service Payment
Patient Access Policy for Insured Patients
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 07/2013 Pages 4
Reimb.- Point of Service Collections/Amt of Collections
EFFECTIVE DATE: February 1, 2014 SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:
REVISED DATE: .11/9/15; 12/1/16; 6/8/18 FIN.04.01
Approved by: &W %:‘ éﬁ/df_
SCOPE:

Applies to Patient Access associates at FMOL-HS facilities and its subsidiaries.

PURPOSE:

To establish standard processes for point-of-service patient collections on insured patients.
Collecting at the time of service reduces overall costs of collection, increases cash flow,
reduces days in accounts receivable, and reduces the volume of bad debt expense.

POLICY:

FMOL-HS staff will make appropriate efforts to collect from patients/guarantors deductibles,
co-payments, co-insurance, and prior balances at or before the time of service, whenever
possible. When pre-service collection attempts are not possible, staff will pursue point-of-
service payments prior to patient discharge from the facility.

e [or scheduled services, Patient Access staff must ensure that patients are aware of
their financial responsibilities at or before the time service is rendered and collect
payment which may be due on the patient’s portion. Patients/guarantors will be
expected to either pay their portion in full or establish payment arrangements,
including an initial deposit. Payment arrangements are subject to management
approval and should take into consideration amount owed and payment history.

o Lxception: Payment in full is expected at or before the time of service for flat-
rate or packaged pricing procedures, e.g. plastic surgery, bariatrics, calcium
scoring, concussion baseline screenings, etc...

o Non-urgent procedures may be rescheduled if acceptable payment terms
are not reached.

o If the ordering physician indicates the scheduled service is medically urgent
and cannot be rescheduled due to lack of payment arrangement, services will
proceed without an upfront payment. In these cases, collection will be
attempted post service, while the patient is still in-house whenever possible.

e For unscheduled, non-emergent outpatient services, Patient Access staff will inform
patients of their estimated out-of-pocket responsibility at the time of registration.


Patients will be expected to pay a 50% deposit toward the out-of-pocket estimate or
establish payment arrangements, including an initial deposit. Payment arrangements
are subject to management approval. 1f the ordering physician indicates that the
procedure is medically urgent and cannot be postponed, the patient will be allowed to
proceed without making a payment.

For unscheduled, non-emergent observation or inpatient services, Patient Access
staff will inform patients of their estimated out-of-pocket responsibility prior to patient
discharge from the facility. Patients will be requested to pay a deposit toward the out-
of-pocket estimate.

For emergency department services, patients will not be approached for money until
a medical screening has been conducted and the patient determined, by the physician
or physician extender, to be in stable condition.

When a payment plan is approved, the table below will be used to establish payment
amounts. Deviations from these minimum payment guidelines must be approved by
facility management and documented in account notes.

PAYMENT PLAN GUIDELINES
AMOUNT OWED PAYMENT ARRANGEMENTS
$50 or less Full Payment (no pmt plan option)
$51 - $200 2 monthly payments
$201 - $500 4 monthly payments
$501 - $750 6 monthly payments
$751 - $1,000 10 monthly payments
$1,001 —2,000 12 monthly payments
$2.001 - $3,000 15 monthly payments
$3,001 - $4,999 18 monthly payments
>=$5,000 Consult with Patient Access Manager or
Director


PROCEDURE:

Scheduled Services. Protocol is as follows:

1.

[o5)

Payment in Full: The patient/guarantor will first be asked for payment in full.

Down-Payment (minimum of 50%): If the patient cannot pay in full, the Patient Access
Representative (PAR) is to request down-payment, with the minimum being 50%.
(Payment arrangements for the remaining balance will be established and documented, in
accordance with payment plan guidelines in the table above.)

Payment Plan: If the PAR is unable to obtain at least a 50% down payment, ¢
supervisor/manager is required (o intervene to review and approve alternative
arrangements if appropriate. The Patient Access/Pre-Access Supervisor or Manager
may offer the long-term payment plan, based on individual circumstances. The 1st
month’s payment is due at the time of service. These payment terms apply to employees,
as well as non-employees.

Unscheduled, Non-Emergent Outpatient Services. PAR’s will follow the same protocol as

with scheduled procedures (see above), at the time of service.

Medically urgent protocol: If the physician indicates that the case is medically urgent, the

Patient Access team member must notify his/her manager, who will consult the local Patient
Access Director, VPMA, or Administrative Council member for guidance. Local facility
guidelines will be followed. Cases may be allowed to proceed without payment.

Unscheduled, Non-Emergent Observation or [npatient Services

I.

[

The facility will establish a process to identify unscheduled/direct admissions to inpatient
and observation units. This process will be performed at least daily.

A Patient Access Rep or Financial Counselor will visit the patient room to explain the
patient’s insurance benefits, inform the patient of their financial obligations, and obtain a
deposit toward out-of-pocket monies owed.

Prior to entering a patient room, the Patient Access Rep or Financial Counselor will
obtain permission from the nurse manager or designee to ensure that the patient’s clinical
condition would not be compromised by a financial visit.

The Patient Access Rep or Financial Counselor will ask the patient for permission before
discussing financial information if others are present in the room.

Emergency Room Services.

1.

[

Patients will not be approached for money until a medical screening has been conducted
and the patient determined to be in stable condition.

The PAR will attempt to collect out-of-pocket monies owed after the medical screening
has been conducted and permission has been obtained from the physician, physician
extender, nurse manager, or designee. NOTE: In the EPIC environment, the clinical
team may signal its permission via the electronic tracker board.

The facility will establish an effective discharge planning process in the ED that enables
Patient Access associates to communicate with patients/guarantors about their financial
responsibilities.

¢ Up-front Payments/Deposits. The patient’s insurance and type of service will dictate the up-
front payment amount that should be pursued for the current service. The PAR should
adhere to the following table:

Up-Front Payments / Deposit Amounts

Scenario Up-Front Deposit
Patient has only one insurance and co-Insurance
can be reasonably determined in advance (using Collect co-pay, deductible, & co-insurance.

payment/price estimation software)

Collect the patient’s deductible and co-pay,
Patient has only one insurance and co-insurance | plus the standard deposit amount as
cannot reasonably be determined in advance. established by the facility’s CFO.

$0, unless insurances do not coordinate

Patient has two or more insurances benefits. In this case, collect co-pay &
deductible but no co-insurance.

Worker’s Compensation $0

Traditional or managed Medicaid 30

Request payment from patient based on
Motor vehicle accident or other 3*-party liability | his/her health insurance coverage (non-
governmental insurance only). If patient has
| Medicare or Medicaid, collect $0.

Flat-rate or packaged pricing procedures, e.g.
plastic surgery, bariatric surgery, etc... Payment in full is required.

¢ Uninsured/Underinsured Patients. Refer to the FMOL Financial Assistance policy.
Determination of financial assistance approval will be based on the family income (and
assets) as a percentage of the federal poverty guidelines.


