i
FRANCISCAN MISSIONARIES OF OUR LADY

HEALTH SYSTEM

RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: SUBJECT:

Revenue Integrity Charge Entry, Charge Error Correction
and Daily Revenue Review

PAGES: REPLACES POLICY DATED:

2 New policy

EFFECTIVE DATE: | REVISION DATE: SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:
9/6/2013 FIN.04.004

APPROVED BY: /[ > DATE: /3 /- /o

SCOPE:

Applies to Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System, Inc. (“FMOLHS”) and its

wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively referred to herein as “Entity”) that
propose and adopt System wide policies.

PURPOSE:

To establish uniform guidelines for accurate charging, monitoring and error correction with adherence
to Regulatory and Compliance policies.


POLICY: All departments are responsible for their own charge entry, charge error corrections, and
for ensuring that their revenue is appropriately captured on a daily basis.
1.

Each department is responsible for documenting and implementing a charging and charge
reconciliation procedure. The procedure should outline the tasks involved in ensuring
accurate, complete and timely charging, daily revenue monitoring, and correction of charging
errors using the revenue and charging etror reports available.

Departmental Managers are responsible for ensuring that backup staff has been assigned to
perform charging, error correction, and daily review of revenue posted to the department
applicable and all cross training has been performed.

All charging activity should accurately reflect the services/products provided. A
service/product charged should never be submitted for a “similar” service/product. Charges
should be established prior to providing any new service/product by contacting the Revenue
Integrity department at least 3 weeks prior to the new service.

All charges should be entered on the day the service/product was provided. Late charges
must be charged no later than three (3) calendar days after the service/product was provided.
Regardless of the day service/product was charged, all departments must charge using the
actual date the service/product was provided.

Department late charges will be monitored by the Revenue Integrity Department and reported
to the appropriate Management personnel.


