1 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL 
  
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center  Manual: Business Office 
 Chapter:  
Subject:  Unidentified/Unposted Payments Section:  
Date of Origination:  May 1, 2014 Supersedes:   
Date of Last Revision: November 9, 2015 Serial Code: Fin.04.15 
Date of Last Review:  December 10, 2015  
 
 
 
POLICY 
 
It is the policy of FMOL to maintain Unidentified/Unposted payments account(s) as clearing 
accounts for payments received but unable to locate or post.  Every attempt will be made to 
clear the balances within the same month by locating and posting to the correct AR account.  
Any unidentified/unposted amounts remaining after month-end will be researched and 
cleared within 60 days of the payment posting date.   
 
PURPOSE  
 
To provide a standardized methodology of accounting for and locating unidentified/unposted 
payments and to appropriately relieve AR in a timely manner.  Increase customer satisfaction by 
reducing inappropriate statements and billings.   
 
PROCEDURE  
 
1. After all efforts are exhausted to locate unbalanced amounts by day-end, or if payments 
are received late in the day and unable to be posted the same day, any remaining 
amounts will be placed in the Unlocated or Unposted accounts.   
• Unlocated – Unable to identify AR account to post 
• Unposted – Unable to complete posting of funds received that day. 
2. Reconciliation - OLOL 
a) Move amount from unbalanced column to the unidentified/unposted column on 
the Reconciliation Spreadsheet. 
b) Post individual amounts to the unidentified/unposted accounts in Rhumba from 
the Reconciliation sheet with Payer and Deposit date indicators on each line 
item.  Each payment item posted must match the amount listed in the Recon 
sheet 
c) If unable to post due to unidentified account, post to unposted in Rumba 
d) On the 15th and the last day of the month, after the designated cutoff time, 
Unidentified/unposted Oncology amounts must be adjusted to zero using the 
appropriate Oncology’s to CDM code. After Oncology account is adjusted to 
zero, no more funds can be placed in this account. 
 
 
 2 
 
PROCESS: 
 
1.  Resolving Unidentified/Unposted accounts 
a) Obtain listing of detail transactions weekly to the unidentified accounts 
b) Enter “absolute value” for each transaction amount and sort so that all same 
credit and debit amounts are listed together. 
c) Identify single transactions to be cleared from the unidentified accounts 
d) After a minimum of 3 (three) attempts to contact patient or payer by phone, 
and 1 (one) time by mail, amounts will be refunded along with appropriate 
communication.  Exceptions will be made for payments for which we are 
awaiting remits. 
e) Reconcile unidentified account(s) within 60 days. 
 
2. Each calendar month an account is established in the patient accounting information 
system for applying unidentified payments.  The account is established as follows: 
a. Patient Last Name: “Unidentified 
b. Patient First Name: “YYYYMM (i. e. 201512=December 2015) 
 
3. Establish an unidentified payment log using Excel to track the management of ALL 
unidentified payment by month of receipt.  At a minimum, record; 
a. Payer 
b. Check Number 
c. Check Date 
d. Check Amount 
e. Patient Name 
f. Dates of Service 
g. Comments 
h. Account Number (when identified) 
i. Post Date (when applied to the correct account) 
j. Amount Posted (to the correct account) 
4. Establish a network folder for the purpose of storing unidentified payment documentation 
by month of receipt (i.e. check copy and accompanying documentation). 
 
5. Upon receipt of payment, efforts are made to identify any and all related account(s) 
within one (1) business day of receipt. 
 
6. Post payment to the unidentified account for the calendar month. 
 
7. If successful in identifying an account, it is recommended that more than one staff 
member review the information and research the payment in an attempt to identify the 
correct patient account in the patient accounting information system(s). 
 
8. Contact the issuer of the check and request additional information. 
 3 
 
9. After all efforts have failed to identify the cash, poster will submit for refund to the issuer 
and return the payment with a cover letter indicating the inability to identify the proper 
account for posting. 
 
10. All unidentified account payments are to be refunded to the payer no later than the last 
business day of the month following the month of receipt of payment (i.e. May 2015 
receipt by the last business day of June 2015).  The unidentified account balance should 
be $0.00 (zero dollars). 
 
11. If unable to properly identify a payer, money should be refunded following the State of 
Louisiana escheat statutes. 
 
 