L FRANCISCAN

MISSIONARIES
OF OUR LADY
HEALTH SYSTEM
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: SUBJECT:
Revenue Cycle Financial Assistance
NUMBER OF PAGES: 14 REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE):
All previous Charity policies at all FMOLHS
hospitals
Original Date: June 28,2013 POLICY NUMBER:
Revised Date : June 2016 FIN.04.29

Effective Date: July 1,2016

POLICY OiTION/APPROVAL:
BY: CEO | APPROVAL DATE: b/l‘?/ /e

Authorized Signature
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center

SCOPE:

Applies to all emergency and other medically necessary care provided by FMOLHS Hospital
facilities, including all such care provided in the FMOLHS Hospital facilities by substantially
related entities. FMOLHS Hospital facilities include:

Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center
St. Francis Medical Center

Our Lady of Lourdes Regional Medical Center
St. Elizabeth Hospital

Our Lady of the Angels Hospital

Assumption Community Hospital

PURPOSE:

The purpose of this Financial Assistance Policy (FAP) is to specify:

Eligibility criteria for Financial Assistance in the form of free care;

How to apply for Financial Assistance;

How the Hospital calculates amounts charged to patients;

How the FAP is widely publicized within the community served by the Hospital;
What actions the Hospital may take in the event of non-payment; and
Compliance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations.

POLICY:

FMOLHS is committed to providing financial assistance to those who have healthcare needs
and are uninsured or underinsured, for medically necessary care based on their individual
financial situation. FMOLHS strives to ensure that the financial capacity of people who need
health care services does not prevent them from seeking or receiving care.

A. To determine whether an individual is eligible for Financial Assistance, the individual
must apply for Financial Assistance. This FAP describes how to apply, as'well as


specifies the eligibility criteria that an individual must satisfy to receive Financial
Assistance. The information and documentation required to be submitted as part of
the FAP application is also set out in this FAP.

. This FAP applies to all emergency and other medically necessary care provided by
FMOLHS Hospitals for the diagnosis and treatment of illness or injury. The Hospital
will determine whether a service is eligible for Financial Assistance. Services
specifically excluded include, but are not limited to, the following:

a. Care that is not medically necessary, including but not limited to
i. Cosmetic procedures, such as breast augmentation, abdomihoplasty,
Botox injections, blepharoplasty, chemical peels, skin tag removal,
dermal fillers, sclerotherapy, and dermatological laser treatments.
ii. Cosmetic dental procedures
iii. Bariatric surgery
iv. Circumcision
v. Genetic testing
vi. Hormone replacement therapy
vii. Stretta therapy

b. Personal items provided during an inpatient stay, e.g. guest trays, private
rooms that are not medically necessary.

c. Charges resulting from procedures that are not covered by third-party
insurance, despite being medically necessary, due to the patient’s failure to
follow insurance payer guidelines where a patient knowingly received services
in a non-contracted hospital.

d. Motor vehicle accidents where third-party liability is being pursued for
payment of hospital expenses (e.g., those involving patients with no health care
insurance).

C. Professional services provided by treating physicians, physician assistants, or

advanced practice clinicians in the Emergency Department and all other Hospital
departments, may or may not be covered by this FAP. A list of providers rendering
emergency and other medically necessary care in the Hospital facility is maintained in
a document separate from the FAP and is available on each FMOLHS Hospital’s
website. The website listings specify which providers are covered by this FAP and
which are not. Patients may request paper copies, free of charge, by calling the
Hospital’s main phone number and asking for the Financial Counseling department at
Our Lady of the Lake and the Admissions department at all other Hospitals. A listing
of websites, physical addresses, and phone numbers is located in Addendum A of this
policy.

. If a patient has potential payment resources such as, but not limited to, health
insurance or third-party settlement proceeds, the individual may not be eligible for
Financial Assistance.

. Financial Assistance is not considered to be a substitute for personal responsibility.
Patients are expected to cooperate with FMOLHS procedures for obtaining financial
assistance or other forms of payment, and to contribute to the cost of their care based
on their individual ability to pay. Individuals with the financial capacity to purchase
health insurance shall be encouraged to do so.

. If an FAP applicant is or may be eligible for funds from local, state, or federal
programs that cover some or all of the costs of health care services, the FAP applicant
is expected to apply for such programs before a determination of eligibility is made
under this FAP. Financial assistance is generally payer of last resort to all other
financial resources available to the patient including: insurance; government programs,
such as but not limited to VA benefits, Medicare, and Medicaid; third-party liability;
and personal assets, including existing liquid assets. The Hospital will provide
assistance to individuals in applying for government programs.

. The Hospital will not deny Financial Assistance under this FAP based on an applicant’s
failure to provide information or documentation that the Hospital does not specify in
this FAP or in the FAP application form. The Hospital will notify the individual in
writing of the decision on their eligibility under this FAP and the basis for the decision.

. Financial Assistance documentation obtained from patients will be secured; access to
this documentation will be limited to those essential to the Financial Assistance
process.

The actions the Hospital may take in the event of non-payment are described generally
in this FAP. The Hospital will make reasonable efforts to determine whether an
individual is eligible for assistance under this FAP before engaging in any
extraordinary collection action (ECA). Following a determination of FAP eligibility,
a FAP-eligible individual will not be charged more for emergency or other medically
necessary care than the Amounts Generally Billed (AGB) to individuals who have
insurance covering such care.

The Amounts Generally Billed (AGB) calculation will be performed annually for
each FMOLHS Hospital. Any needed change will be implemented within 120 days of
the calculation. The Hospital will limit the amounts that it charges for emergency or
other medically necessary care provided to individuals eligible for Financial Assistance
to the average amounts generally billed for commercially insured and Medicare
patients. AGB is determined by multiplying the gross charges for eligible care by an
AGB percentage. The AGB percentage is based on all claims allowed by Medicare and

private health insurers over a specified 12-month period, divided by the associated
gross charges for those claims. Written copies of the AGB percentage currently being
used may be obtained, free of charge, by calling the phone number in Appendix A for
the applicable Hospital facility.

K. Notification about FMOLHS financial assistance programs will be disseminated
through various means, which may include, but are not limited to, the publication of
notices in patient bills and by posting notices in emergency rooms and admissions
areas, and at other public places that FMOLHS may elect. FMOLHS also shall publish
and widely publicize on facility websites the following: this financial assistance
policy, a plain language summary of the policy, and the financial assistance
application. These documents shall be provided in the primary languages spoken by
limited-English proficiency populations served by each FMOLHS Hospital. Paper
copies of these documents will be provided to patients in the emergency room and
other admission areas upon request and by mail.

L. FMOLHS management and facilities shall comply with all other federal, sfate, and
local laws, rules, and regulations that may apply to activities conducted pursuant to
this Policy.

I. APPLICATION PROCESS

A. Completing, signing, and submitting an application for Financial Assistance, as well as
submitting the required documentation set out in this policy, is required in order to
determine if an individual qualifies for Financial Assistance. Applications are
available at all Admission Departments and on each Hospital’s website. See
Addendum A for a listing of websites, physical addresses, and telephone numbers for
each Hospital facility. Directions for returning the completed application are detailed in
the financial assistance application.

B. The availability of financial assistance will be publicized to patients at intake or
discharge. Financial Counselors will screen interested patients and assist in completing
the application for financial assistance. Financial Counselors are available in the
Hospital, at the Admissions Department, to assist in completing the application or
answering any questions in regard to this FAP. The Admissions Department of each
hospital can be found by following the clearly marked signage in the public pathways
at the Hospital. Hospital addresses can be found in Addendum A.

C. The patient or the patient’s guarantor are required to supply personal, financial, and
other documentation relevant to making a determination of financial need within thirty
(30) days of the request for assistance. The applicant must provide the requested
information for the patient, spouse, family members who reside together, and

dependents claimed on the same tax return. Applications not meeting these
conditions may be returned to the applicant or considered denied.

D. An uninsured person who fails to supply the information necessary for an accurate
determination shall be presumed to be able to pay the full charge for services rendered
and will be required to pay a deposit equal to gross charges times the AGB percentage
that applies to the Hospital where services will be rendered, or be rescheduled (in non-
emergency cases only). If the uninsured person has started but not completed the
financial assistance process, the uninsured person will be required to pay a non-
refundable Standard Deposit (sec Addendum D for Standard Deposits for each
Hospital) or be rescheduled when a deposit can be paid or information can be provided
to complete the FAP application (in non-emergency cases). NOTE: For services
rendered in provider-based physician clinics, a deposit equal to the AGB percentage
times gross charges will be used instead of the standard deposit.

E. Although applications may be denied if not completed within 30 days, the application

will be re-opened and reconsidered if the patient contacts us and requests
reconsideration within 240 days after post-discharge billing.

II. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE DETERMINATION

A. Tinancial assistance will be determined in accordance with procedures that involve an
individual assessment of financial need and may:

a. Include the use of external publically available data sources that provide
information on a patient’s or a patient’s guarantor’s ability to pay (such as credit
scoring);

b. Include reasonable efforts by FMOLHS to explore appropriate alternative sources
of payment and coverage from public and private payment programs, and to assist
patients to apply for such programs;

c. Take into account the patient’s available assets, and all other financial resources
available to the patient.

B. Verification of income is required for any financial assistance request. The following
documents must be provided:

a. A completed financial assistance application

b. Photo ID or legal ID

c. Most recent tax returns for the patient/guarantor, family members living in the
house, and dependents claimed on the patient’s/guarantor’s tax return. If
patient/guarantor is not required to file federal taxes (because of low income or no
income), a statement from the IRS is required.

II1.

d. Proof of income for the patient/guarantor, family members living in the house, and
dependents claimed on the patient’s/guarantor’s tax return. '
i. If employed: Last 3 paystubs, last 3 months’ bank statements, last available
W-2’s.
ii. If self-employed: Monthly income statement for self-employment or a copy
of general business ledger/business checking account summary.

iii. If not employed: a copy of benefit information from Social Security
disability, other Social Security income/benefits, 1099R, pension, public
assistance, worker’s compensation, trust fund, unemployment, military
support, child support, and alimony; public assistance checks; retirement
checks; and/or notarized statement of support.

C. Requests for financial assistance shall be processed promptly and FMOLHS shall
notify the patient or applicant in writing within 30 days of receipt of a completed
application.

D. Financial assistance write-offs will be applied to the date of service for which the
financial assistance application was initiated and for future dates of service within
the following six months. NOTE: Insurance verification will be performed for each
episode of care to determine if the patient remains uninsured.

E. Patients must re-apply for financial assistance after the six-month period for which the
original application was approved.

ELIGIBILITY AND AMOUNT OF WRITE-OFF:

Eligibility for write-off is determined based on the number of persons in the household and
annual family income as a percentage of the federal poverty level (FPL). FMOLHS will
use the Federal Poverty Guidelines from the Federal Register, as provided in Addendum
B. Such guidelines will be updated annually.

A. Uninsured patients whose family income is at or below 250% of the FPL will qualify
for a full write-off of all hospital charges, excluding any Standard Deposits previously
paid, assuming they meet the other eligibility criteria set out in the FAP.

B. Uninsured patients whose family income exceeds 250% of the FPL may qualify for
catastrophic medical assistance, depending on the patient’s particular financial
circumstances. If the patient’s medical bills for the 12 months immediately preceding
treatment are greater than or equal to twenty percent (20%) of their annual family
income, the patient may be granted financial assistance in the form of free care.

C. Underinsured patients (see Definitions section) will be treated as uninsured patients
for purposes of financial assistance.

IV. PRESUMPTIVE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

A.

Presumptive eligibility for financial assistance occurs when the Hospital uses
information other than that provided by the individual to determine eligibility for free
care. Accounts meeting presumptive criteria will be written off at 100%.

. A patient may be eligible for financial assistance even if they have no financial

assistance form on file, where the patient or other sources can provide sufficient
evidence of presumptive eligibility. In these instances, collection activity (pursuant to
the actions described in section V below) will continue while the due diligence is being
completed or until the patient’s account is reviewed. A list of information obtained
from other sources is included in Addendum C.

. A scoring system may also be used in order to determine if a patient is eligible for

presumptive financial assistance. The scoring system is similar to credit scoring and is
produced by an FMOLHS approved vendor. Only those accounts that fall below the
scoring system minimum will be considered for presumptive financial assistance. If a
patient has been denied financial assistance due to non-compliance or income that has
been discovered, he/she will not be eligible for a presumptive financial assistance
write-off.

V. COLLECTION ACTIONS

A.

In the event of non-payment on the part of the patient/guarantor, the Hospital will
engage in the following collections actions: sending billing statements, calling patients
for open balances, transferring accounts to billing or collection agencies for follow up,
and filing claims in bankruptcy proceedings. The Hospital may also engage in
extraordinary collection actions (ECAs), which include wage garnishments, liens,
reporting to outside credit agencies, foreclosure, bank account seizure, personal
property seizure, and law suits.

. The Hospital will make reasonable efforts to determine whether an individual is

eligible to receive free care before initiating the ECAs. Reasonable efforts include:

a. Notifying the individual about the FAP (including reasonable efforts to notify
the individual orally about the policy and how to obtain assistance);

b. Refraining from any extraordinary collection actions for a period of at least 120
days from the date the Hospital Facility provides the first post-discharge billing
statement for the care; and

c. Giving the individual a written notice which indicates that financial assistance
is available for eligible individuals and notifies the individual (at least 30 days

in advance) of the type of ECAs the Hospital intends to initiate and the deadline
after which such ECA may be initiated. This written notice will also include a
plain-language summary of the FAP.

C. Applications for financial assistance will be processed up to 240 days after the date of
the first post-discharge billing statement for the care. The Hospital Facility has no
obligation to process applications received after such date. Upon receipt of a timely
application, any ECAs already initiated will be temporarily suspended while the
application is being processed.

D. If an individual submits an incomplete application during the 240-day period beginning
after the first post-discharge billing statement for the care, efforts in addition to those
discussed above should be undertaken before ECAs are initiated or resumed. The
Hospital will notify the individual about how to complete the application, including a
written notice that describes the additional information required and/or documentation
that must be submitted. The written notice will also contain contact information for
how to get more information on the FAP process and how to obtain assistance with the
application process. The Hospital Facility will give the individual a reasonable
opportunity to provide the missing information before initiating or resuming ECAs.

E. Once a completed application is submitted, the Hospital will process it in a timely
manner and notify the individual in writing as to whether they qualify and the basis for
such determination. The Hospital will make reasonable efforts to reverse any ECAs
taken against the individual related to amounts no longer owed.

F. FMOLHS will not impose ECAs for any patient without first making reasonable efforts
to determine whether that patient is eligible for financial assistance under this financial
assistance policy. The Admissions department manager at each Hospital has final
authority and is responsible for determining that reasonable efforts have been made so
that ECAs are then allowable.

VI. DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this policy, the terms below are defined as follows:

Contractual Allowance: The difference between the level of payment established under a
contractual agreement with a third party payer and the patient's gross charges.

Extraordinary Collection Actions (ECAs): ECAs apply when the Hospital facility
impacts credit reporting or initiates legal processes such as liens, foreclosures, seizures of
bank accounts or personal property, garnishment of pay, and/or arrest. ECAs do not
include: calling patients for open balances; sending statements; or filing a claim in a
bankruptcy proceeding. '

Emergency Care: The patient requires immediate medical intervention due to a severe,
life-threatening, or potentially disabling condition. Generally the patient is seen and/or
admitted through the emergency room. See section 1867 of the Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. 1395dd).

Financial Assistance: Financial Assistance is defined as medical services provided at no
charge to patients who are uninsured or underinsured and unable to pay based on income
level (as based on the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Federal Poverty
Guidelines), financial analysis, demographic indicators and/or further healthcare needs
based on diagnosis. Financial Assistance does not include: contractual allowances from
government programs and contractual allowances from insurance.

Family: Using the Census Bureau definition, a group of two or more people who reside
together and who are related by birth, marriage, or adoption.

Family Income: Using the Census Bureau guidelines, the following is used when

computing family income:

¢ Includes earnings, unemployment compensation, workers’ compensation, Social
Security, Supplemental Security Income, public assistance, veterans’ payments,
survivor benefits, pension or retirement income, interest, dividends, rents, royalties,
income from estates, trusts, educational assistance, alimony, child support, assistance
from outside the household, and other miscellaneous sources;

o Determined on a before-tax basis;

o Includes the income of all family members who reside together and dependents
claimed on the income tax return. (Non-relatives, such as housemates, do not count.)

o For dependents who live outside the home, family income shall include the
dependent’s income, along with the income of those who claim the dependent on their
tax return. '

o Family Income also includes resources or property that are easily convertible to cash;
including but not limited to checking accounts, savings accounts, stocks, bonds,
certificates of deposits, and cash. IRA’s and 401K’s are excluded until money is
removed.

Federal Poverty Guidelines: A simplification of the Census Bureau’s poverty thresholds
used for administrative purposes such as determining financial eligibility. Each year the
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) publishes the guidelines in the Federal
Register.

Gross Charges: The total charges at the Hospital’s full established rates for the provision
of patient care services before deductions are applied.

Medically Necessary Care: Medical treatment that is appropriate and necessafy for
treatment of the presented symptoms, as defined by Medicare and third party payers

Presumptive Financial Assistance: Assistance granted on the basis of a scoring system
or other data sources that provide sufficient evidence of eligibility. A financial form on
file is not required for approval of presumptive financial assistance.

Uninsured Patient: A person receiving healthcare services that does not have healthcare
insurance and will not qualify for any state/ federal programs. '

Underinsured Patient: A person receiving healthcare services who has private healthcare
insurance, but whose coverage does not cover specified care. Patients with commercial
insurance are not generally eligible for financial assistance write-offs due to health-plan
and legal requirements related to billing patients for their full cost-share portion of the
provided services. However, if third-party coverage does not provide benefits for the
hospital services due to health plan exclusions, pre-existing conditions, waiting period
prior to eligibility, or exhaustion of benefits, the patient may be considered uninsured and
eligible for a financial assistance adjustment, for the services not covered. This does not
apply when the third-party coverage does not provide coverage at an FMOLHS facility for
services that would otherwise be authorized in the payer’s network of providers.

ATTACHMENTS: Addendum A — Listing of Hospital Websites and Contact Numbers
Addendum B - FPL Guidelines

Addendum C — Presumptive Financial Assistance

Addendum D - Standard Deposits

ADDENDUM A. Listing of Hospital Websites, Physical Addresses, and Contact Numbers

Hospital Website Admissions Department' Phone Number
_| Location
5000 Hennessy Blvd (225)765-7921
Our Lady of the Lake www.ololrme.com/financialassistance Baton Rouge, LA 70808 (800)327-3284
1125 W Hwy 30

St. Elizabeth Hospital

www.steh.com/financialassistance

Gonzales, LA 70737

(225)647-5000

St. Francis Medical Center

www.stfran.com/financialassistance

309 Jackson Street
Monroe, LA 71201

(318)966-4000

Our Lady of Lourdes

www.lourdesrme.com/financialassistance

4809 Ambassador Caffery
Lafayette, LA 70508

(337)470-2000

Our Lady of the Angels Hospital

www.oloah.org/financialassistance

433 Plaza Street
Bogalusa, LA 70427

(985)730-6700

Assumption Community Hospital

www.ololrme.com/financialassistance

135 Highway 402
Napoleonville, LA 70390

(985)369-3600

NOTE: Please do not use the above address for submitting financial assistance applications. The proper
address can be found on the application form itself.


ADDENDUM B. FPL Guidelines

The FPL guidelines as of April 2016 are as follows:

Persons in
Family/
Household

7

8

100%
$11,880
$16,020
$20,160
$24,300
$28,440
$32,580
$36,730

$40,890

2016 Poverty Guidelines - Annual

48 Contiguous States and D.C.

48 Contiguous States and D.C. Poverty Guidelines (Annual)

133%
$15,800
$21,307
$26,813
$32,319
$37,825
$43,331
$48,851

$54,384

Add $4,160 for each person over 8

138%
$16,394
$22,108
$27,821
$33,534
$39,247
$44,960
$50,687

$56,428

160%
$17,820
$24,030
$30,240
$36,450
$42,660
$48,870
$55,095

$61,335

200%
$23,760
$32,040
$40,320
$48,600
$56,880
$65,160
$73,460

$81,780

250%
$29,700
$40,050
$50,400
$60,750
$71,100
$81,450
$91,825

$102,225

300%
$35,640
$48,060
$60,480
$72,900
$85,320
$97,740

$110,190

$122,670

400%
$47,520
$64,080
$80,640
$97,200

$118,760
$130,320
$146,920

$163,560

12

ADDENDUM C. Presumptive Financial Assistance

Information obtained from sources other than the patient may be used to determine presumptive
eligibility. Such information includes evidence that the patient is participating in one or more of the
following:

1. State-funded prescription programs;
2. LACHIP, subsidized housing, free or reduced school lunches, etc. for the patient/guarantor’s
children;
3. Louisiana food stamp program;
4. State Medicaid program. For patients that have Medicaid coverage, the financial assistance
determination will rely on information from the Medicaid program, including evidence that:
e Patient is currently on Medicaid, but has a prior balance within 12 months of the approval
date
e Patient currently has Medicaid with limited benefits (only covers family planning)
e Patient is in a hospice and has Medicaid only
e Patient has Medicaid through a non-contracted state
e Patient qualifies for Medicaid with a “spend-down requirement”
e Patient is eligible for other state or local assistance programs that are unfurided (i.e.,
Medicaid spend-down);
e Patient is deceased with no known responsible party or estate. The due diligence efforts
to verify the estate assets are to be documented via the hospital approved website.

Additionally, a patient may be presumed to be eligible for financial assistance if there is an
independent, qualified attestation that the patient is homeless.


ADDENDUM D. Standard Deposits

Hospital Surgical Procedure | Radiology Standard All Other Services
Standard Deposit Deposit Standard Deposit
Our Lady of the Lake $200 $10 $10
St. Elizabeth $200 $10 $10
St. Francis Medical Center $200 $25 $25
Our Lady of Lourdes $200 $25 $25
Our Lady of the Angels Hospital $200 $25 “$25
Assumption Community Hospital n/a $10 $10


