GME/ADM/11 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME  Section: Administrative 
Title: Visiting/Affiliated House Staff Application 
Process 
Policy Reference #: GME/ADM/11 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 7/17/2007 Last Review Date:  5/9/2017 
Last Revision Date: 4/8/2014 
 
A capitalized word has the meaning as first defined in the policy.  Unless otherwise defined, all other capitalized words have the 
same meaning as ascribed to them by the ACGME Glossary of Terms. 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy  is to outline the process for visiting/affiliated medical interns, residents 
and fellows when applying for House Staff privileges at OLOL under the auspices of their teaching 
program. 
 
DEFINITION: 
When used in this policy, these terms have the following meaning: 
 
House Staff: Interns, residents, or fellows. Visiting or affiliated House Staff are those interns, 
residents, or fellows who are participants in accredited graduate medical education programs and 
are participating in approved clinical rotations at Our Lady of the Lake under the auspices of an 
affiliation agreement with their program and under the supervision of an active member of the 
hospital medical staff.   
 
Supervising Physician: A member of the hospital’s active medical staff who will direct, supervise 
and evaluate House Staff.  
 
Teaching Program/Institution: The graduate medical education program for interns, residents, and 
fellows that is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, the 
Commission on Dental Accreditation, The Council on Podiatric Medical Education, the American 
Osteopathic Association Committee Postdoctoral Training, or other Graduate Medical Education 
Program/Institution approved by the GMEC. 
 
Affiliation Agreement : The affiliation agreement provides the basic framework within which 
graduate medical education is conducted by the teaching program/institution and OLOL, and 
delineates the respective responsibilities of the teaching program/institution, OLOL, and the intern, 
resident, or fellow. GME/ADM/11 
POLICY: 
 
A. An Affiliation Agreement between OLOL and the Teaching Program/Institution is required 
to be executed before the intern, resident, or fellow is allowed to participate in a clinical 
rotation at OLOL. The Teaching Program/Institution initiates the process of affiliation by 
contacting the Designated Institutional Official (DIO)/ Medical Director of Graduate 
Medical Education to request a sponsored clinical rotation.  
 
B. Responsibilities of the Teaching Program/Institution: 
▪ Must provide a written description of the proposed duties, responsibilities, and patient 
care activities of the intern, resident or fellow under the supervision of the Program 
Director; 
▪ Must provide current proof of professional liability insurance for the participants of the 
program and for the institution and faculty members upon request. 
▪ Must arrange for a supervising physician who is a member of the OLOL active medical 
staff to accept clinical responsibility for the participant of the program; 
▪ Must provide the OLOL Graduate Medical Education Office with a list of the names of 
applicants, applicants’ year in program, and dates of rotation four (4) weeks prior to 
beginning any rotation. The Teaching Program/Institution is responsible for notifying 
the OLOL Graduate Medical Education Office of any changes throughout the year. 
 
C. Interns, residents, and fellows must apply to the OLOL Graduate Medical Education Office 
in writing before being allowed to participate in a clinical rotation at OLOL. House Staff 
applicants must complete, sign , and submit the following forms (supplied by the OLOL 
GME office) and attachments to the OLOL  Graduate Medical Education Office before the 
start of the assigned rotation: 
▪ House staff Application form 
▪ Rotator Acknowledgement Agreement 
▪ Rotator Data Sheet 
▪ Resident Photo/Video Use Agreement 
▪ Systems Access and Confidentiality Agreement 
▪ Teaching Program Letter  
▪ Proof of Malpractice Insurance Coverage 
▪ Copy of ECFMG Certificate- if applicable 
▪ Current CV or resume 
▪ Proof of TB Skin Test with Copy of Test Results 
▪ **Other documentation as required by the OLOL GME Office 
 
D.  The OLOL Graduate Medical Education office ensures each House Staff applicant is 
investigated thoroughly. The G raduate Medical Education O ffice will review the 
aforementioned documents as well as query the Specially Designated National and Blocked 
Persons list by the Office of Foreign Assets Control for any intern, resident or fellow 
applicant as well as verify the applicant is not excluded from participating in federal 
programs. The G raduate Medical Education Office will also query the State Board of 
Medical Examiners for primary source verification of medical licensure.  Printed copies of 
these verifications will be maintained within the resident file. GME/ADM/11 
 
E. The applicant  will be required to complete a systems access and confidentiality agreement 
which ensures security, data integrity and confidentiality of patient’s health information. 
 
F. The applicant will receive the following upon on-boarding and orientation.  Information will 
be provided in hard copy or via electronic learning modules. 
▪ Policies and procedures pertinent to graduate medical education and any specific 
protocols pertinent to resident training across certain specialties.  
▪ Helpful Information for Residents/Fellows flyer , inclusive of parking maps, 
resident lounge/call room information, computer access and troubleshooting, 
access to meals, important OLOL contact numbers, and ID badge information. 
▪ Patient Safety & Event Reporting Process at OLOL 
▪ Quality Measures Pocket Guide & Information Sheets 
▪ OLOL Dress & Appearance Standards Policy  
▪ OLOL Ethical and Religious Directives 
▪ Resident Dictation Process 
▪ Resident Housing (if applicable) 
 
G. Reappointment: House Staff must submit a new Teaching Program Letter form at the start 
of each academic year. Maintenance of medical licensure is verified by the G raduate 
Medical Education Office. 
 
H. Disruptive Behavior: Failure to perform in a satisfactory manner and/or when his/her 
behavior is disruptive or detrimental to the hospital and/or patients as determined by the 
DIO will be cause for termination of approval to rotate in at OLOL  without recourse or 
hearing, unless otherwise specified in the Medical Staff Bylaws. 
 
I. Communication among hospital personnel: The GMEC, through the MEC, will regularly 
 communicate,  and will, on a quarterly basis, review the safety and quality of patient care 
 provided by House staff. The  DIO will communicate to the MEC the educational  needs 
 and performance of those in graduate medical education programs. 