GME/MS/01 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME Section/Chapter: Medical Student 
Title: Medical Student Scope of Practice 
Policy Reference #: GME/MS/01 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 1/26/2009 Last Review Date: 10/13/2015 
Last Revision Date: 10/13/2015 
 
A capitalized word has the meaning as first defined in the policy.  Unless otherwise defined, all other capitalized words have the 
same meaning as ascribed to them by the ACGME Glossary of Terms. 
 
PURPOSE:  
To establish policies regarding Medical Student clerkships including supervision and entries in the 
medical record. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
When used in this policy, these terms have the following meaning: 
 
Medical Student: A Medical Student shall be one who is a full time student of an accredited domestic 
medical school or approved foreign medical school. 
 
POLICY: 
A.   
 
B.  Clerkships are limited to Medical Students enrolled in their third or fourth year of medical 
school and in good standing as verified and documented by the school. First and second year 
students requesting shadowing or observership opportunities will be considered on a case by 
case basis depending on the nature of the request and are typically limited to performing patient 
interviews and physical exams. Anything beyond this will be considered on a case by case 
basis.  
 
C. Medical Students enrolled in those medical schools affiliated with OLOL must complete and 
submit all paperwork required by the OLOL GME office prior to beginning a clinical rotation 
at OLOL. Paperwork includes: 
 
▪ Student Rotator Application Form 
▪ Medical Student Rotator Acknowledgement Agreement 
▪ Systems Access and Confidentiality Agreement 
▪ Teaching Program Letter 
▪ Sponsoring Physician Letter GME/MS/01 
▪ Proof of Malpractice Insurance c overage must be supplied whether through 
documentation within an affiliation agreement with the school or through a 
certificate/letter supplied by the school. 
▪ **Other documentation as required by the OLOL GME Office 
 
D. Medical Students enrolled in a medical school that is not officially affiliated with OLOL 
(“visiting student”) must complete the “Application for Medical Student Elective Rotation” 
form in order to request a rotation at OLOL.  For those services in which OLOL sponsors its 
own training program, the student will be assigned to an active member of the OLOL medical 
staff who serves as faculty within the program. For those services in which OLOL does not 
sponsor its own training program, the visiting student is responsible for identifying a physician 
who is an active member of the OLOL medical staff who has agreed to sponsor the rotation, 
prior to submitting the application. The sponsoring physician  will be responsible for 
supervision of the student at all times during the assigned rotation.   OLOL does not sponsor 
visas for visiting international Medical Students.  
 
E. All Medical Students must report to the OLOL Graduate Medical Education office on the first 
 day of their clinical rotation  to check in and receive an OLOL ID badge and information 
 packet, and to complete  any applicable orientation components specific to the assigned 
 rotation.. 
 
F. Medical Students must be clearly identified as such. When being introduced, the phrase 
 “medical student” is recommended. An OLOL ID badge with the Medical Student designation 
 will be worn at all times.  
 
G. Medical Students may provide patient care within their professional competence, subject to the 
roles, responsibilities and patient care activities stipulated in written documents supplied by the 
school (goals and objectives) and subject to the ultimate control and supervision of the 
supervising physician. 
 
H. Medical Students may not participate in patient care if the involved patient objects to their 
 presence. 
 
I. The primary responsibility for the patient is vested with a supervising physician who  is an 
 active member of the medical staff and may not be delegated to a medical student. Residents 
 or Fellows may participate in overseeing the educational process, but any supervising  
 physician must have applicable credentials, privileges, and authorization in order to  oversee 
 each clinical activity or procedure. Supervising/attending physicians and assigned medical 
 students will adhere to the following  principles: 
 
1.  Level III and Level IV Medical Students may document in the medical record if clearly 
identified as “Medical Student”. Entries must be signed, dated and timed and include the 
name of the supervising physician. 
 
2.  I n accordance with CMS “Guidelines for Teaching Physicians, Interns, and Residents” 
(attachment), the teaching physician may only refer to the Medical Student ’s GME/MS/01 
documentation of an evaluation and management (E/M) service that is related to the 
review of systems and/or past, family, and/or social history. The teaching physician may 
not refer to a Medical Student ’s documentation of physical exam findings or medical 
decision making in his or her personal note. If the Medical Student  documents E/M 
services, the teaching physician must verify and re -document the history of present 
illness and perform and re -document the physical exam and medical decision making 
activities of the service. The Medical Student record may not substitute for the required 
history and physical examination or progress notes of an attending or resident physician. 
 
3.  Progress notes recorded by a Medical Student  must be co -signed by the supervising 
physician responsible for the patient. The supervising physician who countersigns 
verifies the content as being accurate and appropriate and shall sign as verified or the 
entry will be rewritten or a note made clarifying any areas of question.  
 
4.  Level III and Level IV Medical Student s may write a physician order if the order is 
immediately signed by the responsible resident or attending physician prior to the order 
being carried out. 
 
5.  Each Medical Student  will be assigned a unique computer access code. Students may 
access the computer to obtain needed information on their patients but are prohibited 
from entering orders for laboratory tests, diagnostic tests, diagnostic procedures, x -rays, 
studies, medications, or diets. 
 
6.  All procedures are to be performed under appropriate supervision. The supervising 
physician must have privileges or authorization to perform the procedure being 
supervised. The degree of supervision must take into account the complexity of the 
procedure, potential for untoward effects, and the demonstrated competence, maturity 
and responsibility of each Medical Student in order to ensure the safety and comfort of 
the patient 
 
7.  Medical Students may not sign as witness to authorizations or consents for procedures or 
surgery on patients cared for by themselves, or their team.  
 
 