GME/ADM/02 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME  Section: Administrative  
Title: Resident Recruitment  and Selection  
Policy Reference 
#: GME/ADM/02 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination:  4/15/2008  Last Review Date: 6/23/20 23 
Last Revision Date: 6/23/2023 
 
 
A capitalized word has the meaning as first defined in the policy.  Unless otherwise defined, all other capitalized words hav e the 
same meaning as ascribed to them by the ACGME Glossary of Terms.  
 
PURPOSE:  
This policy describes the recruitment and selections process that is consistent and fair to all 
applicants to OLOL sponsored graduate medical education programs.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
When used in this policy, these terms have the following meaning:  
 
Match: a uniform date  of appointment t o positions in graduate medical education in the United 
States. Established by the National Resident Matching Program (NRMP).  
 
POLICY: 
A. Programs will convene a  selections committee comprised of the Program Director or 
designee, represent atives of program  faculty, and staff, with the responsibility  for 
overseeing the recruitment of qualifi ed applicants and selection of resident s for that 
program. Upper level and chief residents are involved in the formal interview process.  
 
 
B. Programs will outline in writing specific process es and criteria for selecting from among 
eligible applicants on the basis of residency program -related criteria such as : 
 Preparedness  
 Ability 
 Aptitude 
 Academic credentials  
 Communication skills  
  Personal qualities such as motivation and integrity  
 
C. Program specific process es and selection criteria will be reviewed a nnually or as requested 
by the GMEC.  
 
D. Programs will not discriminate with regard to sex, race, age, religion, color, national origin, 
disability, veteran status, or any other applicable legally protected status.  
 GME/ADM/02 
E. Candidates must me et eligibility cr iteria to be considered for selection as outlined in the 
Resident Eligibility Policy. (GME/ADM/01) 
 
F. All programs are required to participate in the National Resident Matching Program 
(NRMP) with the exception of non-NRMP residencies.  
 
G. Uniform applica tion requirements for OLOL sponsored programs include an application 
form, board scores, request for letters of reference, a dean’s letter, and a medical school 
transcript. Programs may supplement the OLOL packet and requirements as appropriate and 
necessary, and as approved by that program’s selection committee.  
 
H. The GMEC expects that: 
 
 Each program selection committee will screen  and invite applicants according to its 
established program criteria  
 
 Each applicant who is invited for an interview will b e informed in writing or by 
electronic means, of the terms, conditions, and benefits of appointment, including 
financial support; benefits, professional liability  coverage, disability insurance 
accessible to residents/ fellows , and health insurance accessible to residents / fellows 
and their eligible dependents. Additionally, residents/ fellows will be provided with 
institutional policies for vacation , leaves of absence including medical, par ental and 
caregiver leaves of absence.   
 
 The credentials of each matched applicant are to be verified by the Graduate Medical 
Education Office before appointment of the resident candidate. An offer for 
residency training is extended directly to the applicant by the Program Director or 
designee, through a letter of offer and subsequent contract within the time frame and 
according to c riteria set by the NRMP.  
 
 Following the results of the Match or acceptance of offers by new residents, the 
Program Director will notify the Academic Affairs Office of all candidates accepted 
and provide copy of each applicant’s file for the depar tment’s permanent record.  
 
 