GME/RES/08  
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
 
Policy Manual: 
 
GME 
 
Section: 
 
Resident 
 
 
Title: 
 
House Staff Participation in Surgical 
Procedures 
Policy Reference 
#: 
 
GME/RES/08 
 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 7/19/2007 Last Review Date: 7/25/2023 
Last Revision Date: 1/28/2013  
 
 
A capitalized word has the meaning as first defined in the policy.  Unless otherwise defined, all other capitalized words have the 
same meaning as ascribed to them by the ACGME Glossary of Terms. 
 
PURPOSE: 
To  assure  House  Staff  are  practicing  within  the  scope  of  their  professional  competence  and 
licensure and are subject to the supervision of an active member of OLOLRMC medical staff 
during surgical procedures. 
 
DEFINITION: 
When used in this policy, these terms have the following meaning: 
 
House Staff:  Interns, residents, or fellows. House Staff physicians are to be sponsored by approved 
graduate medical education programs in conjunction with a supervising physician. 
 
Supervising Physician: A member of the hospital’s active medical staff who will direct, supervise 
and evaluate House Staff. 
 
Direct Supervision: The supervising physician is physically present with the resident and patient. 
 
Indirect Supervision with Direct Supervision Immediately Available: The supervising physician is 
physically within the hospital or other site of patient care, and is immediately available to provide 
direct supervision. 
 
POLICY: 
House  Staff  participating  in  surgical  procedures  and  in  conjunction  with  the  scope  of  their 
professional competence and licensure are to remain within the guidelines set forth and approved by 
the Graduate Medical Education Committee and the Medical Executive Committee. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
Surgical Site Markings: 
The patient’s attending physician has the responsibility of ensuring that the correct surgical site is 
marked. This responsibility may be delegated at the supervising physician’s discretion to a fellow 
or resident for whom the attending has direct supervisory responsibility.   The supervising physician GME/RES/08  
 
must be in-house when the procedure is performed, providing direct or indirect supervision with 
direct supervision immediately available, and the resident or fellow must be familiar with the 
patient and a participant in the procedure. The supervising physician has the ultimate discretion as to 
the level of involvement of the resident or fellow and the amount of supervision provided. 
 
Informed Consents: 
The supervising physician has the ultimate responsibility for obtaining the informed consent. The 
attending will speak with the patient and outline the planned procedure, explaining its risks, benefits 
and alternatives. The supervising physician may delegate the obtaining of informed consent to a 
resident or a fellow who is a participant in the procedure. In those instances, the resident or fellow 
will speak with the patient and outline the planned procedure, explaining its risks, benefits and 
alternatives. 
 
If a resident or fellow is not participating in a procedure from the beginning, they should not obtain 
the consent. 
 
A resident or fellow obtaining informed consent must have the knowledge and skill to discuss the 
risks, benefits and alternatives to the planned procedure. 
 
Time Out Before a Surgical Procedure: 
The time out before a surgical procedure involves the immediate members of the procedure team, 
including the individual performing the procedure and other active participants who will be 
participating in the procedure from the beginning. 