   
4/3/2023 2:32 PM 
 
2323362.v1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME Section: Resident/Fellow 
Title: Resident/Fellow Leave of Absence 
Policy 
Reference #: GME/RES/01 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 4/16/2010 Review Date: 7/1/2022 
Revision Date: 11/9/2010, 9/24/2014, 
10/14/2014, 7/1/2022
 
A capitalized word has the meaning as first defined in the policy. Unless otherwise defined, all other capitalized words have the 
same meaning as ascribed to them by the ACGME Glossary of Terms. 
 
 
POLICY: 
This Resident/Fellow Leave of Absence Policy (the “Policy”) applies to all Residents/Fellows 
participating in the Graduate Medical Education Program (referenced herein as “the Program”) 
for which Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center is the Sponsoring Institution. It is the 
policy of the Program to grant a leave of absence to eligible Residents/Fellows as required by 
state or federal law or by ACGME institutional requirements. This Policy is sponsored by the 
Program and, where applicable and as described herein, administered by Franciscan 
Missionaries of Our Lady Health System Leave Administration.
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to describe the process by which FMOLHS Leave Administration 
will grant leaves of absence to eligible Residents/Fellows. 
Absent extraordinary circumstances, or as otherwise required by state or federal law or by 
ACGME institutional requirements, the following leave policies will apply to eligible 
Residents/Fellows. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the Program reserves 
the right to terminate, amend or revise any leave policy or provision, in its sole discretion, 
except as prohibited by law. Likewise, nothing stated in the policies is intended or should be 
read as changing the nature of the relationship between the Program and any Resident/Fellow or 
as guaranteeing any particular benefit. 
 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
LEAVE PURSUANT TO ACGME INSTITUTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this Resident/Fellow Leave of Absence Policy, it is the 
intention of the Program to comply with the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical 
Education requirements, effective July 1, 2022, related to medical, parental, and caregiver 
leaves of absence (“ACGME Leave”). Residents/Fellows will be provided a minimum of six 
weeks of approved ACGME Leave for qualifying reasons that are consistent with applicable 
2323362.v1 2
law and relevant leave provisions set forth in this Policy. Residents/Fellows are eligible for 
ACGME leave from the first day that they are required to report for participation in the 
Program. Residents/Fellows will utilize all available vacation leave and sick leave (where sick 
leave is applicable) concurrently with ACGME leave. For first time ACGME leave, 
Residents/Fellows will be paid their full salary for any portion of the first six weeks of leave for 
which they have no available vacation or sick time. One week of paid vacation time will be 
reserved for use outside of the first six weeks of ACGME leave.  
 
Any leave of absence provided in this Policy which applies to medical, parental, or caregiver 
categories of leave will run concurrently with ACGME leave to the greatest extent permissible 
by law. This includes FMLA leave for the Resident’s/Fellow’s own serious health condition or 
to care for a covered family member with a serious health condition, leave for pregnancy or the 
birth or placement of a child, military caregiver leave, and other approved non-FMLA medical 
leave. To the extent not inconsistent with ACGME Leave requirements, all definitions, 
protocols, and procedures provided in this Policy with respect to the various types of leave will 
apply in the case of ACGME Leave.   
 
 
PRACTICES APPLICABLE TO ALL FORMS OF LEAVE  
Where practical, and except when the Program believes that circumstances warrant a different 
practice, the procedures and guidelines in this Section will apply to all forms of leave contained 
in this Leaves of Absence policy. 
A. Definitions 
 1.         Serious Health Condition – An illness, injury, impairment, or physical or mental 
 condition that involves either a n overnight stay in a medical care facility, or 
 continuing treatment by a healt h care provider for a condition that either 
                        Prevents the Resident/Fellow from performing the functions of the position or 
prevents the qualified family member from participating in school or other daily 
activities. 
 Subject to certain conditions, the  continuing treatment requirement may be met 
by a period of incapacity of more than 3 consecutive calendar days combined 
with at least two visits to a health care provider or one visit and a regimen of 
continuing treatment, or incapacity due to pregnancy, or incapacity due to a 
chronic condition.  Other conditions may meet the definition of continuing 
treatment and will be evaluated with respect to the particular Resident’s/Fellow’s 
circumstances. 
           2. Child - A biological, ad opted or foster child, a stepchild, a legal ward, or a child 
of a person standing in loco parentis, who is either under 18 years old or an adult 
dependent child incapable of self-care because of a mental or physical disability. 
           3. Parent - A biological, foster, or adoptive parent, a stepparent, a legal guardian, or 
a person standing in loco parentis. Parent does not include a parent-in-law.  
4. Spouse - A husband or wife, defined or recognized under stat e law for purposes 
of marriage in the state where the Resident/Fellow resides, including “common 2323362.v1 3
law” marriage and same-sex marriage. 
 
 5. Next of Kin - the nearest bl ood relative of an individual. 
            6. 12-Month Period - 12-m onth period set on a rolling calendar from the first day 
of approved leave. 
7.        “Serious Injury or Illness” - For purposes of Military Caregiver Leave only, is an  
 injury or illness in curred by a covered service member or a veteran in the line of  
 duty on active duty in the Armed F orces (or existed before the beginning of the  
 member’s active duty and was a ggravated by service in the line of duty on active 
 duty in the Armed Forces) that may render the service member medically unfit 
            to perform the duties of the service member’s office, grade, rank, or rating. 
 
            8. Active Duty - A call or order to active duty under a provision of law referred to 
in section 101 of Title 10, United States Code. 
B. Notice of Leave 
            1. When the need for leave can be planned, such as for the birth or placement of a 
child or scheduled medical treatme nt, the Resident/Fellow must,  if possible, 
provide at least 30 days advance notice to the Program Director  and FMOLHS 
Leave Administration office and make efforts to schedule the le ave to minimize 
disruption to the Resident’s/Fellow’s education, the Program, a nd  any affiliated 
hospital’s  operations and patient care.   
 
            2. If the need for leave i s not foreseeable, the Re sident/Fellow must notify the 
Program Director and FMOLHS Leave Administration of the need to  take a 
leave of absence within two calendar days of the first day of l eave or as soon as 
practical and possible. The deter mination of when a Resident/Fe llow could 
practically provide notice will be based upon the particular fa cts and 
circumstances of the individual case. 
  
 3. Failure to provide required no tice may result in delay of leave. 
  
            4. In cases of extended illn ess, the Resident/Fellow will be required to maintain 
regular contact with the Leave Administration office and the Program Director at 
the designated interval listed on the Notice of Rights and Responsibilities. 
Failure to maintain regular contact at the designated interval may result in 
disciplinary action. 
 
C. Basic Conditions of Leave &  Physician Certification Requirements 
 
Except as otherwise required by this Leaves of Absence policy, or as otherwise required by law, 
the following conditions/certifications are required for each leave of absence: 
 
In general, Leave entitlement will be calculated on a rolling twelve-month basis, with the first 
day of the twelve-month period being the first day of leave. Each time a Resident/Fellow takes 
leave, the time utilized will be subtracted from the total of the specific leave entitlement 2323362.v1 4
available for the rolling twelve-month period. While leave availability is typically calculated on 
a rolling 12-month basis, the Program will also ensure that a Resident/Fellow is afforded any 
required ACGME Leave on an academic year basis. 
 
1. The Program/FMOLHS Leave Administration will require medical ce rtification 
from a certified health care pr ovider to support a request for leave for a 
Resident’s/Fellow’s own serious health condition or to care for  a seriously ill child, 
spouse, parent, or a seriously ill child, spouse, parent or nex t of kin serving active 
duty in the military. The medical certification will be require d if the period of 
incapacity is more than three consecutive calendar days. 
 
2. The Program/FMOLHS Leave Administration may also require periodic re-
certifications as the leave situation warrants. Failure to return certifications/re-
certifications in a timely manner, absent unusual circumstances, may result in denial 
of the requested leave of absence. 
 
3. For the Resident’s/Fellow’s own medical leave, the certificatio n must state that the 
Resident/Fellow is unable to pe rform the functions of his/her p osition because of a 
serious health condition in addition to any other information r equired under state or 
federal regulations. 
 
4. If the leave is to care for a family member, the certification must state that the 
Resident/Fellow is required to provide care to the family member. 
 
5. If leave is for military exigency, the Program/FMOLHS Leave Adm inistration may 
require a copy of the military doc uments showing expected date of active duty 
service. 
 
6. The Program/FMOLHS Leave Administration may also require documentation from 
the Resident/Fellow to confirm family relationships. 
 
 
7. The Resident/Fellow must submit a request in Leave Management S ystem or in 
writing to the FMOLHS Leave Administration office and to the Pr ogram Director 
stating the need for a Personal Leave of Absence. 
 
8. At the discretion of the Program /FMOLHS Leave Administration, a  second and 
third medical opinion at its own expense may be required.  
 
9.  
 
10. Any Resident/Fellow requesting unscheduled intermittent leave w ill be required to 
call in to the Program Director at a minimum of two (2) hours p rior to his/her 
scheduled shift. The Resident/Fellow will also be required to c ontact the Leave 
Administration Office of each episode of unforeseeable intermit tent leave within 24 
hours of the episode, absent unus ual circumstances. The Residen t/Fellow will be 2323362.v1 5
required to inform the Leave Ad ministration office of the reason and duration of the 
absence. Failure to follow the call in policy and notify the Le ave Administration 
office of absences will result in an unexcused/unapproved absence and may result in 
disciplinary action. If the interm ittent leave is due to schedu led medical treatment, 
notice of the days and hours need only be given to the Program Director and Leave 
Administration office prior to the start of the leave, unless t here is a change in the 
days, hours, or scheduled treatment. 
11. Retrospective leave of absence  requests may be considered f or those leaves 
beginning no more than 30 days prior to the request unless the situation warrants a 
longer retrospective period based on applicable law. 
 
12. If the leave is for military duty/training, benefit time such as PTO or HOLIDAY will 
not be keyed to cover the absences unless the Resident/Fellow a dvises Leave 
Administration in advance that he/she wants to use benefit time . If it is not possible 
to advise Leave Administration in advance of the start date tha t the Resident/Fellow 
wants to use PTO and/or Holiday time, Leave Administration will  b e g i n  t o  u s e  
available benefit time as of the date the notice is received th rough the remainder of 
the leave or exhaustion of the benefit. 
 
13. Any Resident/Fellow who fraudule ntly obtains leave under this p olicy will be 
subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
 
14. A health care provider’s release  note or fitness for duty certi fication as determined 
by the FMOLHS Leave Administration office and/or Employee Healt h is required if 
the Resident/Fellow is returning from a medical leave of more t han three 
consecutive calendar days. 
 
D. Benefits 
            1. Any Resident/Fellow w ho is granted an approved leave of absence under this 
policy may continue his/her benefit coverage. Residents/Fellows will be required 
to continue to pay their contribution of benefit costs during a period of leave 
under the law. Contributions will be covered by the Resident’s/Fellow’s 
available vacation leave, sick leave, or other similar accrued benefit time. Once 
accrued benefit time is exhausted, the Resident/Fellow will continue to pay the 
contributions by arranging to pay his/her portion of the premium contributions 
during the period of unpaid absence. A Resident/Fellow may contact the Leave 
Administration office to explore available options for repayment of owed benefit 
contributions. If the Resident/Fellow does not pay his/her contributions while on 
unpaid leave, the contributions will go in arrears and the benefits will be 
retrospectively cancelled back to last paid pay period if the contributions are not 
paid within the required period of time. If the benefits are cancelled while on 
leave, the Resident/Fellow will not be eligible to re-enroll in benefits until the 
next open enrollment unless otherwise required under FMLA regulations. If a 
Resident/Fellow returns to work and has contributions in arrears, the 
contributions will be deducted from subsequent paychecks.  
If a Resident/Fellow is actively communicating with Leave Administration staff 2323362.v1 6
regarding the owed benefit contributions and compliant with approved payment 
arrangements, the benefits will not be cancelled. If at any point during an 
approved payment arrangement period, the Resident/Fellow becomes 
noncompliant with the payment arrangement, the benefits will be cancelled 
retrospectively back to the last paid pay period. The Resident/Fellow will not be 
eligible to re-enroll in benefits until the next open enrollment unless otherwise 
required under FMLA regulations. 
            2. Except as otherwise provided in the Leave of Abs ence policy or required by law, 
if a Resident/Fellow elects not to return to work upon completion of an approved 
leave of absence, the Program/FMOLHS may recover from the Resident/Fellow 
the cost of any premiums paid to maintain coverage. Benefit entitlements based 
on length of service will be calculated as of the last paid workday before the start 
of the unpaid leave of absence. 
3. A Resident/Fellow on approved leave will not lose any employ ment benefits 
available before the leave.  
4. Except as may be required by ACGME Leave provisions set fort h below, and 
notwithstanding any other provision of this Policy, any applicable paid benefit 
time must be used for any type of leave of absence. 
5.         All Residents/Fellows must complete a Leave Attestation Form for all types of 
leave. This form certifies that a Resident/Fellow acknowledges the leave of 
absence process and his/her responsibilities as well as the Program’s or 
FMOLHS’ legal right to recover the cost of any Resident/Fellow contributions 
paid or incurred by it to maintain the Resident’s/Fellow’s coverage in group 
benefits during any period of unpaid leave. Should the Resident/Fellow fail to 
return to the Program following the expiration of leave for reasons other than the 
continuation, recurrence or onset of a serious health condition of him/herself, 
his/her spouse, his/her child, or parent, the Resident/Fellow may be required to 
reimburse the Program/FMOLHS for all Resident/Fellow contributions the 
Program/FMOLHS paid or incurred while Resident/Fellow was on leave. 
E. Procedures for Requesting Leave 
1. The Resident/Fellow must submit a request for leave using the d esignated Leave 
Management System or in writing to the Leave Administration off ice if unable to 
access the designated Leave System. A copy of the request must also be submitted to 
the Program Director. The request should be submitted 30 days i n advance of the 
effective date of the leave unless the need for leave arises as a result of an emergency 
or an unexpected event.   
2. If a Resident/Fellow is incapacitated or needed to care for a f amily member for a 
period that includes more than three consecutive calendar days, he/she must apply for 
a leave of absence. 
3. If the Program Director or other agent of the Program obtains i nformation from the 
Resident/Fellow regarding a requ est for leave, he/she should in form the 
Resident/Fellow of his/her obli ga t i o n  t o  u s e  t h e  d e s ignated Leave Mana gement 2323362.v1 7
System for requesting leave or to contact the FMOLHS Leave Administration Office.
4. A Combined Leave form is to be completed by any Resident/Fellow  who is 
requesting leave and whose spouse also works for the Program or affiliated hospital. 
5. An appropriate certification may be required as dictated by the  t y p e  o f  l e a v e  
requested.  
 
F. Procedures for returning to work 
 1. Leave related to Resident’s/Fellow’s own health condition: 
            a. Must report to Employee Health with a completed fitness-for-duty 
certification or other approved release note from their health care provider 1-2 
days before returning to work. Unless otherwise accepted by Employee Health, 
the document should include the following: 
i. the health condition that warranted the leave of absence 
ii. the dates the Resident/Fellow was under the care of the health care 
provider 
iii. the return-to-work date 
iv. if the Resident/Fellow is able to perform the essential functions of his/her 
job 
v. specific details of any restrictions/limitations prescribed by the health 
care provider along with frequency and duration  
 b. If upon release by a health car e provider, a Resident/Fellow fails to 
contact the Employee Health or FMOLHS Leave Administration office or return 
to work at the end of an approved Leave of Absence, his/her residency may be 
terminated in accordance with Resident/Fellow Appointment Agreement. 
 2. Leave unrelated to Res ident’s/Fellow’s health: 
  a. Must notify FMOLHS Leave of fice 1-2 days prior to return to work. 
            3. If the Resident/Fellow fails to provide appropriate notice or follow the policy for 
return to work, retrospective benefit accruals may be denied. 
            4. If a Resident/Fellow needs assistance, he/she sh ould contact the FMOLHS 
Leave Administration office. 
G. Procedures for Residents/Fellows who do not return to the Pr ogram 
            1. Upon notification that a Resident/Fellow will no t return to the Program, the 
FMOLHS Leave Administration office will notify Human Resources and the 
Program Director for an appropriate follow up action. 
H. Moonlighting   
The Program does not permit moonlighting (working for another company) while on approved 2323362.v1 8
leave during employment or residency/fellowship with the Program or its sponsoring 
institutions. That holds true for self-employment. While the Program does not seek to intrude 
on Residents’/Fellows’ personal lives, moonlighting while on leave impacts the sole purpose 
for the approved leave. The Program may make an exception to the policy when the second 
employment is to fulfill obligations to the Military. 
 
 
FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE  
A. Eligibility    
 
To be eligible for leave under this policy,  a Resident/Fellow m ust have worked at least 1,250 
hours during the 12-month period before the leave request and t he Resident/Fellow must have 
been employed for (12) months. Residents/Fellows are required to utilize available vacation and 
sick benefits concurrently with FMLA leave. Otherwise, except as may be required by ACGME 
Leave provisions, FMLA leave is unpaid. 
 
B. Basis for FMLA Leave  
 
Generally, up to twelve (12) weeks of leave (or 26 weeks in the case of Military Caregiver 
Leave) is allowed for: 
 
 1. Birth - Birth of a child  
 
 2. Placement - Placement of a child for adoption or foster care  
 
            3. Family Member Medical Condition - To care for the Resident’s/Fellow’s 
spouse, child, or parent suffering from a serious health condition    
 
            4. Resident/Fellow  Medical Condition - Because of the Resid ent’s/Fellow’s own 
serious health condition which renders him/her unable to perform the job 
 
            5. Qualifying Exigency - Because of any “qualifying exigency” arising out of the 
fact that a spouse, son, daughter, or parent is on or is called  to covered active 
duty in the Armed Forces. Qualifying exigencies may include att ending certain 
military events, arranging for alternative childcare, addressin g certain financial 
and legal arrangements, attendi ng certain counseling sessions, and attending 
post-deployment reintegration br iefings. It does apply to Resid ents/Fellows of 
military personnel retired from the Regular Armed Forces. 
 
           6. Military Caregiver - An eligible Resident/Fellow will receive up to a total of 
twenty six (26) workweeks of leave during any 12 month period t o care for a 
covered service member who is a spouse, son, daughter, parent o r next of kin of 
the Resident/Fellow and who is  undergoing medical treatment, re cuperation or 
therapy or is in outpatient status for a serious illness or inj ury.  The service 
member must be a current member of the Armed Forces, includin g a member of 2323362.v1 9
the National Guard or Reserves, who is undergoing medical treat ment, 
recuperation, or therapy, is othe rwise in outpatient status, or  is otherwise on the 
temporary disability retired list, for a serious injury or illness. Military Caregiver 
Leave also includes leave to care for a veteran who was dischar ged or released 
under conditions other than dishonorable any time during the fi ve-year period 
prior to the first date the eligible employee takes FMLA leave to care for the 
covered veteran, and who is und ergoing medical treatment, recup eration, or 
therapy for a serious injury or illness. In any 12-month period  in which an 
eligible Resident/Fellow takes military caregiver leave, the Re sident/Fellow is 
not entitled to more than the 26 work weeks of FMLA leave (mili tary or 
otherwise), even if the Resident/Fellow qualifies for other FMLA type leave. 
    
C. Calculation of Leave 
 
 1. Generally 
 
 a. Entitlement to leave will be calculated on a rolling twelve-month basis, 
with the first day of the twelve-month period being the first day of leave. 
 
 b. Each time a Resident/Fellow takes leave pursuant to the FML A, the time 
utilized will be subtracted from the total of the 12 work weeks  (or 26 with 
respect to military caregiver leave) available for the rolling 12-month period.   
 
 2. Intermittent Leave or Reduced Leave Schedule 
  
 a. A Resident/Fellow does not need to use his/her FMLA leave entitlement 
in one block. Leave may be taken intermittently or on a reduced  leave schedule 
when medically necessary, as documented by a healthcare provider. 
 
 b. All approved intermittent le ave will be counted toward the total 12 work 
weeks of possible leave. 
 
 c. Residents/Fellows must make reasonable efforts to schedule leave for 
planned medical treatment so as  not to unduly disrupt the Progr am’s operations 
or patient care.  
 
 d. If an exempt Resident/Fello w takes FMLA leave on an intermi ttent or 
reduced-schedule basis, the time off will be deducted from the 
Resident’s/Fellow’s worked hours. Vacation Leave or Sick Leave, or other 
applicable paid benefit time, must be used as available to repl ace the missed 
hours, except for the one week of vacation time which may be re served in some 
instances pursuant to ACGME Leave requirements.  
  
3. If both spouses are employed by the same FMOLHS sponsored or ganization, 
they are entitled to a total of 12 work weeks of leave, rather than 12 work weeks 
each, for the birth or placement of a child.  2323362.v1 10
  
 a. However, each spouse may take up to 12 work weeks of leave to care for 
a newborn with a serious health condition. 
 
 b. Leave for the birth or placement of a child must take place  within 12 
months after the event. Leave ma y begin before birth or adoptio n, as 
circumstances dictate. 
 
 c. Both spouses are entitled, together, to a total of 26 work weeks for 
Military Caregiver leave. 
 
D. Employment Restoration 
 
           1. Any eligible Resident/Fellow who qualifies for and takes FMLA leave for a 
purpose intended by the law shall,  upon returning to work, be r estored to the 
same position of employment held when the leave began or to an equivalent 
position with equivalent benefits, pay and certain other terms and conditions, 
with due regard to educational  and board requirements.   
 
            2. Restoration to the same or equivalent position i s contingent upon the 
Resident’s/Fellows ability to perform all the essential functions of the job.  Make 
up of missed training due to leave of absence is to be arranged  with the Program 
Director in accordance with requirements of the board of the af fected specialty. 
The Program and the Graduate Medical Education Committee reserv e the right 
to determine what is necessary for each Resident/Fellow for mak e-up including 
repeating any part of the Residency/Fellowship Program previously completed. 
 
            3. An exception to the emp loyment restoration provi sions of this policy is if the 
Resident’s/Fellow’s participati on in the Program would have oth erwise been 
terminated or modified during the leave period, regardless of the type of leave. 
 
             4. A health care provider’s release note or fitnes s for duty certification as 
determined by the FMOLHS Leave Administration office and/or Emp loyee 
Health is required if the Resident/Fellow is returning from a m edical leave of 
more than three consecutive calendar days. 
  
            5. Resident/Fellow who fails to return to work at t he end of his/her leave period 
will be considered to have abandoned their position and may be subject to 
disciplinary action up to and including dismissal from the Program.  
 
E. Benefits 
 
During approved FMLA leave, the Program will maintain the Resid ent’s/Fellow’s group 
benefits under the same terms as if the Resident/Fellow had con tinued to work. 
Residents/Fellows will be required to continue to pay their con tribution of benefit costs during 
any period of unpaid leave. Contributions will be covered by the Resident’s/Fellow’s available 2323362.v1 11
Vacation or Sick Leave or simila r accrued benefit time, if any.  Once such benefit time is 
exhausted, the Resident/Fellow will continue to pay the contrib utions by arranging to pay 
his/her portion of the benefit contributions during the period of unpaid absence.  
 
The Resident/Fellow must use all applicable accrued benefit hou rs concurrent with FMLA 
leave, except as otherwise set forth herein with respect to ACGME Leave.  
 
If the Resident/Fellow does not pay his/her contributions while on unpaid leave, the 
contributions will go in arrears and the benefits will be retrospectively cancelled back to last 
paid pay period if the contributions are not paid within the required period of time as per FMLA 
regulations. 
If the benefits are voluntarily cancelled while on leave and the Resident/Fellow does not return 
with the 12-week FMLA entitlement, the Resident/Fellow will not be eligible to re-enroll in 
benefits until the next open enrollment unless otherwise required under FMLA regulations. If a 
Resident/Fellow returns to work and has contributions in arrears, the contributions will be 
deducted from subsequent paychecks.  
If a Resident/Fellow is actively communicating with Leave Administration staff regarding the 
owed benefit contributions and compliant with approved payment arrangements, the benefits 
will not be cancelled. If at any point during an approved payment arrangement period the 
Resident/Fellow becomes noncompliant with the payment arrangement, the benefits will be 
cancelled retrospectively back to the last paid pay period. The Resident/Fellow will not be 
eligible to re-enroll in benefits until the next open enrollment unless otherwise required under 
FMLA regulations. 
F. Certification Required 
 
            1. Resident/Fellow must pr ovide sufficient information for FMOLHS Leave 
Administration to determine if the leave may qualify for FMLA protection and 
the anticipated timing and duration of the leave. Sufficient information should 
include as applicable that the Resident/Fellow is unable to perform job functions, 
the family member is unable to perform daily activities, the need for 
hospitalization or continuing treatment by a healthcare provider, and/or 
circumstances supporting the need for military family leave. Residents/Fellows 
also must inform the Program Director and Leave Administration if the 
requested leave is for a reason for which FMLA leave was previously taken or 
certified.  
            2. Depending on the basis for the leave taken under  the FMLA, one of the 
following Certification Forms must be completed by a health care provider and 
returned to the FMOLHS Leave Administrator within 15 days of receipt of the 
certification form: 
 a .  Certification of Health Care Provider for Resident’s/Fellow’s 
Serious Health Condition - Must complete form when requesting family and 
medical leave due to one’s own illness. Additionally, for intermittent leave, the 
Resident/Fellow must provide a statement of medical necessity for his/her 
intermittent leave or reduced leave schedule, the expected duration of the 2323362.v1 12
schedule, and a listing of dates of his/her planned medical treatment and the 
duration of the treatment. 
 b. Certification of Health Care Provider for Family Member’s Serious 
Health Condition - Must complete form when requesting family and medical 
leave due to the serious health condition of a child, parent, or spouse. 
 c .  Certification of Qualifying Exigency for Military Family Leave - 
Must complete form when requesting leave due to a qualifying exigency relating 
to the covered active duty status of a spouse, child, or parent. 
 d. Certification for Serious Injury or Illness of Covered Service 
Member for Military Family Leave - Must complete when requesting leave to 
care for a spouse, parent, child or next of kin who is a covered service member 
of the Regular Armed Forces, the National Guard, or the Reserves who is 
undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy, is otherwise in 
outpatient status, or is otherwise on the temporary disability retired list for a 
serious injury or illness. 
3.         At the discretion of the Program/FMOLHS Leave Administration, a second 
medical opinion and periodic recertification at its own expense may be required. 
If the first and second medical opinions differ, the Program/FMOLHS Leave 
Administration, at its own expense, may require opinion of a third health care 
provider, approved by both the Program/FMOLHS Leave Administration and the 
Resident/Fellow. This third opinion is binding. Subsequent recertification may 
also be required by the Program/FMOLHS Leave Administration if it has reason 
to question the continued appropriateness of the leave or its duration, or 
whenever circumstances have changed significantly.   
G. Enforcement 
The Program will not interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of any right provided under 
the FMLA, nor discharge or discriminate against any person for opposing any practice made 
unlawful by the FMLA or for involvement in any proceeding under or relating to the FMLA.  
 
MEDICAL LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
Non FMLA Medical Leave of Absence is an approved leave which may be afforded to 
Residents/Fellows for up to 12 work weeks of leave in any rolling 12-month period under 
circumstances that are critical to the Resident’s/Fellow’s own health. Except as otherwise 
required by ACGME Leave requirements, Residents/Fellows are required to use any available 
vacation and sick benefits or non FMLA leave is unpaid. Residents/Fellows on FMLA due to 
their own personal illness may be eligible for a Non FMLA medical leave of absence after 
FMLA protection expires. Except as may be required by law, this leave is afforded at the 
discretion of the Program with due regard to all surrounding circumstances. The 
Program/FMOLHS Leave Administration will require medical certification of the need for 
Medical Leave consistent with the certification required under the policy governing FMLA. 
Extensions of this leave may be granted as circumstances warrant, and in compliance with state 
or federal law.  2323362.v1 13
 
INCIDENTAL LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
Incidental leave of absence is an approved unpaid absence that is seven days or less in 
duration and occurs due to a Resident’s/Fellow’s own illness. Such leave will only require the 
Resident/Fellow to provide notification and application for leave according to FMOLHS policy 
and provide a fitness for duty certification or other acceptable return to work note to Employee 
Health prior to the return-to-work date. The return-to-work documentation must contain the 
dates the Resident/Fellow was unable to work and under the care of the health care provider as 
well as the return-to-work date. If a Resident/Fellow is eligible for FMLA and has available 
FMLA entitlement, the absences will be designated as such, if approved. If a Resident/Fellow is 
not eligible for FMLA or has exhausted his/her FMLA entitlement, the absences will be 
designated as Non FMLA Medical leave, if approved. 
 
MILITARY LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
Military Leave of Absence may be approved for eligible Residents/Fellows serving in the 
“Uniformed Services.” The “Uniformed Services” include Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air 
Force, Coast Guard, Army National Guard, Air National Guard, Commissioned Corps of the 
Public Health Service, and any other category of persons designated by the President of the 
United States in time of war or emergency. Given the unique circumstances and requirements 
of the Program, requests for military leave will be evaluated by the Graduate Medical 
Education Committee and administered as required by federal or state law with due regard to 
ACGME and Program requirements. A Resident/Fellow must provide advance written notice to 
Leave Administration and the Program of all military duty, unless giving notice is impossible, 
unreasonable, or precluded by military necessity. A copy of military orders is also requested 
prior to start of military leave or as soon thereafter as practical if circumstances prevent 
submission prior to commencement of leave. 
 
PERSONAL LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
Personal Leave of Absence is an approved unpaid absence available to eligible 
Residents/Fellows for up to four weeks of leave in any rolling twelve-month period. If 
approved, a portion of Personal Leave may be paid and/or the four weeks extended if required 
to comply with ACGME Leave provisions. Personal Leave is intended to assist in critical 
circumstances for which no other leave of absence is available. Personal Leave is afforded at 
the discretion of the Program, with due regard to all surrounding circumstances. Except where 
ACGME Leave provisions apply, a Resident/Fellow becomes eligible for Personal Leave of 
Absence following 6 months of employment.  
 
PREGNANCY LEAVE  
Female Residents/Fellows may be granted six weeks of unpaid lea ve due to pregnancy, 
childbirth, or a related medical  condition. A portion of this l eave may be paid if required by 
ACGME Leave Provisions. This period may be extended for up to f our months if the 
Resident/Fellow is disabled on account of pregnancy, childbirth , or a related medical condition. 
The Resident/Fellow will be required to provide a physician's certification of such disability.  2323362.v1 14
Leave taken pursuant to this section runs concurrently with any other authorized leave, 
including any available FMLA leave. A Resident/Fellow becomes eligible for Pregnancy Leave 
immediately upon employment. 
 
 
 
THE FOLLOWING ADDITIONAL LEAVE BENEFITS/PARAMETERS ARE 
ADMINISTERED DIRECTLY THROUGH THE PROGRAM. PLEASE CONTACT THE 
PROGRAM DIRECTOR FOR FURTHER DIRECTION OR INFORMATION REGARDING 
THE FOLLOWING POLICIES. 
 
SICK LEAVE 
Residents/Fellows may be afforded up to 14 sick days per year for leave related to the 
Resident’s/Fellow’s own personal illnesses.  Residents/Fellows are not entitled to sick leave 
until such time as they request such leave, and it is approved in writing by the Program. Sick 
leave is a gratuitous benefit afforded to Residents/Fellows who become ill and is not considered 
to be part of the Resident’s/Fellow’s wages. Likewise, the maximum sick leave available, as 
identified above, will not be carried forward from year to year and will not be paid as wages 
upon the Resident’s/Fellow’s departure from the Program. Available paid sick leave will run 
concurrently with any type of approved Resident/Fellow leave of absence. Sick leave benefits 
(where sick leave is applicable) apply toward the 6 weeks of paid ACGME Leave. 
 
VACATION LEAVE 
PGY1 Residents may receive up to three weeks (21 days to be taken, typically, in 7-day 
intervals) of vacation during the academic year. Residents PGY2 and above may receive up to 
four weeks (28 days to be taken, typically, in 7-day intervals) of vacation during the academic 
year. Residents/Fellows are not entitled to vacation until such time as they apply for vacation 
leave, and such is approved in writing by the Program. Vacation leave is a gratuitous benefit 
afforded to Residents/Fellows and is not considered to be part of their wages. Likewise, the 
maximum vacation available, as identified above, will not be carried forward from year to year 
and will not be paid as wages upon the Resident’s/Fellow’s departure from the Program. 
Scheduling is pre-determined by the Program and is determined by the rotation schedule and 
those rotations that allow for leave. available paid vacation leave will run concurrently with any 
type of approved Resident/Fellow leave of absence. Vacation benefits apply toward the 6 weeks 
of paid ACGME Leave, except where one week must be reserved pursuant to ACGME Leave 
requirements. 
 
EDUCATIONAL LEAVE:   
Residents/Fellows are permitted up to five total days of educational leave to attend or present at 
medical meetings approved by Program. Residents/Fellows are not entitled to educational leave 
until such time as they request such leave, and it is approved in writing by the Program. 2323362.v1 15
Educational leave is a gratuitous benefit afforded to Residents/Fellows and is not considered to 
be part of their wages. Likewise, the maximum educational leave available, as identified above, 
will not be carried forward from year to year and will not be paid as wages upon the 
Resident’s/Fellow’s departure from the Program. 
 
 
OTHER: 
 
Make up of missed training due to leave of absence is to be arranged with the Program Director 
in accordance with the requirements of the Board of the affected specialty. The Program and the 
Graduate Medical Education Committee reserve the right to deter mine what is necessary for 
each Resident/Fellow for make-up including repeating any part o f Program previously 
completed. 
 
ATTACHMENTS/APPENDIX: 
 
 
 