GME/ADM/13 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME Section: Administrative 
Title: Graduate Medical Education Housing 
Policy 
Reference #: GME/ADM/13 
Supersedes #: 
Date of Origination: 4/2/2008 Review Date: 10/14/14; 7/2015 
Revision Date: 10/14/14; 7/2015 
A capitalized word has the meaning as first defined in the policy.  Unless otherwise defined, all other capitalized words have the same 
meaning as ascribed to them by the ACGME Glossary of Terms. 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to outline OLOL graduate medical education housing criteria. 
DEFINITIONS: 
When used in this policy, these terms have the following meaning: 
Guest: The resident physician assigned to OLOL for a rotation that may utilize OLOL paid housing 
during the academic year.  
POLICY: 
OLOL affords limited housing units to eligible visiting/affiliated medical students, residents, and fellows 
as a service. 
Guests residing in OLOL apartments and their affiliated program will agree to hold harmless OLOL and 
to indemnify OLOL for any damage to the property or any personal injury to the guest and/or family 
members or guests/visitors that may come upon the property.  
Housing requests shall be made to the Graduate Medical Education Office by the guest ’s program 
coordinator within his/her respective teaching program.  Housing applications and $100.00 fully 
refundable damage deposit must be submitted to the Graduate Medical Education Office at least two 
weeks prior to start of rotation.  The Graduate Medical Education Office will determine housing 
eligibility and will make appropriate assignments with program according to housing availability.  Once 
the academic year is complete, a refund of the deposit will be given to guest if no damages to the 
assigned apartment were reported.  If repair costs exceed the amount of the deposit, the guest and the 
program will be notified and payment must be submitted to OLOL prior to returning to OLOL for a 
rotation. 
Guests assigned to OLOL housing are not permitted to loan apartments out to others or share apartments 
with residents who have lost housing privileges. Guests are not allowed to switch apartments with other 
Guests.  If a Guest wishes to switch apartments, approval from the OLOL Graduate Medical Education 
Office is required prior to making the switch. 
Guests assigned to OLOL housing are to comply with the following terms, including but not limited to: GME/ADM/13 
 No pets – if a Guest is found to have a pet in the apartment, the guest will be responsible for fees 
incurred by OLOL to have a cleaning service (Selected by OLOL) to deep clean the apartment.  
 No disturbances of neighbors are all allowed at any time. After a first warning, there shall be a 
$25.00 per occurrence fine/fee for each disturbance thereafter 
 Apartments must be left clean and free of trash 
 No additions or alterations (including painting) may be made to the premises 
 No smoking within the apartment unit 
 
Guests will be issued  apartment keys after signing the OLOL Graduate Medical Education Housing 
Policy Attestation. The Guest is the only person that can sign the OLOL Graduate Medical Education 
Housing Policy Attestation and sign for keys to assigned apartment. 
 
Provided amenities include basic furnishings and utilities . The following items are not provided  by 
OLOL: bed and bath linens, cable and phone services.  
 
Guests must vacate OLOL housing upon completion of rotations at OLOL to allow for other guests. 
Keys are to be returned to the Graduate Medical Education Office on the move-out date. If the guest fails 
to be completely moved out of the apartment by 12:00 p.m. noon on the last day of the rotation, the guest 
will be charged a cleaning service reschedule fee (currently $35.00 but subject to change without notice). 
 
Special requests for extension of stay must be given to the Graduate Medical Education Office no later 
than two weeks prior to move out date.  Availablilty  of a late move out d ate/time are not guaranteed.  
Request for extension is not approved until Guest receives an email from the GME Services Coordinator 
stating that extension is granted. 
 
Guest is required to notify the GME Office at 225-765-5952 immediately if there are any maintenance 
issues (air condition, water, etc…).  If Guest fails to notify the GME office, Guest may be subject to 
charges associated with damage resulting from delay in notifying the GME Office. 
 
If Guest loses or is unable to provide all keys (apartment, mailbox, etc…) assigned to the apartment, the 
Guest will be responsible for the cost to rekey the item associated with the missing key. If a parking pass 
is assigned with the assigned apartment, Guest is required to return the parking pass at the same time the 
apartment key is return to the GME Office.  If the Guest is unable to produce the parking pass, the Guest 
is responsible for the cost to replace the parking pass (currently $15.00) 
 
If the Guest is provided a wireless router (and all issued components of the wireless router) the Guest is 
responsible to return all wireless router components at the same time as key return.  If the Guest is unable 
to return all components of the wireless router, the Guest will be responsible for the cost associated with 
replacing the component or the entire wireless router if the wireless router will not work without the 
component.  
 
All fees associated with this policy are to be p aid to the Our Lady of the Lake Office of Graduate 
Medical Education no later than 7 business days after notification is given to the Guest. 
 
Any resident found to be in violation of this policy will be required to vacate the apartment immediately 
and will not be considered for future housing. 