Guidelines for Teaching
Physicians, Interns, and ResidentsPayment for Physician Services in Teaching Settings
2
Guidelines for Teaching Physicians, Interns, and Residents
Services furnished in teach-
ing settings are paid under
the Medicare Physician Fee
Schedule (MPFS) if the
services are:
■ Personally furnished 
by a physician who is
not a resident;
■ Furnished by a resident when a teaching physician 
is physically present during the critical or key portions
of the service; or
■ Furnished by residents under a primary care 
exception within an approved Graduate Medical
Education (GME) Program.
The services of residents are payable either through direct
GME payment or reasonable cost payments.
Services Furnished by an Intern or Resident 
Within the Scope of an Approved Training Program
Medical and surgical services furnished by an intern or
resident within the scope of his or her training program are
covered as provider services. This includes services that are
furnished in a setting that is not part of the provider where
(among other things) the provider has agreed to incur all or
substantially all the costs of training in the nonprovider
facility. When a resident who is a licensed physician
performs the services but the provider incurs little or none
of the training costs, the services are paid under the MPFS.
Services Furnished by an Intern or Resident 
Outside the Scope of an Approved Training 
Program (Moonlighting)
Medical and surgical services furnished by an intern or
resident that are not related to his or her training program
and are furnished outside the facility where he or she has
the training program are covered as physician services
when the requirements in the first two bullets listed below
are met. Medical and surgical services furnished by an
intern or resident that are not related to his or her training
program and are furnished in an outpatient department or
emergency room of the hospital where he or she has the
training program are covered as physician services when
the requirements in all three bullets listed below are met.
When these criteria are met, the services are considered to
have been furnished by the individuals in their capacity as a
physician, not in their capacity as an intern or resident.
■ The services are identifiable physician services, the
nature of which require performance by a physician in
person and contribute to the diagnosis or treatment of
the patient’s condition.
■ The intern or resident is fully licensed to practice medi-
cine, osteopathy, dentistry, or podiatry by the State in
which the services are performed.
■ The services furnished can be separately identified from
those services that are required as part of the training
program.
General Documentation Guidelines
Both residents and teaching physicians may document
physician services in the patient’s medical record. The
documentation must be dated and contain a legible
signature or identity and may be
■ Dictated and transcribed; 
■ Typed; 
■ Hand-written; or
■ Computer-generated. 
A macro is a command in a computer or dictation
application in an electronic medical record that automati-
cally generates predetermined text that is not edited by the
user. The teaching physician may use a macro as the
required personal documentation if he or she personally
adds it in a secured or password protected system. In
addition to the teaching physician’s macro, either the
resident or the teaching physician must provide
customized information that is sufficient to support a
medical necessity determination. The note in the electronic
medical record must sufficiently describe the specific
services furnished to the specific patient on the specific
date. If both the resident and the teaching physician use
macros only, this is considered insufficient documentation.
:
Evaluation and Management Documentation
Guidelines
For a given encounter, the selection of the appropriate level
of evaluation and management (E/M) services is deter-
mined according to the code of definitions in the American
Medical Association’s Current Procedural Terminology
(CPT)book and any applicable documentation guidelines.
When teaching physicians bill E/M services, they must
personally document at least the following:
■ That they performed the service or were physically pres-
ent during the key or critical portions of the service fur-
nished by the resident; and
■ His or her participation in the management of the
patient.
On medical review, the combined entries into the medical
record by the teaching physician and resident constitute the
documentation for the service and together must support
the medical necessity of the service. Documentation by the
resident of the presence and participation of the teaching
physician is not sufficient to establish the presence and
participation of the teaching physician.
Evaluation and Management Documentation
Provided by Students
Any contribution and participation of a student to the
performance of a billable service must be performed in the
physical presence of a teaching physician or resident in a
service that meets teaching physician billing requirements
(other than the review of systems [ROS] and/or past,
family, and/or social history [PFSH], which are taken as
part of an E/M service and are not separately billable).
Students may document services in the medical record;
however, the teaching physician may only refer to the
student’s documentation of an E/M service that is related
to the ROS and/or PFSH. The teaching physician may not
refer to a student’s documentation of physical examination
findings or medical decision making in his or her personal
note. If the student documents E/M services, the teaching
physician must verify and redocument the history of
present illness and perform and redocument the physical
examination and medical decision making activities of 
the service.
Exception for Evaluation and Management 
Services Furnished in Certain Primary Care Centers 
Medicare may grant a primary care exception within an
approved GME Program in which the teaching physician is
paid for certain E/M services the resident performs when
the teaching physician is not present. The primary care
exception applies to the following lower and mid-level E/M
services and the initial preventive physical examination
(also known as the “Welcome to Medicare Physical”): 
New Patient Established Patient
CPT Code 99201® CPT Code 99211
CPT Code 99202 CPT Code 99212
CPT Code 99203 CPT Code 99213
3
Guidelines for Teaching Physicians, Interns, and Residents
CPT only copyright 2006 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Effective January 1, 2005, the
following code is included under
the primary exception:
■ Healthcare Common
Procedure Coding System
code G3044: Initial
Preventive Physical
Examination: face-to-face
visit, services limited to new
beneficiary during the first
six months of Medicare enrollment.
A center must attest in writing that all of the following
conditions are met for a particular residency program for
the exception to apply:
■ The services must be furnished in a center located in
the outpatient department of a hospital or another
ambulatory care entity in which the time spent by resi-
dents in patient care activities is included in determin-
ing direct GME payments to a teaching hospital. This
requirement is not met when the resident is assigned to
a physician’s office away from the center or makes
home visits. The nonhospital entity should verify with
the Fiscal Intermediary or A/B Medicare Administrative
Contractor that it meets the requirements of a written
agreement between the hospital and the entity.
■ Residents who furnish billable patient care without the
physical presence of a teaching physician must have
completed more than six months of an approved resi-
dency program. 
■ Teaching physicians who submit claims under the
exception must not supervise more than four
residents at any given time and must direct the care
from such proximity as to constitute immediate avail-
ability. The teaching physician must:
• Have no other responsibilities, including
the supervision of other personnel, at the time the
service was furnished by the resident.
• Have primary medical responsibility for patients
cared for by residents.
• Ensure that the care furnished is reasonable and
necessary.
• Review the care furnished by residents during or
immediately after each visit. This must include a
review of the patient’s medical history and diagno-
sis, the resident’s findings on physical examina-
tion, and treatment plan (e.g., record of tests and
therapies).
4
Guidelines for Teaching Physicians, Interns, and Residents
E
 
• Document the extent of his or her participa-
tion in the review and direction of the services 
furnished to each patient.
■ Patients should consider the center to be their primary
location for health care services. Residents must be
expected to generally furnish care to the same group of
established patients during their residency training. The
types of services furnished by residents under the
exception include the following:
• Acute care for undifferentiated problems or chron-
ic care for ongoing conditions including chronic
mental illness.
• Coordination of care furnished by other physicians
and providers.
• Comprehensive care not limited by organ system
or diagnosis.
Residency programs most
likely to qualify for the
exception are:
■ Family practice;
■ General internal
medicine;
■ Geriatric medicine;
■ Pediatrics; and 
■ Obstetrics/gynecology. 
Certain GME programs in psychiatry may qualify in
special situations, such as when the program furnishes
comprehensive care for chronically mentally ill patients.
The range of services residents are trained to furnish, and
actually furnish, at these centers include comprehensive
medical as well as psychiatric care.
GLOSSARY
Critical or Key Portion
The part or parts of a service that the
teaching physician determines are a critical
or key portion.
Direct Medical and Surgical Services
Services to individual beneficiaries that are
personally furnished by a physician or a
resident under supervision in a teaching
hospital. Election is made to receive pay-
ments for physician services furnished in
teaching hospitals on a reasonable cost basis. 
Intern or Resident
An individual who participates in an approved
Graduate Medical Education (GME) program
or a physician who is not in an approved GM
program but who is authorized to practice
only in a hospital setting (e.g., has a tempo-
rary or restricted license or is an unlicensed
graduate of a foreign medical school). Also
included in this definition are interns and
fellows in GME programs recognized as
approved for purposes of direct GME
payments made by Fiscal Intermediaries or
A/B Medicare Administrative Contractors.
Receiving a staff or faculty appointment,
participating in a fellowship, or whether a
hospital includes the physician in its full-time
equivalency count of residents does not by
itself alter the status of “resident.” 
Medicare Physician Fee Schedule
The basis for which Medicare Part B pays for
physician services. Lists the more than 7,000
covered services and their payment rates.
Physically Present
When the teaching physician is located in the
same room as the patient (or a room that is
subdivided with partitioned or curtained areas
to accommodate multiple patients) and/or
performs a face-to-face service.
Student
An individual who participates in an accredit-
ed educational program (e.g., medical school)
that is not an approved Graduate Medical
Education program and is not considered an
intern or resident. Medicare does not pay for
any services furnished by a student.
Teaching Hospital
A hospital in an approved Graduate Medical
Education residency program in medicine,
osteopathy, dentistry, or podiatry.
Teaching Physician
A physician, other than an intern or
resident, who involves residents in the care
of his or her patients. Generally, the teach-
ing physician must be present during all
critical or key portions of the procedure and
immediately available to furnish services
during the entire service in order for the
service to be payable under the Medical
Physician Fee Schedule.
Teaching Setting
Any provider, hospital-based provider, or
nonprovider setting in which Medicare pay-
ment for the services of residents is made by
the Fiscal Intermediary or A/B Medicare
Administrative Contractor under the direct
Graduate Medical Education payment
methodology or on a reasonable cost basis
to freestanding Skilled Nursing Facilities or
Home Health Agencies.
Helpful Websites
Direct Graduate Medical Education
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/AcuteInpatientPPS/06_dgme.asp 
Documentation Guidelines for E/M Services
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/MLNEdWebGuide/25_EMDOC.asp
Internet-Only Manuals
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/Manuals/IOM/list.asp 
Medicare Learning Network
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/MLNGenInfo
This fact sheet was prepared as a service to the public and is not intended to grant rights or impose obligations. This booklet may
contain references or links to statutes, regulations, or other policy materials. The information provided is only intended to be a
general summary. It is not intended to take the place of either the written law or regulations. We encourage readers to review the
specific statutes, regulations and other interpretive materials for a full and accurate statement of their contents.
The Medicare Learning Network (MLN) is the brand name for official CMS educational products and information for Medicare
fee-for-service providers. For additional information visit the Medicare Learning Network’s web page at
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/MLNGenInfoon the CMS website.
CPT only copyright 2006 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. CPT is a registered trademark of the American
Medical Association. Applicable FARS/DFARS Restrictions Apply to Government Use. Fee schedules, relative value units, conversion
factors and/or related components are not assigned by the AMA, are not part of CPT, and the AMA is not recommending their use.
The AMA does not directly or indirectly practice medicine or dispense medical services. The AMA assumes no liability for data con-
tained or not contained herein. 
Section 911 of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (MMA) Congress mandated that
the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services replace the current contracting authority under Title XVIII of the
Social Security Act with the new Medicare Administrative Contractor (MAC) authority. This mandate is referred to as Medicare
Contracting Reform. Medicare Contracting Reform is intended to improve Medicare’s administrative services to beneficiaries and
health care providers. Currently, there are four Durable Medical Equipment (DME) MACs that handle the processing of DME
claims and three A/B MACs (Jurisdiction 3, Jurisdiction 4 and Jurisdiction 5) to handle the processing of both Part A and Part B
claims for those beneficiaries located within the states included in Jurisdiction 3, Jurisdiction 4 and Jurisdiction 5. All Medicare
work performed by Fiscal Intermediaries and Carriers will be replaced by the new A/B MACs by 2011. Providers may access the
most current MCR information to determine the impact of these changes at http://www.cms.hhs.gov/MedicareContractingReform/.
` July 2007  ICN: 006347