Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:   HIM 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  VIII 
Subject: Release of Information - Psychiatric Section:  R 
Date of Origination: May 13, 1990 Supersedes:   
Date of Last Revision: September 2, 2009 Serial Code:  HIMR17 
Date of Last Review:  November 1, 2013,  
March 2015, June 2021  
 
 
Purpose: 
The purpose of this policy is to assure the privacy of patients receiving mental and 
behavioral health services at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center. 
 
Policy: 
It is the policy of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center that all requests for 
information concerning hospital or clinic psychiatric patients must be transferred to the 
Medical Records Department (for hospital records) or to Clinic staff assigned to release 
of information (for clinic records).  The request for information must follow standard 
release of information policy and procedures. 
 
Procedure: 
 
I.  GENERAL AUTHORIZATION GUIDELINES FOR RELEASE OF 
INFORMATION ON PSYCHIATRIC PATIENTS 
 
Special care must be exercised in the release.  Written authorization from the 
patient is necessary before releasing any information. 
 
  A. The authorization must include the following eight points: 
 
1. Name of the facility from which records are requested. 
2. Name of the organization or individual to which disclosure is 
to be made. 
3. Name of the patient, date of birth and social security 
number. 
   4. Purpose of disclosure. 
   5. Description of information requested. 
6. Statement that consent is revocable at any time up to what 
statement has already been disclosed. 
   7. Date consent signed. 
   8. Signature of the patient or his legitimate agent. 
 B. The regulations specify categories of persons to who limited 
disclosure of necessary information may be made with consent. 
   1. Medical personnel to enable furnishing of services. 
2. Central registries concerning types of drugs and dosages in 
order to prevent multiple enrollments in drug therapy 
program (i.e., Methadone). 
3. Patient’s family unless disclosure would be harmful to the 
patient. 
4. Third party payers and funding sources only to the extent 
necessary to the patient. 
5. Employers and employment agencies for verification of 
status and treatment or where the information is necessary 
to evaluate hazards to the patient or others. 
6. Certain personnel in the criminal justice system where 
participation in a treatment program is condition of the 
individual’s release from confinement, suspension of 
sentence, etc.; with the patient’s consent, the scope of 
information released may be unrestricted.  
7. Other persons where it is certain that the patient’s consent 
was voluntary, granting the request will not harm the 
patient-program relationship and granting the request will 
not harm the patient. 
   
C. Requests for  information from psychiatric records from Our Lady 
of the Lake Regional Medical Center will be handled by staff 
assigned to release of information for hospital records and by staff 
assigned to release of information for clinic records.   
   
  D. Exceptions where no consent is required: 
 
1. Release for consulting physicians of Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center staff. 
2. Release to medical personnel in an emergency. 
3. Qualified personnel for studies and research (without 
disclosure of identity). 
4. Order by the court of competent jurisdiction which shows 
good cause. (Only disclose information necessary for the 
purpose). 
5. Release for continuity of care of the patient. 
6. If there are any questions, consult the Director of Health 
Information Management. 
 
 
   
      E. All authorizations for release of PHI forms must be completed in 
full. Any blanks will render the authorization invalid.  
      F. A disclosure cannot be made on the basis of an authorization 
which has expired, fails to conform to the requirements necessary for a 
valid authorization, is known to have been revoked, or is known to be 
materially false. 
   
G.  A new authorization form must be signed for each new request for 
information. 
 
H.  Only the information specifically requested on the authorization form 
may be released. Requests for “any and all information” should be 
discouraged. 
 
 
II. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES FOR RELEASE DURING HOSPITAL STAY (IN-
HOUSE PATIENTS) 
 
 A.  Request for information on psychiatric patients who are still in-house must be 
transferred to the appropriate medical records personnel. The following requestor 
specific guidelines shall apply: 
 
.  
1.  Third-party payers 
 
  Authorization form may be signed on admission for release of information 
for utilization review purposes. 
 
     2. Utilization Review 
 
           Authorization form may be signed on admission for release of information 
for utilization review purposes. 
 
3. Collection of payment for services 
 
             Authorization form may be signed on admission giving authorization to 
release only that information necessary for collection of charges for 
services rendered. A separate consent form designed specifically for this 
should be used. 
 
 
                       4. Employee Assistance Programs 
 
Authorization shall be signed when request for information is received. 
 Information released shall be limited to the date of patient signature. 
 Any treatment that occurs after the patient has signed the authorization 
shall not be released.   
                       5. Halfway Houses 
 
           Authorization shall be signed when request for information is received. 
Only information up to the date of patient signature shall be released. If 
patient is being referred to Halfway House at discharge, release shall be 
signed at discharge if information is requested for entire stay.  
 
      6. Family Members 
 
           To release information on the presence of patient to family members or to 
request patient information from family members, an authorization may be 
signed on admission. The authorization must include the complete name, 
address and telephone number of the person the patient authorizes to 
receive or release information. However, information shall be given only 
on a “call back” basis. The call back system involves identifying the full 
name of the person calling, name of the hospital or doctor’s office, 
telephone number and extension, and calling that person back in order to 
verify that the request is legitimate. 
 
      7. Judges or Attorneys 
 
           Authorizations shall be signed when request for information is received. 
Only information up to the date of the patient’s signature shall be released.  
 
 
      8. External Case Managers 
 
            Authorization shall be signed when request for information is received. 
Only information up to the date of the patient’s signature shall be released.  
 
 
 
 
III.  GUIDELINES FOR IN-HOUSE REQUESTS FOR COPIES OF 
PSYCHIATRIC RECORDS FOR PATIENTS BEING TRANSFERRED  
 
A. The staff on the unit is responsible for obtaining the proper authorization 
for release. 
 
B.   At hospital facility, the unit staff will deliver the authorization and chart to 
the Health Information Management Department’s release of information office. 
 
C. Health Information Management Release of Information (ROI) will 
ascertain that the authorization is valid and will copy the record. 
 D. Health Information Management Release of Information (ROI) will notify 
the unit that the copies of the record are ready to be picked up by the nursing unit. 
 
E. If the patient is at off-site TAU facility, the unit staff will obtain the proper 
authorization and forward the authorization and record to the main hospital ROI. 
1. Health Information Management Department Release of 
Information (ROI) will notify the nursing unit that the copies are ready 
and return them via courier. 
2. If the request is STAT and the party is waiting for the records, the 
TAU staff will make copies upon receipt of proper authorization.   
  
 
 
IV. REQUEST FROM PATIENT TO REVIEW OR OBTAIN RECORD: 
 
A. It is the policy of the Our Lady of the Lake RMC to secure written 
permission from a licensed healthcare professional prior to release of 
information of hospital or clinic psychiatric patients. The “Request for 
Release of Information/Psychiatric Service Request” form shall be utilized 
to secure permission.  (See attachment)   
 
B. A health care provider may deny access to a record if the health care 
provider reasonably concludes that knowledge of the information 
contained in the record would be injurious to the health or welfare of the 
patient or could reasonable be expected to endanger the life of safety of 
any other person (LA. R.S. 1299.96) 
 
C. A written authorization from the patient requesting the medical record 
shall be obtained.  (See Section I. A. for required content of authorization) 
 
 D.   Approval or Denials of Access 
1. All denials of access, in whole or in part, will be referred to the 
Privacy Officer. 
 
2.  Some requests for PHI are considered Non-Reviewable Denials 
 
A denial of access will be issued and will not be reviewable if: 
a. The PHI is (i) psychotherapy notes; (ii) information compiled in 
reasonable anticipation of litigation or administrative proceeding; or 
(iii) laboratory information subject to or exempted from the Clinical 
Laboratory Improvements Amendments of 1988. 
b.  Our Lady of the Lake RMC is acting under the direction of a 
correctional institution and the information could jeopardize the 
health, safety, security, custody or rehabilitation of the individual, any 
officer, employee, or other inmates, or of any officer, employee, or other person at the correctional institution or responsible for the 
transporting of the inmate. 
c. The PHI was created or obtained in the course of research that 
includes treatment.  (In such cases access may be temporarily 
suspended for as long as the research is in progress, provided that the 
individual has agreed to the denial of access when consenting to 
participate in the research, and has been informed that the right of 
access will be reinstated upon the completion of the research.) 
d. The PHI is contained in records that are subject to the Privacy Act, 5 
U.S.C. § 552a.  (Access to such records may be denied under certain 
circumstances governed by that law.) 
e. The PHI was obtained from someone other than a health care 
provider under a promise of confidentiality and the access requested 
would be reasonably lively to reveal the source of the information. 
 
3. All other requests from patients to review or obtain records from 
psychiatric services will be submitted to the licensed healthcare 
professional using the “Request for Release of Information/Psychiatric 
Service Request” form. 
 
4.  The licensed healthcare professional may: 
 
 a. Grant permission to release information to the patient, or 
 
b. Request the patient review the medical record with 
psychiatric personnel or physician in attendance, or 
psychiatric personnel or physician in attendance, or 
 
c. Request information be released to patient named advocate, or  
 
d. Deny access due to medical contraindications.  
 (LA R.S. 2144) 
 
1.  Licensed healthcare professionals may deny access to 
PHI in the following situations: 
 a. A licensed healthcare professional has 
determined, in the exercise of professional judgment, that 
the requested access is reasonably likely to endanger the 
life or physical safety of the individual or another person; 
 b.  The PHI refers to another person (unless such 
other person is a health care provider) and a licensed 
healthcare professional has determined, in the exercise of 
professional judgment, that the requested access is 
reasonably likely to cause substantial harm to that other 
person; or   c. The request for access is made by the individual’s 
personal representative and a licensed healthcare 
professional has determined, in the exercise of professional 
judgment, that the provision of access to such personal 
representative is reasonably likely to cause substantial harm 
to the individual or another person.   
 
2.   In denying access in whole or in part to the extent 
possible, staff assigned to release of information for 
hospital records and staff assigned to release of information 
for clinic records will give the individual access to any 
other protected health information requested, after 
excluding the PHI that was denied. 
 
3.  If licensed healthcare professional denies access, the 
“Request for Release of Information/Psychiatric Service 
Request” form and the Authorization for Release of 
Protected Health Information shall be sent to the Privacy 
Officer.   
 
4.   A timely, written denial must be provided to the patient 
from the Privacy Officer or designee within 15 days of 
request.  The denial must be made in plain language and 
contain: 
a. The basis for the denial; 
b. If applicable, a statement of the individual’s 
review rights, including a description of how the 
individual may exercise such review rights; and 
c. A description of how the individual may 
complain to Our Lady of the Lake RMC or its 
affiliates or to the HHS Secretary, including the 
name or title and telephone number of the 
contact person or office designated to receive 
such complaints. 
 
    
 
 
Examples of appropriate statements of notification are: 
 
a. It is OLOL policy to obtain permission from the attending 
physician prior to release of information when patients are treated 
in special units. Your physician has decided it is not in your best 
medical interest to receive this information. If you wish to discuss 
this with him, you may contact his office. (Offer telephone 
number, address and directions).  
b. Your physician has decided it is in your best medical 
interest to review your record with a health care provider present. 
We will make arrangements for you to review your record with 
someone present. If you wish to discuss etc., etc. 
 
c.   Your physician has decided it is in your best medical 
interest to release your record to (Patient Advocate – relative, 
friend, guardian) that can assist you in the review and use of this 
information. If you wish to discuss etc., etc. 
 
5.  If Our Lady of the Lake RMC does not maintain the PHI that is 
the subject of the individual’s request for access but knows where 
the requested information is maintained, Our Lady of the Lake 
RMC must inform the individual where to direct the request for 
access.   
 
6.  The patient may request in writing a review of a denied request 
for access.   
a.  The Privacy Officer must promptly refer the request for 
review to a licensed health care professional who is 
designated to act as a reviewing official and who did not 
participate in the original decision to deny access. 
b.   The reviewing official must determine, within a 
reasonable period of time, whether or not to deny the 
access requested. 
c.   The Privacy Officer must provide written notice to the 
individual outlining the outcome of the review. 
 
7.  The Privacy Officer will submit the “Request for Release of 
Information/Psychiatric Service Request” form, the Authorization 
for Release of Protected Health Information and all 
correspondence and associated documentation related to patient 
access, including denials, to the Health Information Management 
Department (for hospital record) or to the Clinic Manager (for 
clinic records) for inclusion in the patient’s medical record.   
 
 
 
____________________________     __________________ 
Jeff Limbocker                      Date 
Chief Financial Officer 