ECLS-012 (7055) 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Heart and Vascular 8th Floor Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for HV8 (7055) 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 (102-10314-
2053) 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: November 16, 2017 Review Date: 6/13/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exits are located at elevators near HV8A and HV8B and at stairwell by HV8A and HV8B. 
o Adjacent smoke compartment is accessible through double doors near elevators. 
o Fire/Smoke barrier doors are located adjacent to 8008 and 8016 
o Fire/Smoke barrier doors are located by nursing stations on HV8A and HV8B leading to 
staff hallway 
 ECLS-012 (7055) 
Page 2 of 2 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• RN or designee clears hallway of any carts or equipment by moving them to conference room on 
HV8B.  
• CNA or designee closes doors and windows 
• Charge Nurse or designee confirms automatic fire doors closed  
• RN  or designee moves patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an 
emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• CSR or designee prevents people from using elevator 
• RN or designee assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with sensory or 
mobility disabilities 
• CSR or designee ensures all employees are accounted for 
• Charge Nurse or designee ensures all patients are accounted for 
• Nurse Manager or Charge RN ensures each room is empty.   
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
If your department has medical gas shut off valves, identify that your staff has been trained to know 
who has authority to shut them off.  In most cases the authorized position will notify either Plant 
Services or Respiratory to turn off the medical gas. The med gas shut off valves are located across 
from patient rooms 8007 and 8015. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• HV8 is partially ambulatory and assistance will be needed for evacuation.   
• For horizontal evacuations patients will be moved via wheelchairs or stretchers. 
• For vertical evacuations patients will be moved via sheets and mattresses depending on level of 
acuity. 
• Wheelchairs can be located near HV8A and HV8B nurse’s station. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• There are fire alarm pulls in each nurse’s station, next to stairwells, and by the elevators. 
• There are fire extinguishers located by HV8A nurse’s station next the pharmacy door and in the 
main hallway across from room 8009 and 8015. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Oxygen cylinders are stored on the unit in the Supply Rooms. 
• Some patients on the unit are not ambulatory. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Individuals can be evacuated horizontally from the A side of HV8 to the B side of HV8. 
• Individuals can be evacuated horizontally from the B side of HV8 to the A side of HV8. 
• Individuals can be evacuated vertically through stairwell on HV8A or HV8B with destination 
being the main parking garage. 
• A secondary vertical evacuation zone is located outside of the entrance to the HVI building. 