IAD-033 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Imaging Services/ 
Administration 
Title: Imaging Critical Results Reporting Policy Reference #: IAD036 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 3/2/2018 Last Review Date: 
3/2/2018;7/19, 
1/21, 8/22, 3/23, 
2/24 
Last Revision Date:   3/2/18, 11/24 
 
 
 
PURPOSE 
To provide guidelines for the timeliness of reporting diagnostic critical results to the licensed healthcare 
provider that can act on the results. 
 
 
DEFINITIONS 
1. A Physician/designee - is the on-call Physician, Physician Assistant, Nurse Practitioner or Physician 
office nurse who has been permitted to accept the results immediately and relay to the ordering 
Physician. 
2. Critical Results – These are tests that a critical finding could significantly impact a patient’s well-
being.  These are generally considered to be the initial first-time diagnostic results that are 
immediately or potentially life, limb or organ threatening, thus requiring an urgent response. Listed 
are results that are considered a critical result unless they are deemed a previously known diagnosis:  
 
 
New intracranial hemorrhage or hemorrhagic transformation of stroke 
Tension pneumothorax 
Aortic dissection or traumatic tear 
Acute pulmonary embolism 
Ruptured aneurysm or impending rupture 
Active bleeding/ Contrast Extravasation 
Perforation of viscus (free air) 
Ischemic bowel (pneumatosis) 
Ectopic Pregnancy 
Testicular or ovarian torsion 
Dangerous malposition of line or tube 
 
 
POLICY 
 
Critical results are to be reported to the Physician/designee within 60 minutes of being resulted.  
 
 
 IAD-033 
Page 2 of 2 
PROCEDURES 
 
 
1. The Radiologist will communicate critical results to the ordering Physician/designee.  
2. The Radiologist will ask the Physician/designee to read back the results to verify that they were 
understood correctly.   
3. The Radiologist will document in the procedure report the person and the time of notification. 
 
 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
Brandon St. Amant M.D. Medical Director Imaging Services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 