POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Imaging Services 
Subject:  Operation of Imaging Equipment Section:  Administration 
Date of Origination:  5/88 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
May 2019 
12/17, 5/19, 5/21, 3/23, 
2/24 
Serial Code:  IAD 014 
     
  
PURPOSE: 
To identify personnel identified for operating imaging equipment. 
POLICY: 
A. All equipment maintained by the Imaging Services Department is to be 
used under the direction of the radiologist / physician, physician assistant, 
and / or by persons registered / certified with specified training in their field 
of expertise.  Manufacturer’s instructions and guidelines are to be followed 
for all Imaging equipment.  
B. These persons are subject to the rules and regulations of State and 
Federal regulatory bodies. 
C. License and Registry 
1. Radiologic Technologist and Special Imaging Technologist 
 The Radiologic Technologist is required to be registered by the American 
Registry of Radiologic Technologists (ARRT) or board eligible.  As required by 
Louisiana State Law, all radiologic technologists employed by the Medical Center 
must be licensed to practice in Louisiana (LSRT). Copies of license and registry 
verification will be kept in the Human Resources. 
2. Ultrasonographer 
 The Ultrasonographer is required to be a Registered Diagnostic Medical 
Sonographer (RDMS) or board eligible.  Copies of registry verification will be kept 
in the Human Resources. 
3. MRI Technologist  
 The MRI Technologist is preferred to be registered by the American 
Registry of Radiologic Technologists (ARRT). Copies of registry verification will 
be kept in Human Resources. 
4. Nuclear Medicine 
 The Nuclear Medicine Tech is required to be registered (or board eligible) 
by the American Registry of Radiologic Technologists (N) or certified by the 
Nuclear Medicine Technologist Certification (CNMT).  Copies of the registry / 
certification verification will be kept in Human Resources.  