POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Imaging Services 
Subject:  Department Philosophy and Scope of Services  Section:  Administration 
Date of 
Origination:  
05/31/06 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
12/11 
01/15,1/17, 12/17, 5/19, 1/21, 
3/23, 2/24 
Serial Code:  IAD 29 
     
  
PURPOSE: 
The primary purpose of the Imaging Services Department is to provide 
diagnostic, therapeutic, and consultative services to doctors and patients by the 
application of radiant energy and other imaging modalities. 
 
POLICY:  
 
A. Philosophy 
This department is to be totally oriented toward the best delivery of optimal 
patient care in a most expeditious and professional manner.  The standards of 
professionalism must remain at the highest level to promote a feeling of wellbeing to 
both patients and staff. The product of our services must be kept at a high level of 
quality to insure the best diagnostic results for both patient and attending physician. 
 
B. Scope of Services 
1. Imaging Services consists of procedures performed in Diagnostic Radiology, 
Computed Axial Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), 
Ultrasound, Special Procedures, and Nuclear Medicine.  Portable procedures are 
performed throughout the organization.  Portable fluoroscopic procedures are 
performed in the Operating Room.  
 
2. Services consist of acquiring an image through one of the modalities listed above 
by licensed and registered personnel, quality assurance monitoring and 
evaluation, appropriate use of shielding and quality control, image interpretation 
and dictation by a radiologist or nuclear medicine physician, record keeping and 
image management.  
 
3. Ranges of services include diagnostic procedures, non-invasive procedures and 
operative and invasive procedures, with or without the use of contrast media. The 
nuclear medicine department provides a wide range of diagnostic and therapeutic 
procedures.  
 4. Imaging Services personnel consist of registered, licensed technologist, 
registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, radiology technologist assistants, 
receptionist, and clerks.  All personnel have appropriate training, skills and 
competence.  
 
 
 
C. Objectives 
The objective of the Imaging Services Department is to provide to our patients the 
optimum diagnostic and therapeutic “state-of-the-art” Imaging combined with excellence 
in Clinical Care.  The Chairman of Imaging Services coordinates the medical team.  The 
technologist and ancillary personnel are under the direction of department management.  
Department management coordinates overall activities through Administration. 
 
1. To offer prompt, efficient, and competent service to the patients at all times.  
 
2. To maintain sound departmental administrative policies and procedures.  
 
3. To provide quality patient care, this enhances diagnosis and treatment.  
 
4. To give radiological and therapeutic consultation.  
 
5. To provide adequate clinical and didactic experience for residents, interns and 
student technologist.  
6. To have images and records available for teaching.  
 
7. To cooperate with the medical education activities and research.  
 
8. To provide, promote and maintain educational activities and research.  
 
9. To provide and maintain protective policies and measures for patient and 
personnel against unnecessary radiation.  
 
10. Provide good organizational structure by assignment of specific duties, 
delegation of authority and efficient means of communication.  
 
11. Adhere to standards of courtesy established by the Medical Center.  
 