 1 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Infection Control 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: I 
Subject:  Performance Improvement Plan Section:  
Date of Origination:  March 11, 1998 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision:  March 31, 2023 Serial Code: IC1005 
Date of Last Review:  March 31, 2024  
______________________________________________________________________________ 
  
PURPOSE:  The goal of the surveillance, prevention, and control of infection is to identify and 
reduce the risks of acquiring and transmitting infections among patients, employees, physicians and 
other allied health staff, contract service workers, volunteers, students, and visitors. 
 
POLICY:  This policy is formulated to coordinate the processes and activities aimed at the 
surveillance, prevention, and control of infection. 
 
PROCEDURE:        
Assignment of Responsibility: 
 A. The Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System, the Board of Directors, 
and Administration strives to ensure a safe environment for patients, personnel, and 
visitors by requiring and supporting the establishment of an integrated, organization-
wide program for the surveillance, prevention, and control of infection. 
 B. The Infection Prevention and Control Department approves all aspects of care and 
appropriate indicators for prevention and control of infection. 
 C. The Infection Preventionists are responsible for ensuring that the process for 
monitoring, evaluating, and identifying problems is maintained and ongoing, and is 
reported through the Quality Leadership team and forwarded to the Medical Staff 
Executive Committee and Board  of Directors. Members of the department shall 
participate in measuring, assessing, and improving important patient care and 
organizational operations. Participation ensures a strong awareness of customer 
needs and the importance of outcome data and customer satisfaction. 
Description of Services Provided:  
 A. Investigation of positive laboratory microbiology cultures. 
 B. Evaluation of confirmed infectious cases to ensure implementation of appropriate 
isolation precautions and engineering controls. 
 C. Employee Health related issues and inservice education related to infection control 
practices. 
 D. Review of medical waste management and disposal program.  
 E. Interaction with state and federal regulatory agencies. 
 
  2 
Description of Customers: 
All patients, OLOL Health employees, physicians, allied health practitioners, visitors, students, 
volunteers, vendors, and contract workers. 
 
Priority Areas and Strategic Goals: 
These priority areas and strategic goals are communicated to senior leadership through 
committee meetings, memos, and one-on-one communication (in person, telephone, or email). 
 
Priority Areas Strategic Goals 
Systematic, coordinated, and continuous 
approach to improving performance, focusing 
on surveillance, prevention, and control of 
infections throughout the organization. 
To carry out the healthcare mission of OLOL 
Health, by assessing the healthcare needs and 
measuring the health status of patients which 
OLOL Health serves. 
Ensure functioning coordinated processes to 
reduce risk of healthcare-associated infections 
in patients and staff. 
To afford OLOL Health patients and staff quality 
care and a safe environment. 
Education of personnel regarding infection 
prevention and control. 
Consider the educational level of the personnel and 
adapt teaching methods accordingly. 
Increase community education regarding 
communicable diseases. 
To help OLOL Health enhance its image and 
provide service to the community. 
OLOL Health's compliance with regulatory 
agency requirements to avoid costly fines. 
To ensure OLOL Health's continued financial 
success. 
 
Department Plan: 
The department is committed to improving organizational performance, continuously enhancing 
the quality of patient care, and ultimately improving patient health outcomes.  The department 
contributes to the hospital -wide approach of performance improvement by monitoring the 
following measures, which are relevant to patient health outcomes. 
 
Quality Monitors/Indicators: 
• Procedure specific surgical site infections 
• House-wide device-related infections (e.g., catheter-associated urinary tract infections, 
central line-associated bloodstream infections) 
• House wide MDRO events   
• Employee TB Skin Test (PPD) conversions 
• Employee injury, accident, and illness trends 
 
Rationale for Choosing: 
The following indicators have been chosen to evaluate specific components of care, prevention, 
and surveillance and to assess the quality of patient care: 
A. Procedure-specific Surgical Site Infections: the intent of this indicator is to evaluate 
the quality of surgical care by monitoring the surgical site infections of specific 
surgical procedures to assess the quality of surgical care.  3 
B. House-wide central line-associated bloodstream infections (CLABSI) and catheter-
associated urinary tract infections (CAUTI): the intent of this indicator is to evaluate 
these high -risk, high-volume, problem-prone procedures because of the increased 
potential for adverse patient outcomes and to assess the quality of patient care. 
C. MDRO events: the intent of this indicator is to monitor the acquisition of MDRO 
pathogens of patients admitted to this facility.  Prevention methods and education on 
best practice are developed based on event rates. 
D. Employee injury, accident, and illness trends: the intent of this indicator is to monitor 
the employee work -related injuries, accidents, and infectious illnesses . These 
occurrences are tracked to evaluate the effectiveness of work practices, engineering 
controls and employee compliance. 
 
Unit-Based Performance Assessment and Improvement Indicators: 
• All quality indicators listed above are important aspects of care and are monitored, trended, 
reported, and followed up to improve service to the customers. 
• The Infection Prevention and Control program recommends action  for process 
improvement. Actions taken are then  monitored and the outcome s are communicated 
appropriately. 
• Outcomes will be reviewed/compared to OLOL Health trends over time to community and 
national standards, and to benchmarks as established by national organizations. 
• Outcomes and any related recommendations for improvement will be reported to the Lean 
Project Management Office and results communicated to all departments as appropriate. 
 
Interdepartmental and/or Interdisciplinary Performance Improvement Activities: 
• The Infection Prevention and Control department supports continuous improvement of key 
hospital functions and processes, which serve the hospital customers.  In collaboration with 
other departments, units, and disciplines, selected representatives actively participate on 
performance improvement teams. Opportunities for improvement are communicated to the 
appropriate departments and units. 
• The department will follow the organization -wide Lean Methodology: Design, Measure, 
Analyze, Improve, Sustain or Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) cycle.  These models as outlined 
in the Lean Project Management Office ’s policies will be used for documentation of 
improvement projects. 
• When problems or opportunities for improvement are identified, recommendations and 
actions taken will be documented in the appropriate performance improvement software.   
• If immediate action is necessary, the vested authority will be implemented to institute any 
surveillance, prevention, and control measures based on risk assessment. The responsibility 
and direct accountability for the surveillance, data gathering, aggregation, and analysis is 
assigned to the Infection Prevention and Control and Data Analytics teams. 
• Hospital personnel and medical staff members share indirect accountability in reporting of 
isolation cases, suspected infections, and reports of positive cultures to the Infection  4 
Prevention and Control Department. There is collaboration between departments to identify 
any hospital associated trends or patterns that may occur or opportunities to improve 
outcomes in the reduction and control of infections. 
 