 1 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Infection Control 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: II 
Subject:  Exposure Control Plan OSHA Section:  
Bloodborne Pathogens 29CFR Part 1910.1030 
Date of Origination: May 1994 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: March 31, 2023 Serial Code: IC2004 
Date of Last Review: March 31, 2024 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of the Bloodborne Pathogens Standard is to eliminate or reduce occupational 
exposure to Hepatitis B Virus (HBV), Hepatitis C Virus (HCV), Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), and other bloodborne pathogens that employees may 
encounter during their work activities. This Bloodborne Pathogen Exposure Control Plan 
is intended to meet the requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration's (OSHA) Bloodborne Pathogens Standard; Final Rule 29 CFR 
1910.1030, as well as the Needlestick Safety and Prevention Act. 
 
POLICY: 
Introduction 
OLOLRMC has implemented this Exposure Control Plan to minimize occupational 
exposure to diseases transmitted by the bloodborne route. This is accomplished by 
providing a safe working environment through the practices of: 
    I. Exposure determination 
   II. Methods of compliance - Standard precautions 
  III. Engineering and work practice controls 
  IV. Personal protective equipment 
   V. Housekeeping  
  VI. Hepatitis B vaccination and post-exposure follow-up 
 VII. Communication of hazards to employees 
VIII. Recordkeeping 
 
Program Review 
The Environment of Care Committee and the Infection Prevention and Control 
Department are primarily responsible for this plan and its maintenance, update, and 
annual review as well as conducting periodic monitoring for policy compliance. Each 
Department Head or Manager is responsible for the implementation of this Exposure 
Control Plan in their departments. 
A copy of this Exposure Control Plan is accessible to all employees. 
The Exposure Control Plan shall be reviewed and updated at least annually and whenever 
necessary to reflect new or modified tasks and procedures which affect occupational 
exposure and to reflect new or revised employee positions with occupational exposure.  
  2 
 
The review and update of this plan shall also:  
• Reflect changes in technology that eliminate or reduce exposure to bloodborne 
pathogens; and  
• Document consideration and implementation of appropriate commercially available 
and effective safer medical devices designed to eliminate or minimize occupational 
exposure. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
I. EXPOSURE DETERMINATION 
Each Department Head is responsible for classifying tasks performed in their areas of 
responsibility according to the OSHA job classifications. The OSHA I and II job 
classifications have been combined on the “At Risk” list to provide full protection to all 
employees who have either normal or unplanned exposure to blood or body fluids as part 
of their routine job tasks.  Body fluids mean ALL secretions and excretions, except 
sweat, (regardless of whether they contain visible blood), non-intact skin, and mucous 
membranes. 
Human Resources, Employee Health, and Infection Prevention will assist Department 
Heads with the monitoring of the “At Risk” list of all job titles by department in which 
employees in those job classifications have occupational exposure. This exposure 
determination shall be made without regard to the use of personal protective equipment.  
The following is a list of tasks and procedures or groups of closely related tasks and 
procedures in which the potential for occupational exposure exists:    
 
Exposure Prone Tasks: 
▪ Administering intravenous fluids and medications 
▪ Blood glucose determination  
▪ Direct patient care 
▪ Environmental cleaning of patient care areas 
▪ Flushing intravenous and arterial lines 
▪ Handling all biohazard, medical wastes 
▪ Handling contaminated or dirty linen 
▪ Handling contaminated sharps and sharps containers 
▪ Handling contaminated medical equipment 
▪  Performing and assisting in endoscopic, laparoscopic, invasive, and surgical 
procedures 
▪ Phlebotomy 
▪ Starting, changing, and discontinuing all intravenous and arterial lines 
▪ Transporting patients 
▪ Transporting or handling specimens 
▪ Ventilator care 
▪ Wound care 
 
Each new employee's job title and the tasks and procedures that they will perform are 
checked against the Job Classification on the “At Risk” list. Employee Health refers to 
this list to assign new employees needing OSHA Bloodborne Pathogens Training and 
Hepatitis B Vaccination.   3 
If the employee is transferring from one job to another within our facility, the job 
classifications pertaining to their new position are also checked against the list. Based on 
this "cross-checking", the new job classification, which will bring the employee into 
occupational exposure situations, is identified. 
 
II. METHODS OF COMPLIANCE - STANDARD PRECAUTIONS 
Standard Precautions apply to (1) blood, (2) all body fluids, secretions, and excretions 
except sweat, regardless of whether or not they contain visible blood, (3) non-intact skin, 
and (4) mucous membranes.  Standard Precautions are designed to reduce the risk of 
transmission of microorganisms from both recognized and unrecognized sources of 
infection in the hospital. Use Standard Precautions for the care of all patients.  Standard 
Precautions merges the major features of Universal (Blood and Body Fluid) Precautions 
(designed to reduce the transmission of bloodborne pathogens) and Body Substance 
Isolation (designed to reduce the transmission of pathogens from moist body substances).  
 
III. ENGINEERING AND WORK PRACTICE CONTROLS 
A. Engineering and work practice controls shall be used to eliminate or minimize 
employee exposure. Where occupational exposure remains after institution of these 
controls, personal protective equipment shall also be used. 
B. Engineering controls shall be examined and maintained or replaced on a regular 
schedule to ensure their effectiveness.  
1. Handwashing - refer to the Handwashing Policy, IC2005. 
2. Spill clean-up - All department heads and supervisory personnel are responsible 
for ensuring that their employees are prepared to properly respond to spills of 
potentially infectious materials such as blood/body fluids in their work area. Each 
department will always maintain proper spill clean-up equipment. If necessary, 
due to the volume of the spill, notify the Housekeeping Department to disinfect 
the area. 
Standard Precautions will be employed in all circumstances by the person(s) 
cleaning the spill.  Decontamination and cleaning materials shall include but not 
be limited to EPA registered disinfectant, and other appropriate cleaning 
equipment (i.e., cleaning cloths, towels, etc.). 
Hands alone will not pick up broken glassware.  The use of mechanical means 
such as brooms, brushes, dustpans, tongs, or forceps will be employed. 
a) The department where the spill occurs will be responsible for the clean-up 
initially using a hospital approved germicidal solution.  Spill clean-up will be 
done by employees trained in the use of Standard Precautions.  
b) The area involved in the spill will be restricted to patient, visitor, and staff 
traffic passage until the clean-up/disinfecting efforts are completed. 
c) Assemble materials and equipment to include such items as wet floor signs, 
gloves, cleaning cloths, paper towels, hospital-approved germicide, biohazard 
bags, clear plastic bag for linens contaminated with infectious waste. Put on 
protective clothing as required.  4 
d) Remove bulk amount of blood/body fluid with an absorbent rag or paper towel 
and dispose of in appropriate receptacle. Place linen in soiled linen bag and 
soiled paper towels in biohazard bag. The area can then be cleaned with a 
hospital-approved germicidal solution. 
e) If necessary, after the bulk amount of blood/body fluid has been removed, 
notify the Housekeeping Department to disinfect the area. 
f) Remove PPE and dispose of properly. 
g) Wash hands. 
3. Sharps Injury and Blood and Body Fluid Exposure Prevention - Care will be 
taken to prevent injuries when using needles, scalpels, and other sharp 
instruments or devices, when handling sharp instruments after procedures, when 
cleaning used instruments, and when disposing of used needles.  Puncture-
resistant containers (needle boxes) are located in patient rooms as well as key 
areas in all clinical departments.   
a) Use available safer medical devices, such as sharps with engineered sharps 
injury protection or needleless systems, for withdrawing body fluids, accessing 
a vein or artery, or administering medications or other fluids.  Safer medical 
devices are those with a built-in safety feature or mechanism that effectively 
reduces the risk of an exposure incident.  For purposes of this plan, an 
"available" safer medical device includes only devices whose use, based on 
reasonable judgment in individual cases, will not jeopardize patient or 
employee safety or be medically contraindicated. 
b) Never recap used needles, or otherwise manipulate them using both hands, or 
use any other technique that involves directing the point of a needle toward any 
part of the body; when absolutely necessary, use either a one-handed "scoop" 
technique or a mechanical device designed for holding the needle sheath. 
c)  Do not bend, break, or otherwise manipulate used needles by hand.  Do not 
remove used needles from disposable syringes by hand, unless a situation 
exists which necessitates using a syringe to draw blood and transfer the 
collected blood into a test tube before disposing of the contaminated syringe.  
In such a situation, a syringe with engineered sharps injury protection must be 
used.  Removal of the safety-engineered needle must be accomplished after 
activation of the safety feature and using safe work practices (including use of 
mechanical means of removal whenever possible).  Transfer of the blood from 
the syringe to the test tube must be done using a needleless blood transfer 
device. 
d) Place used disposable syringes and needles, scalpel blades, and other sharp 
items in appropriate puncture-resistant containers, which are located as close as 
practical to the area in which the items were used.  Place reusable syringes and 
needles in a puncture-resistant container for transport to the reprocessing area. 
e) When OLOL employee and physician exposures occur, the employee should 
notify their supervisor immediately, call Lake Line Direct (765-5253) to speak 
to the Nurse Navigator, complete a Safety Event form, and contact Employee  5 
Health department on the next business day for follow-up. (See EH1006 for 
further instruction). 
For Non-OLOL Employees: Refer to the non-employee blood and body fluid 
policy (See EH1007 for further instruction). 
f) Work Area Restrictions - Eating, drinking, applying cosmetics or lip balm, and 
the handling of contact lenses are prohibited in work areas where there is a 
reasonable likelihood of occupational exposure. This includes laboratory work 
areas, patient and treatment rooms, nursing units, and other patient care areas. 
These areas will be called "potentially contaminated areas" and should be 
identified in department-specific written procedures. Personnel are to eat and 
drink in areas designated for these purposes (clean areas such as cafeteria, 
lounges, break rooms, and other areas deemed at low risk for contamination). 
A risk assessment of central nursing stations is conducted to determine if 
beverages with lid coverings may be allowed in these areas. In addition, food 
and drink shall not be kept in refrigerators, freezers, shelves, or bench tops 
where blood or other potentially infectious materials are kept. 
g) Procedures - All procedures involving blood or other potentially infectious 
materials shall be performed in such a manner as to minimize splashing, 
spraying, spattering, and generation of droplets of these substances (e.g., 
cleaning contaminated instruments, irrigation). Mouth pipetting or suctioning 
of blood or potentially infectious material is prohibited. 
h) Specimen Handling - All containers used to contain specimens of blood or 
other potentially infectious materials shall prevent leakage during collection, 
handling, storage, transport, or shipping. Since Standard Precautions are 
utilized in this facility, there is no need to label each specimen with a biohazard 
symbol; however, the containers must be recognizable as specimen containers. 
Biohazard labels must be attached to carriers designed to transport multiple 
specimens. If the outsides of the specimen containers are soiled with blood or 
other potentially infectious materials, the primary containers must be placed in 
a secondary container that prevents leakage during all phases of handling. The 
secondary container (trays and coolers) shall also be puncture resistant. If the 
transport container becomes contaminated, the person identifying the leakage 
shall promptly clean up the spill according to protocol. 
i) Contaminated Medical Equipment - Handle used patient care equipment soiled 
with blood, body fluids, secretions, and excretions in a manner that prevents 
skin and mucous membrane exposures, contamination of clothing, and transfer 
of microorganisms to other patients and environments. All equipment which 
may become contaminated during use shall be examined prior to servicing or 
shipping and shall be decontaminated as necessary and when possible. Prior to 
sending equipment that may be contaminated to Bio-Med or after initiating 
service call, it shall be decontaminated with hospital approved disinfectant. 
When it is not possible or feasible to decontaminate the equipment, the parts 
that are contaminated must be labeled with a biohazard symbol stating which 
portions may be contaminated. Those who perform maintenance on potentially 
contaminated equipment must observe Standard Precautions and wear 
appropriate PPE when handling contaminated equipment. If it is necessary to  6 
ship equipment that has not been decontaminated to a manufacturer, the 
company representative or the manufacturer must be notified of the biohazard 
prior to shipping and appropriate labels must be affixed to the equipment. 
Reusable equipment is not to be used for the care of another patient until it has 
been cleaned and reprocessed appropriately. Single-use items are to be 
discarded properly.  Any single-use items under consideration for third party 
reprocessing will be approved by the Infection Prevention and Control 
Department. 
j) Pregnant Healthcare Workers - Pregnant healthcare workers are not known to 
be at greater risk of contracting HIV infection than healthcare workers who are 
not pregnant; however, if a healthcare worker develops HIV infection during 
pregnancy, the infant is at risk of infection resulting from prenatal transmission.  
Because of this risk, pregnant healthcare workers will be especially familiar with 
and strictly adhere to precautions to minimize the risk of HIV transmission. 
k) Invasive or Exposure Prone Procedures - Healthcare workers who perform 
invasive or exposure prone procedures will adhere to Standard Precautions 
vigorously to minimize the risk of transmission of bloodborne pathogens from 
infected patients to HCWs and vice versa. 
1) An invasive procedure is defined as a procedure involving puncture or 
incision of the skin, or insertion of an instrument or foreign material into 
the body, including but not limited to, percutaneous aspirations, biopsies, 
cardiac and vascular catheterizations, endoscopies, angioplasties, and 
implantations, and excluding venipuncture and intravenous therapy. 
2) Characteristics of exposure prone procedures include digital palpation of a 
needle tip in a body cavity or the simultaneous presence of the HCW's 
fingers and a needle or other sharp instrument or object in a poorly 
visualized or highly confined anatomic site. 
3) Standard Precautions will be the minimum precautions for ALL such 
invasive or exposure-prone procedures: 
• All health care workers who participate in exposure prone or 
invasive procedures will routinely use appropriate barrier 
precautions to prevent skin and mucous membrane contact with 
blood and other body fluids of all patients. 
4) Gloves and surgical masks will be worn for invasive or exposure prone 
procedures. 
5) Protective eyewear or face shields will be worn for procedures that 
commonly result in the generation of droplets, splashing of blood or other 
body fluids. 
6) Gowns or aprons made of materials that provide an effective barrier will be 
worn during procedures that are likely to result in the splashing of blood or 
other body fluids.   
7) All health-care workers who perform or assist in vaginal or cesarean 
deliveries will wear gloves and gowns when handling the placenta or the 
infant until blood and amniotic fluid have been removed from the infant's 
skin and will wear gloves during post-delivery care of the umbilical cord.  7 
8) If a glove is torn or a needlestick or other injury occurs, the glove must be 
removed, and a new glove replaced as promptly as patient safety permits; 
the needle or instrument involved in the incident must also be removed 
from the sterile field. 
l) Laboratory Procedures - Blood and other body fluids from ALL patients should 
be considered infectious.  To supplement the Standard Precautions as previously 
listed, the following precautions are required for health care workers in clinical 
laboratories. 
1) All patient specimens are considered infectious.   
2) All specimens of blood and body fluids must be put in a well-constructed 
container with a secure lid to prevent leakage during transport.  Care will 
be taken when collecting each specimen to avoid contaminating the 
outside of the container and the laboratory form if accompanying the 
specimen. 
3) All persons processing blood and body fluid specimens (e.g., removing 
tops from vacuum tubes) will wear gloves.  Masks and protective eyewear 
will be worn if mucous/membrane contact with blood or body fluids is 
anticipated.  Gloves will be changed, and hands washed after completion 
of specimen processing. 
4) For routine procedures, such as histologic and pathologic studies or 
microbiologic culturing, a biological safety cabinet is not necessary.  
However, biological safety cabinets (Class I or II) will be used whenever 
procedures are conducted that have a high potential for generating 
aerosolized droplets.  These include activities such as blending, sonicating, 
and vigorous mixing. 
5) Mechanical pipetting devices will be used for manipulating all liquids in 
the laboratory.  Mouth pipetting will not be done. 
6) Use of needles and syringes will be limited to situations in which there is 
no alternative, and the previous recommendations for preventing injuries 
with needles/sharps will be followed. 
7) Laboratory work surfaces should be decontaminated with an appropriate 
chemical germicide after a spill of blood or other body fluids and when 
work activities are completed.  With large spills of cultured or 
concentrated infectious agents in the laboratory, the contaminated area 
will be flooded with a liquid germicide before cleaning, and then 
decontaminated with fresh germicidal chemical.  Gloves will be worn 
during the cleaning and decontaminating procedures.  Refer to LBA201 
Exposure Control plan. 
8) Contaminated materials used in laboratory tests are decontaminated before 
reprocessing or placed in bags and disposed of in accordance with 
institutional policies for disposal of infectious waste.  Refer to  
Management of Infectious Medical Waste (Regulated Waste), IC2006, for 
specific details.  8 
9) Scientific equipment that has been contaminated with blood or other body 
fluids should be decontaminated and cleaned before being internally 
repaired or transported to the manufacturer.  (See Contaminated Medical 
Equipment section in this policy) 
10) All persons should wash their hands after completing laboratory activities 
and remove protective clothing before leaving the laboratory.   
m) Autopsy Procedures - In addition to the Standard Precautions as previously 
listed, the following precautions must be used by persons performing 
postmortem procedures: 
1) All persons performing or assisting in postmortem procedures must wear 
gloves, masks, protective eyewear, gowns, and/or aprons, which create an 
effective barrier. 
2) Instruments and surfaces contaminated during postmortem procedures will 
be decontaminated with an appropriate chemical germicide. 
n) Blood Donor Area  
1) Employees outside the volunteer blood donor area, who perform 
phlebotomy, venipuncture or who initiate IV therapy shall wear gloves, at 
a minimum, for personal protection. 
2) Employees who perform phlebotomies in the volunteer blood donation 
area shall wear gloves, at a minimum, for personal protection.  
 
IV. PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 
A. Provision. When there is a risk of occupational exposures, personal protective 
equipment (PPE) such as, but not limited to gloves, gowns, lab coats, face shields, 
masks, or respirators, will be provided at no cost to employees. PPE will be chosen 
based on the anticipated exposure to blood or other potentially infectious materials. 
The protective equipment will be considered appropriate only if it prevents blood or 
other infectious material from passing through or reaching worker’s clothing, skin, 
eyes, mouth, or other mucous membranes under normal conditions of use and for the 
duration of time which the protective equipment will be used. It is the responsibility 
of the employee to inform the manager/supervisor of difficulty or inability to 
obtain/use specific PPE so that an alternative solution may be determined. 
B. Use. All personnel who may have occupational exposure are required to use personal 
protective equipment when they have reasonable anticipation of exposure. The only 
exception is in rare circumstances when, in the employee's professional judgement, a 
specific instance would have prevented the delivery of care or would have posed an 
increased hazard to the safety of the worker or co-worker.  
C. Accessibility. Appropriate PPE in proper sizes shall be readily accessible in the work 
area or issued to employees. Persons with allergies or other conditions limiting the 
ability to use certain PPE shall be evaluated by Employee Health to determine the 
appropriate solution. 
D. Cleaning, Laundering, and Disposal. PPE shall be provided, replaced, cleaned, 
repaired, laundered, and/or disposed of at no cost to employees. Any time PPE is 
penetrated by blood or other potentially infectious materials, the garments shall be  9 
removed immediately, or as soon as feasible, in a manner which prevents contact with 
intact and non-intact skin, and mucous membranes and placed in the soiled linen. 
(This does not include personal clothing items.)  Standard Precautions will be used 
when handling all laundry. All PPE must be removed prior to leaving the work area. 
If personal protective equipment fails to protect against the soiling of employee 
personal clothing, the PPE is not appropriate for the tasks being performed. 
Laundering of personal clothing items will be addressed on a case-by-case basis. The 
same care shall be exercised in the handling of contaminated personal clothing as the 
PPE handling described above. 
E. Gloves – Gloves shall be worn when contact with blood, mucous membranes, non-
intact skin, or other potentially infectious material is likely. Disposable gloves must 
be removed and replaced as soon as practical, when contaminated or as soon as 
feasible if they are torn, punctured, or when the barrier properties are compromised. 
With the exception of reusable utility gloves, gloves should never be washed or 
decontaminated for reuse. Utility (heavy-duty reusable) gloves are to be 
decontaminated with approved solution following the last use of the shift. However, 
they must be discarded if they are cracked, torn, punctured, or exhibit other signs of 
deterioration. Disposable gloves are for single use only. A variety of gloves, 
including powderless and hypoallergenic gloves are available. Employees with 
known allergies to latex gloves must notify Employee Health of their condition to 
determine the appropriate alternative gloves. 
F. Masks, Eye Protection, Face Shields – Masks in combination with eye protection 
devices, such as goggles, glasses, or face shields, shall be worn whenever splashes, 
sprays, spatter, or droplets of blood or other potentially infectious materials may be 
generated and eye, nose, or mouth contamination can be reasonably anticipated. 
Reusable goggles or face shields should be cleaned with a hospital-provided 
decontamination solution or disinfectant wipe by the user.  
G. Gowns, Aprons, Other Protective Body Covering – Appropriate protective 
clothing shall be worn in occupational exposure situations. The type and 
characteristics will depend upon the task and degree of exposure anticipated. In all 
circumstances the garment chosen will not allow blood or other potentially infectious 
materials to pass through to the skin or mucous membranes of the person. All used 
coverings shall be disposed of in appropriate receptacles after use. 
H. Surgical Caps or Hoods, Shoe Covers, or Boots – Additional protective clothing 
shall be worn when gross contamination of the head or feet is reasonably anticipated 
(e.g., autopsies, orthopedic procedures). 
I. Resuscitation Devices – Barrier devices shall be used in place of mouth-to-mouth 
resuscitation. Following use, such items if reusable, will be decontaminated. Those 
devices that are disposable will be discarded in the appropriate receptacle. 
 
V. HOUSEKEEPING 
A. All facilities are maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Housekeeping is 
responsible for determining and maintaining written cleaning and decontamination 
schedules based on the type of surface to be cleaned, type of soil present, and tasks or 
procedures being performed in the area.  10 
B. All equipment and environmental and working surfaces shall be cleaned and 
decontaminated after contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials. 
Housekeeping will ensure that adequate procedures for the routine care, cleaning, and 
disinfection of environmental surfaces, beds, bedrails, bedside equipment, and other 
frequently touched surface are being followed. 
C. Contaminated work surfaces shall be decontaminated immediately or as soon as 
feasible with an appropriate disinfectant: 
• After completion of procedures 
• When surfaces are overtly contaminated following any spill of blood or other 
potentially infectious materials 
• At the end of the work shift, if the surface may have become contaminated since 
the last cleaning. 
D. Protective coverings, such as plastic wrap, aluminum foil, or imperviously backed 
absorbent paper used to cover equipment and environmental surfaces, shall be 
removed and replaced as soon as feasible when they become overtly contaminated or 
at the end of the work shift if they may have become contaminated during the shift. 
E. All bins, pails, cans, and similar receptacles intended for reuse which have a 
reasonable likelihood for becoming contaminated with blood or other potentially 
infectious materials shall be inspected and decontaminated on a regularly scheduled 
basis and cleaned and decontaminated immediately or as soon as feasible upon visible 
contamination. 
F. Broken glassware which may be contaminated shall not be picked up directly with the 
hands. It shall be cleaned up using mechanical means, such as a brush and dustpan, 
tongs, or forceps. 
G. Reusable sharps that are contaminated with blood or other potentially infectious 
materials shall not be stored or processed in a manner that requires employees to 
reach by hand into the containers where these sharps have been placed. 
Handling of Trash 
Standard Precautions will be used in handling all patient trash. There will be no Isolation 
trash set up in the Isolation rooms. All patient trash is to be handled the same. 
1.  Patient trash/wastes that must be placed in Bio-Hazard Bag trash include: 
• Liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious materials. 
• Contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially infectious 
materials in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed. 
• Items that are caked with dried blood or other potentially infectious materials 
and are capable of releasing these materials during handling. 
• Contaminated sharps (use puncture-resistant container), and  
• Pathological and microbiological waste containing blood or other potentially 
infectious material. 
2.  Trash/wastes that meet the above definition from patient care areas include items 
grossly soiled with infectious organisms such as purulent dressings, wound dressings 
containing blood, bags (receptacles), and tubings/filters. Contain this type of trash in a 
plastic bag in the patient room, then place into the red bag trash in the soiled utility room. 
3.  Disposal of all regulated waste shall be in accordance with applicable regulations.   11 
Regulated Waste. 
Contaminated Sharps Discarding and Containment. 
1.  Contaminated sharps shall be discarded immediately or as soon as feasible in 
containers that are: closable; puncture resistant; leak-proof on sides and bottom; and 
labeled or color-coded in accordance with OSHA standard. 
2.  During use, containers for contaminated sharps shall be: 
• Easily accessible to personnel and located as close as is feasible to the immediate 
area where sharps are used or can be reasonably anticipated to be found (e.g., 
laundry). 
• Maintained upright throughout use, and 
• Replaced routinely and not be allowed to overfill. 
3. When moving containers of contaminated sharps from the area of use, the container 
shall be: 
• Closed immediately prior to removal or replacement to prevent spillage or 
protrusion of contents during handling, storage, transport, or shipping. 
• Placed in a secondary container if leakage is possible. The second container shall 
be:  closable, constructed to contain all contents and prevent leakage during 
handling, storage, transport, or shipping, and labeled or color-coded. 
4. Reusable containers shall not be opened, emptied, or cleaned manually or in any other 
manner which would expose employees to the risk of percutaneous injury. 
 
Linen 
Handle, transport, and process used linen soiled with blood, body fluids, secretions, and 
excretions in a manner that prevents skin and mucous membrane exposures and 
contamination of clothing and that avoids transfer of microorganisms to other patients 
and environments. There will be no linen hamper set up in isolation rooms. All patients’ 
linen will be handled the same using Standard Precautions. 
1.  Contaminated linen is to be bagged at the location where it is used and will not be 
sorted or rinsed in the location of use. 
2.  Employees who have contact with contaminated linen will wear protective gloves and 
other appropriate personal protective equipment. 
 
3.  The standard cloth bags will be used for the majority of soiled linen. Whenever 
contaminated linen is wet and presents a reasonable likelihood of soak-through or of 
leakage from the bag, the linen is to be first placed in a plastic bag; and then the plastic 
bag is to be placed inside the cloth bag for transport to prevent soak-through and /or 
leakage of fluids to the exterior.  
 
VI. HEPATITIS B VACCINATION AND POST-EXPOSURE FOLLOW-UP  
See the Hepatitis B Vaccination Program policy (EH1004) and the Employee Blood and 
Body Fluid Exposure policy (EH 1006). 
 
VII. COMMUNICATION OF HAZARDS TO EMPLOYEES 
A. Labels and Signs: 
Labeling with the biohazard symbol or the use of red bags or containers is used to 
warn employees of potential hazards. The universal biohazard symbol must always be  12 
used in conjunction with the word "biohazard". The warning labels must be orange-
red or predominantly so, with lettering and symbols in a contrasting color. 
1.  The following items must be labeled appropriately as biohazard: 
a) Contaminated equipment 
b) Containers of regulated waste 
c) Refrigerators and freezers to store blood or other potentially infectious materials 
d) Sharps disposal containers 
e) Containers used to store, transport, or ship blood or other potentially infectious 
materials (e.g., blood drawing trays) 
f) Containers used to transport items contaminated with blood or other potentially 
infectious materials 
2.  Labeling is not required for: 
a) Transfusion related equipment including containers of blood, blood components, 
and blood products labeled as to their contents and released for transfusion or 
other clinical use because they have been screened for HBV, HCV, and HIV 
prior to their release. 
b) Individual containers of blood or other potentially infectious materials that are 
placed in secondary labeled containers during storage, transportation, shipment, 
or disposal. 
c) Specimen containers: Standard Precautions are utilized when handling all 
specimens. 
d) Laundry bags: Standard Precautions are used when handling all laundry. 
B. Information and Training: 
Training regarding occupational hazards and required personal protective measures 
will be provided to all new employees at general orientation for employees with risk 
of occupational exposures. As part of department specific orientation, employees with 
risk of occupational exposure will receive job specific training prior to beginning 
activities that may place them at risk of occupational exposure. Retraining must occur 
on an annual basis within one year of the original training date. Department managers 
must ensure that each employee with risk of exposure receives annual training. An 
individual knowledgeable on the subject matter must conduct the training. Training 
content must include: 
1. An accessible copy of the regulatory text of OSHA standard 29 CFR Part 
1910.1030, Bloodborne Pathogens Standard. 
2. A general explanation of the epidemiology and symptoms of bloodborne 
pathogens. 
3. An explanation of the modes of transmission of bloodborne pathogens. 
4. An explanation of the exposure control plan and the means by which the 
employee can obtain a copy of the written plan. 
5. An explanation of how tasks and other activities that may involve exposure to 
blood or other potentially infectious materials can be recognized. 
6. An explanation of methods that will prevent or reduce occupational exposure, 
including appropriate engineering controls, work practices, PPE, and the 
limitations of each. 
7. Information on the types, proper uses, location, removal, handling, 
decontamination, and disposal of PPE. 
8. An explanation of the basis for selection of PPE.  13 
9. Information on the HBV vaccine including efficacy, safety, method of 
administration, the benefits of being vaccinated, and that the vaccination will be 
offered free of charge through the Employee Health Department. 
10. Information on the appropriate actions to take and persons to contact in 
emergency involving exposures to blood or other infectious materials. 
11. An explanation of the procedure to follow if an exposure incident occurs, 
including the method of reporting the incident and the medical follow-up that will 
be made available. 
12. Information on the post-exposure evaluation and follow-up that the employer is 
required to provide for the employee following an exposure incident. 
13. An explanation of the signs, labels and/or color-coding used to identify hazards. 
 
VIII. RECORDKEEPING  
A. Medical Records: 
A medical record must be established and maintained for each employee with the 
potential for occupational exposures. These records will include: 
1. The employee's name and employee number, which can be cross-referenced to 
obtain the employee's social security number. 
2. A copy of the employee's Hepatitis B vaccination status, including the date of all 
Hepatitis B vaccinations and any medical records related to the employee's ability 
to receive the vaccinations. 
3. A copy of all results of examinations, medical testing, and follow-up procedures 
that have been compiled as the result of occupational exposures. 
Employee medical records will be maintained confidentially in the Employee 
Health Department. Contents of the medical record will not be disclosed or 
reported without the employee's written consent to any person within or 
outside the workplace except as required by law. Employees can access their 
medical records by requesting access through the Employee Health Nurse. 
Medical records may also be released to anyone having written consent of the 
employee. Worker’s compensation medical records must be maintained for 
the duration of employment plus 30 years. 
 
B. Sharps Injury Log 
Employee Health will establish and maintain a sharps injury log for the recording of 
percutaneous injuries from contaminated sharps. The information in the sharps injury log 
shall be recorded and maintained in such manner as to protect the confidentiality of the 
injured employee. The sharps injury log shall be maintained for the period required by 
OSHA. The sharps injury log shall contain, at a minimum: 
1. The type and brand of device involved in the incident, 
2. The department or work area where the exposure incident occurred, and 
3. An explanation of how the incident occurred. 
 
 
C. Training Records: 
Training records may be maintained indefinitely but minimally for three years from the 
date of training. Training records will include the following information:  14 
1. The date of training sessions. 
2. The content or summary of the training sessions. 
3. The name and qualifications of persons conducting the training. 
4. The names and job titles of all persons attending training sessions. 
Training records shall be provided to the employer or employee representative upon 
request for examination or copying. 
 
D. Transfer of Records  
OLOLRMC will comply with requirements involving transfer of records. If a facility 
ceases to do business and there is no successive employer to receive and retain the 
records for the prescribed period of time, the facility's administration must notify the 
Director of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) at least 
three months before the records are scheduled for disposal. NIOSH may request that the 
records be forwarded to them to be maintained for the duration of the prescribed period 
of time. 
 
 
Definitions - For purposes of this policy the following shall apply: 
 
“Bio-hazard” means infectious agents or hazardous biological materials that present a 
risk or potential risk to the health of humans, animals or the environment. 
"Blood” means human blood, human blood components, and products made from human 
blood. 
"Bloodborne Pathogens" means pathogenic microorganisms that are present in human 
blood and can cause disease in humans. These pathogens include, but are not limited to, 
Hepatitis B virus (HBV), Hepatitis C Virus (HCV), and human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV). 
"Clinical Laboratory" means a workplace where diagnostic or other screening 
procedures are performed on blood or other potentially infectious materials. 
"Contaminated" means the presence or the reasonably anticipated presence of blood or 
other potentially infectious materials on an item or surface. 
"Contaminated Laundry" means laundry which has been soiled with blood or other 
potentially infectious materials or may contain sharps. 
"Contaminated Sharps" means any contaminated object that can penetrate the skin 
including, but not limited to, needles, scalpels, broken glass, broken capillary tubes, and 
exposed ends of dental wires. 
"Decontamination" means the use of physical or chemical means to remove, inactivate, 
or destroy bloodborne pathogens on a surface or item to the point where they are no 
longer capable of transmitting infectious particles and the surface or item is rendered safe 
for handling, use, or disposal. 
“Engineering Controls” means controls (e.g., sharps disposal containers, self-sheathing 
needles, safer medical devices, such as sharps with engineered sharps injury protections 
and needleless systems) that isolate or remove the bloodborne pathogens hazard from the 
workplace.  15 
"Exposure Incident" means a specific eye, mouth, other mucous membrane, non-intact 
skin, or parenteral contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials those 
results from the performance of an employee's duties. 
"Handwashing Facilities" means a facility providing an adequate supply of running 
potable water, soap and single use towels or hot air-drying machines or alcohol-based 
waterless hand sanitizers. 
"HBV" means Hepatitis B virus. 
"HIV" means human immunodeficiency virus. 
“Needleless Systems” means a device that does not use needles for: 
(1) The collection of bodily fluids or withdrawal of body fluids after initial venous or 
arterial access is established. 
(2) The administration of medication or fluids or 
(3) Any other procedure involving the potential for occupational exposure to 
bloodborne pathogens due to percutaneous injuries from contaminated sharps. 
"Occupational Exposure" means reasonably anticipated skin, eye, mucous membrane, 
or percutaneous contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials that may 
result from the performance of an employee's duties. 
"Other Potentially Infectious Materials" means: 
(1) The following human body fluids: semen, vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, 
synovial fluid, pleural fluid, pericardial fluid, peritoneal fluid, amniotic fluid, saliva in 
dental procedures, any body fluid that is visibly contaminated with blood, and all body 
fluids in situations where it is difficult or impossible to differentiate between body fluids;  
(2) Any unfixed tissue or organ (other than intact skin) from a human (living or dead); or  
(3) HIV-containing cell or tissue cultures, organ cultures, and HIV- or HBV-containing 
culture medium or other solutions; and blood, organs or other tissues from experimental 
animals infected with HIV or HBV. 
"Percutaneous" means piercing mucous membranes or the skin barrier through such 
events as needlesticks, human bites, cuts, and abrasions. 
"Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)" is specialized clothing or equipment worn by 
an employee for protection against a hazard. General work clothes (e.g., uniforms, pants, 
shirts or blouses) are not intended to function as protection against a hazard and are not 
considered personal protective equipment. 
"Regulated Waste" means liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious 
materials; contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially infectious 
materials in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items that are caked with dried 
blood or other potentially infectious materials and are capable of releasing these materials 
during handling; contaminated sharps; and pathological and microbiological wastes 
containing blood or other potentially infectious materials.  16 
“Sharps with Engineered Sharps Injury Protections” means a non-needle sharp or a 
needle device used for withdrawing body fluids, accessing a vein or artery, or 
administering medications or other fluids, with a built-in safety feature or mechanism that 
effectively reduces the risk of an exposure incident. 
"Source Individual" means any individual, living or dead, whose blood or other 
potentially infectious materials may be a source of occupational exposure to the 
employee. Examples include, but are not limited to, hospital and clinic patients; clients in 
institutions for the developmentally disabled; trauma victims; clients of drug and alcohol 
treatment facilities; residents of hospices and nursing homes; human remains; and 
individuals who donate or sell blood or blood components. 
"Sterilize" means to use a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all microbial life, 
including highly resistant bacterial endospores. 
“Standard Precautions" is an approach to infection control. Standard Precautions apply 
to (1) blood, (2) all body fluids, secretions, and excretions except sweat, regardless of 
whether they contain visible blood, (3) nonintact skin, and (4) mucous membranes.  
Standard Precautions are designed to reduce the risk of transmission of microorganisms 
from both recognized and unrecognized sources of infection in the hospital. Use Standard 
Precautions for the care of all patients.  Standard Precautions merges the major features 
of Universal (Blood and Body Fluid) Precautions (designed to reduce the transmission of 
bloodborne pathogens) and Body Substance Isolation (designed to reduce the 
transmission of pathogens from moist body substances).  
"Work Practice Controls" means controls that reduce the likelihood of exposure by 
altering the manner in which a task is performed (e.g., prohibiting recapping of needles 
by a two-handed technique). 
 
 
Reference: 
US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, / 1910.1030 - Bloodborne 
pathogens, https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910/1910.1030 