 1 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Infection Control 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: II 
Subject:  Tuberculosis Infection Control Plan Section:  
Date of Origination:  January 31,1997 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision:  September 17, 2024 Serial Code: IC2011 
Date of Last Review:    September 17, 2024 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
 PURPOSE:  
The purpose of this document is to provide a comprehensive, integrated plan and written policy to prevent 
or eliminate exposures to Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tb). 
POLICY: 
The Environment of Care and Infection Prevention and Control Departments are responsible for 
establishing the policies and procedures to comply with the current recommendations to prevent or 
eliminate exposures to tuberculosis (TB). Department Heads are responsible for the implementation of these 
policies in their departments/units. 
PROCEDURE: 
Introduction 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is carried in airborne particles, known as droplet nuclei.  These particles can 
be generated when persons with pulmonary or laryngeal tuberculosis (TB) sneeze, cough, speak, or sing. 
Transmission of TB is a recognized risk in health-care facilities. Transmission is most likely to occur from a 
patient with unrecognized pulmonary or laryngeal TB who are not on effective anti-tuberculosis therapy 
and have not been placed in Airborne Precautions.  
Persons with immunocompromising conditions have a greater risk for the progression of latent TB infection 
to active disease.  HIV infection is the strongest known risk factor yet identified for the progression from 
latent TB infection to active TB disease. 
Implementation of this TB Control Plan requires risk assessment; early identification and isolation of 
potentially infectious patients; effective engineering controls; an appropriate respiratory protection program; 
and Health Care Worker TB education, counseling, screening, and evaluation.  
Although eliminating the risk of TB transmission in the health-care facility may be impossible, adherence to 
these guidelines should greatly reduce the risk to persons in these settings. 
OLOL TB Risk Assessment  
The organization reviews the Guidelines for Preventing the Transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in 
Healthcare Settings, 2005i Appendix C Risk Classifications to determine its TB exposure risk. This is 
documented annually in the TB Risk Assessment.  2 
Identification, Characteristics and Evaluation of Patients Who Have TB 
A diagnosis of TB should be considered in any patient with persistent cough (i.e., a cough lasting for > 3 
weeks) or other signs or symptoms compatible with TB (e.g., bloody sputum, night sweats, weight loss, 
anorexia, or fever).   
The probability of TB is higher among patients with: 
o radiographic features or lab findings consistent with TB 
o history of a positive PPD or interferon-gamma release assay test 
o previous TB or recent exposure to TB 
o past or current residence in or travel to an endemic area 
o HIV and respiratory symptoms 
In general, persons suspected or confirmed to have active TB should be considered infectious.  Patients 
identified as having an increased risk for tuberculosis as defined by the criteria above should be placed in 
negative pressure isolation immediately upon identification of these risks. 
All patients with suspected or confirmed TB will be reported to the Health Department immediately so that 
standard procedures for identifying and evaluation of TB contacts can be initiated. 
Prioritizing Isolation Rooms for Infectious TB Patients 
The negative air isolation rooms will be utilized for admission of the active or suspected TB patient. Other 
conditions requiring isolation and patients not requiring isolation may use these rooms. However, the 
suspected or confirmed TB patient placement will need to take priority.  The room will be vacated, as soon 
as possible, when needed for these patients. 
Managing Outpatients Who Have Possible Infectious TB 
Triage of patients should include vigorous efforts to promptly detect patients with active TB. Patients with 
signs or symptoms suggestive of TB should be evaluated and isolated promptly to minimize the time spent 
in ambulatory care areas.  
Such patients should have TB precautions applied while the diagnostic evaluation is being conducted. 
1. Place patient in a separate waiting room. 
2. Give the patient a surgical mask and instruction to keep it on. Patients should also be given tissues 
and instructed to cover their mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing if they must remove their 
masks to facilitate respiratory clearance. 
3. Immediately institute TB precautions for known TB patients non-compliant with prescribed drug 
therapy. 
4. Avoid scheduling active TB patients at same site/time with severely immunocompromised or HIV+ 
patients.  If this is not feasible, physically separate clinic/waiting areas. 
5. Design and maintain ventilation of areas serving patients diagnosed with TB or high risk for TB to 
reduce risk of transmission.  3 
a. Ventilate waiting or treatment rooms with greater than or equal to 6 air exchanges per hour.  New 
construction or renovation of existing health-care facility should be designed so that TB isolation 
rooms achieve airflow of greater than or equal to 12 air exchanges per hour. 
b. Use Airborne Infection Isolation Room (AIIR) for suspected TB cases. 
c. Cough induction should be performed in a negative pressure area, allowing adequate time for 
expelled air to be filtered and removed prior to use for another patient. 
MANAGING INPATIENTS WHO HAVE POSSIBLE INFECTIOUS TB  
1. Patients known to have active or suspected TB will be placed in Airborne Precautions in a AIIR. 
2. The Medical Center will take appropriate measures to minimize the risk to health-care workers by 
applying current knowledge and technology as recommended by Federal and State Health and/or 
OSHA agencies. 
Airborne Precautions for TB Patients 
Patients who are placed in airborne isolation for TB should be educated about the mechanisms of  
M. tuberculosis transmission.  They should be taught to cover their mouths and noses with a tissue when 
coughing or sneezing, even while in the isolation room, to contain drops and droplets before they are 
expelled into the air. 
1. Airborne Precaution criteria: 
a. Private room (may have anteroom) with the doors kept closed at all times except for entry and 
exit. 
b. AIIR maintained at negative pressure to adjacent areas. 
c. AIIR with, at minimum, greater than or equal to 6 air changes per hour with at least 2 outside 
exchanges hourly.  New construction or renovation of existing health-care facility should be 
designed so that the AIIR achieve airflow of greater than or equal to 12 air exchanges per hour. 
d. AIIR directly exhausted to the outside away from intake vents, people, and animals. 
2. Healthcare workers entering the patient’s room shall wear a properly fitted particulate respirator 
(PR). 
3. When a patient who may have infectious TB is transported outside the AIIR, they should wear a 
properly fitted surgical rated mask at all times. Persons transporting the TB patients do not need to 
wear (PR) respirators outside the AIIR. 
4. Healthcare workers who perform procedures that are likely to produce bursts of droplet nuclei, such 
as bronchoscopy and administration of aerosolized Pentamidine (AP), should wear a PR.  All 
designated areas, such as AIIR and bronchoscopy areas, shall be assessed for proper ventilation, 
pressure, and exhaust when system modifications are necessary.   
5. Direct admits or outpatients who are actively infectious should not mingle in public areas.  
Appropriate communication should be made by the attending physician to the department providing  4 
the service or to Admissions to minimize airborne transmission and to plan the placement and care 
of the patient.  Patients should be instructed by their physician to wear a surgical rated mask prior to 
entry and while in the Medical Center. 
6. Precautions will continue until one of the following criteria are met: 1) three separate sputum 
smears collected at least 8 hours apart with one being a morning sample are negative or 2) a 
negative sputum tuberculosis PCR test. Isolation should be continued throughout hospitalization for 
patients who have multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) because of the tendency for 
treatment failure or relapse that has been observed in such cases. 
7. Before a TB patient is discharged from the hospital, collaboration with the public health authorities 
should take place to ensure continuation of therapy. 
Housekeeping 
An EPA approved anti-tubercular disinfectant is used for routine, daily and terminal cleaning procedures in 
TB isolation rooms.  
Engineering Recommendations 
Prevention of nosocomial TB transmission requires: 
a) Greater than or equal to 6 air exchanges per hour.  New construction or renovation of existing 
health-care facility should be designed so that AIIR rooms achieve airflow of greater than or 
equal to 12 air exchanges per hour. 
 b) Air to be directly exhausted to the outside. 
 c)  Maintenance of negative pressure. 
 d) The door of the room to remain closed to maintain negative airflow. 
 e) The monitor to have a red and a green light or a ball indicator to indicate the current pressure 
relation in the room.   
Nursing is responsible for monitoring the negative pressure status daily when a patient requires negative 
pressure airflow.  Nursing is also responsible for documenting in the patient's medical record that negative 
pressure is maintained.  Contact Plant Services if the monitor has no light or the green light is on.  The 
monitor will not alarm audibly. Plant services contracts an outside vendor to inspect the airflow annually.   
COUGH INDUCING AND AEROSOL-GENERATING PROCEDURES: 
Procedures that involve instrumentation of the lower respiratory tract or induce coughing can increase the 
likelihood of droplet nuclei being expelled into the air. These cough-inducing procedures include 
endotracheal intubation and suctioning, diagnostic sputum induction, aerosol treatments (e.g., pentamidine 
therapy), and bronchoscopy. Other procedures that can generate aerosols (e.g., irrigation of tuberculous 
abscesses, homogenizing or lyophilizing tissue, or other processing of tissue that may contain tubercle 
bacilli) are also covered by these recommendations. 
  5 
Endoscopy Lab Procedures If performing procedures, i.e., bronchoscopy, in positive-pressure rooms 
(such as operating rooms) is unavoidable, TB should be ruled out before the procedure. If bronchoscopy is 
being performed for diagnosis of pulmonary disease that may include TB, it should be performed in a room 
that meets TB isolation ventilation requirements. When ordered, post-bronchoscopy chest x-ray should be 
done with a portable unit in the Endoscopy procedure room.  If patients must recover from sedatives or 
anesthesia following procedures such as bronchoscopy, they should be monitored in a separate TB isolation 
room, and not in recovery rooms with other patients. 
Administration of Aerosolized Pentamidine 
1. Patients should be screened for active TB before prophylactic therapy with aerosolized pentamidine 
is initiated. 
2. Before each subsequent treatment with aerosolized pentamidine, patients should be screened for 
symptoms suggestive of TB. If such symptoms are elicited, a diagnostic evaluation for TB should 
be initiated.  
OTHER SELECTED AREAS: 
 Operating Rooms 
1. Elective procedures on patients with TB should be delayed, if possible, until the patient is no longer 
infectious. 
2. If surgical procedures must be performed: 
a. They should be done in rooms with door closed and traffic at a minimum to reduce the 
frequency of opening and closing the door. The core area between these rooms serves as the 
anteroom with traffic flow through this area to the OR.   
b. Procedures should be done when other patients are not present in the operating suite (e.g., 
end of day) and when minimum number of personnel is present.   
c. Airborne Precautions and isolation procedures should be followed during transport through 
the halls. 
d. The patient should not be taken to Pre-Op Holding or to PACU but should enter the 
department from the side entrance and be transported directly to the Operating Room. 
e. Limit the number of Healthcare Workers (HCWs) present in the room during the 
extubation procedure when the risk of aerosol-generation is greatest.   
3. A bacterial HEPA filter is to be placed on the patient's endotracheal tube or at the expiratory port of 
the breathing circuit of the anesthesia machine when general anesthesia is being administered to 
patient with possible TB, to reduce the risk of contamination of anesthesia equipment or discharge 
of tubercle bacilli into the ambient air.  
4. The pulmonary TB patient should be transported to a AIIR for post anesthesia care with a PACU 
nurse in attendance. If a AIIR is not available, then the patient should be recovered in the Operating 
Room.  6 
5. When operative procedures (or other procedures requiring a sterile field) are performed on patients 
who may have infectious TB, respiratory protection worn by the health-care worker should serve 
three functions:  
a. It should protect the surgical field from the respiratory secretions of the health-care workers. 
b. It should protect the health-care worker from infectious droplet nuclei that may be expelled 
by the patient or generated by the procedure.  
c. If the patient has extra-pulmonary TB (outside the pulmonary system, i.e., bone or tissue), 
then respiratory protection should be worn by HCWs in the OR for protection from 
aerosolized particles from irrigations, Bovie, or laser plumes. 
 Respirators with expiration valves and positive-pressure respirators do not protect the sterile field; 
therefore, a respirator that does not have a valve and meets the criteria should be used. 
6. The operating room should be unoccupied for 30 minutes after patient leaves the room. If the room 
is to be cleaned during that time period all staff members should wear appropriate PPE (N95) and 
doors should remain closed.   
7. All OR rooms with a patient on airborne isolation (TB or otherwise) should undergo terminal 
cleaning after the case is finished and the patient has left the room.   
Autopsy Rooms 
1. Infectious aerosols are likely to be present in autopsy rooms; such areas should be at negative 
pressure with respect to adjacent areas, and the room air should be exhausted directly to the outside 
of the building.  
2. Respiratory protection should be worn by personnel while performing autopsies on deceased 
persons who may have had TB at the time of death. 
Laboratories 
Laboratories in which specimens for mycobacteriologic studies (e.g., AFB smears and cultures) are 
processed should be designed to conform to criteria specified by CDC and National Institutes of Health. 
(See Laboratory specific policies and procedures.) 
RESPIRATORY PROTECTION PROGRAM: 
The OSHA respiratory protection standard requires that all respiratory protection devices used in the 
workplace be certified by NIOSH. Personal respiratory protection should be used by a) persons entering 
rooms in which patients with known or suspected infectious TB are being isolated, b) persons present 
during cough-inducing or aerosol-generating procedures performed on such patients, and c) persons in other 
settings where administrative and engineering controls are not likely to protect them from inhaling 
infectious airborne droplet nuclei. 
The use of the TB respiratory protective devices is limited to the health-care workers that are assigned to 
work in the areas that have been given priority for isolation/treatment of the active or suspected TB patient.   7 
1. Respiratory protective devices will have the ability to filter particles 0.3 micrometer in size with a 
filter efficiency of > 95% (i.e., filter leakage of <5%). Respirators used will have the ability to be fit 
tested, in accordance with OSHA standards. The current respirator used is the NIOSH N-95 
respirator. 
2. A proper seal between the respirator's sealing surface and the face of the person wearing the 
respirator is essential for effective and reliable performance of any negative-pressure respirator. 
Face-seal leakage can result from various factors, including incorrect face piece size or shape, 
incorrect or defective face piece sealing-lip, beard growth, perspiration or facial oils that can cause 
face piece slippage, failure to use all the head straps, incorrect positioning of the face piece on the 
face, incorrect head strap tension or position, improper respirator maintenance, and respirator 
damage. A powered air purification respirator may be worn in situations in which the health-care 
worker is unable to wear a particulate respirator. (See Respiratory Care policies and procedures.)  
3. In some settings, health-care workers may be at risk for two types of exposure: 
a) inhalation of TB and  
b) mucous membrane exposure to fluids that may contain Bloodborne pathogens. In 
these settings, protection against both types of exposure should be used. 
4. When operative procedures (or other procedures requiring a sterile field) are performed on patients 
who may have infectious TB, respiratory protection worn by the health-care worker should serve 
two functions: a) it should protect the surgical field from the respiratory secretions of the health-care 
worker, and b) it should protect the health-care worker from infectious droplet nuclei that may be 
expelled by the patient or generated by the procedure. Respirators with exhalation valves and most 
positive-pressure respirators do not protect the sterile field. 
5. Visitors to TB patients should be given surgical mask to wear while in isolation rooms and they 
should be given general instructions on how to use their mask. 
6. Surgical masks are designed to prevent the respiratory secretions of the person wearing the mask 
from entering the air. To reduce the expulsion of droplet nuclei into the air, patient suspected of 
having TB should wear surgical masks when not in TB isolation rooms. These patients do not need 
to wear particulate respirators, which are designed to filter the air before it is inhaled by the person 
wearing the respirator. Patients suspected of having or known to have TB should never wear a 
respirator that has an exhalation valve, because this type of respirator does not prevent expulsion of 
droplet nuclei into the air. 
Medical Screening 
1. Health-care workers should not be assigned a task requiring use of respirators unless they are 
physically able to perform the task while wearing the respirator. Health-care workers are screened 
for pertinent medical conditions at the time they are hired. 
2. Prior to being fit-tested for respirators, health-care workers will be screened using a questionnaire 
for pertinent medical conditions. The results of the screening will then be used to identify health-
care workers who need further medical evaluation. Few medical conditions preclude the use of most 
negative-pressure particulate respirators.    8 
Fit-test Training 
Health-care workers who wear respirators and the persons who supervise them should be informed about 
the necessity of wearing respirators and the potential risks associated with not doing so. This training should 
include: 
 The nature, extent, and specific hazards of M. tuberculosis transmission. 
 A description of specific risks for TB infection among persons exposed to M. tuberculosis, of any 
subsequent treatment with INH or other chemoprophylactic agents, and of the possibility of active 
TB disease. 
 A description of engineering controls and work practices and the reasons why they do not eliminate 
the need for personal respiratory protection. 
 An explanation for selecting a particular type of respirator, how the respirator is properly 
maintained and stored, and the operation, capabilities, and limitations of the respirator provided. 
 Instruction in how the health-care worker wearing the respirator should inspect, put on, fit check, 
and correctly wear the provided respirator (i.e., achieve and maintain proper face-seal fit on the 
health-care worker's face). 
 An opportunity to handle the provided respirator and learn how to put it on and wear it properly.  
How to check the respirator face piece fit before each use. 
  Instruction in how to recognize an inadequately functioning respirator. 
During Multi-Disciplinary Orientation, Employee Health will fit test those new employees who may need 
to wear an N95 respirator.  The fit testing records will be maintained in the employees’ files.  If an 
employee fails fit testing, their manager will be notified and there will be another opportunity to re-fit test 
again in 2 weeks during the next orientation week. 
N95 respirator fit testing of eligible employees will be coordinated by the Employee Health Department. 
Employee Health will monitor for compliance through annual TB skin testing and/or the Tuberculosis (TB) 
Health Assessment form. Facial changes will also be monitored. 
Respirator Inspection, Maintenance, and Storage 
Manufacturer's instructions for inspecting and maintaining respirators should be followed to ensure that the 
respirators continue to function properly. 
Evaluation of Respiratory Protection Program 
The program will be evaluated annually and revised as necessary based on the results of the evaluation. 
Elements of the program that should be evaluated include work practices and employee acceptance of 
respirator use. 
TB Screening and Counseling of Employees 
Prior to being employed by this facility, all prospective employees will be screened for TB (see Employee 
Health procedure). PPD skin tests results will be recorded and reviewed by conversion rates by  9 
Department/Unit and job category to determine groups that need more frequent testing. Any new PPD 
conversions in employees will be referred to the Health Department or to their private Physician for follow-
up.  
Any employee who has a persistent cough (i.e., a cough lasting > 3 weeks), especially in the presence of 
other signs or symptoms compatible with active TB (e.g., weight loss, night sweats, bloody sputum, 
anorexia, or fever), should be evaluated promptly for TB. The employee should not return to the workplace 
until a diagnosis of TB has been excluded or until the employee is on therapy and a determination has been 
made that the employee is noninfectious. 
Counseling will be offered to the employee regarding TB. Employee Health will counsel and inform the 
immunocompromised employee of their increased risk of TB infection. As the best protection against 
becoming infected, severely immunosuppressed employees should avoid exposure to M. tuberculosis.   
The CDC protocol for investigating employee PPD test conversions and active TB in employees will be 
used. 
Compliance Monitoring 
All employees must comply with the required protective measures and standards outlined in the TB Control 
Plan.  
1. It is the responsibility of the Department Head to: 
a. Schedule each new employee to complete the Infection Control Orientation education offering. 
The Department Heads and Supervisors will provide additional instructions in their work area on 
the appropriate protective equipment and respiratory protective equipment. 
b. Review annually the exposure class specific to the job classification held by the employee.  
c. Schedule updates for staff annually or more frequently as necessary. 
d. Identify, document, report and correct instances of noncompliance through appropriate channels 
and/or disciplinary action.  The employee compliance to obtain the annual TB skin test or the 
Tuberculosis (TB) Health Assessment form is in conjunction with the employee's performance 
appraisal. 
2. It is the responsibility of the employee to: 
a. Be knowledgeable of the Exposure Control Plans for Bloodborne Pathogens and the TB Control 
Plan including Airborne Isolation, use of personal protective equipment required for contact 
tasks performed in their job classification. 
b. Report concerns or instances of noncompliance to their Department Head, Infection Control, or 
Employee Health. 
c. Comply with all protective practices outlined in the TB Control Plan. Failure to comply with 
these standards will subject the employee to this facility's disciplinary action process. 
3. Monitoring is achieved through both formal and informal means, and instances of non-compliance 
are documented and referred to the appropriate department or committee for investigation and 
corrective action.  10 
Post-Exposure Evaluation and Follow-Up Procedures 
All on-the-job related exposures to employees are to be promptly reported and investigated. In the event of 
employee exposure to a patient with undiagnosed TB occurs, potentially exposed employees will be 
identified, notified, and followed according to the Employee Health policies and procedures.     
References 
 
i 2005 CDC Guidelines for Preventing the Transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in Health-Care 
Setting/MMWR, December 30, 2005/Vol.54/No. RR-17. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/rr/rr5417.pdf.  
 
Tuberculosis Guidance for Public Health Professionals | Tuberculosis (TB) | CDC 