 1 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Infection Control 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: III 
Subject:  Isolation Precautions Section:  
Date of Origination: May, 1996 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: May 8, 2024 Serial Code: IC3001 
Date of Last Review: May 8, 2024 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
 
PURPOSE: 
Isolation Precautions are designed to prevent the spread of microorganisms among patients, personnel, 
physicians, visitors, and students. 
 
RATIONALE: 
Transmission of infectious agents within a healthcare setting requires three elements: a source of 
infectious agents, a susceptible host, and a mode of transmission for the agent.  
 
POLICY: 
1. There are two tiers of HICPAC/CDC Isolation precautions used to prevent the spread of 
infections. First, Standard Precautions are used for the care of all patients, including those 
patients without known infection. Implementation of Standard Precautions is the primary 
strategy for successful hospital-acquired infection control. 
  
Second, Transmission Based precautions are used in addition to Standard Precautions for 
patients with known or suspected infections or colonization with certain infectious agents. The 
facility utilizes transmission-based precautions to include Airborne, Droplet, Contact, Special 
Contact/Contact-Plus, and Enhanced Precautions. 
 
2. All personnel, physicians, and students are responsible for complying with Isolation Precautions. 
 
3. Patients and visitors have a responsibility for complying with Isolation Precautions. The 
appropriate measures will be explained to the patient and visitors by their physician and nurses. 
 
4. The nurse in charge of the patient is responsible for ensuring that isolation precautions are 
initiated and maintained according to hospital policy. The nurse in charge of the patient should 
contact the Infection Prevention and Control Department regarding any questions or problems 
concerning the isolation of a patient.  
 
5. All patients placed on Transmission Based Precautions will be reviewed by the Infection 
Prevention and Control Department. All patients diagnosed or suspected of having a disease or 
condition that requires Transmission Based Precautions will be placed on the appropriate type of 
isolation by the nurse in charge of the patient using the List of Type and Duration of Precautions 
Recommended for Selected Infections and Conditions, IC3001 Table 1.  This is a nurse driven 
protocol.   
  2 
6. Outpatients who are actively infectious should not mingle in public areas. The referring 
physician should inform the patient to wear a surgical mask to the facility if the patient has 
highly communicable diseases such as measles, chicken pox, or tuberculosis.  The referring 
physician should make appropriate communication to Registration or to the area providing 
service, so the departments can plan for the placement and care of the patient.  The patient will 
be placed in a room with the door closed as soon as feasible to have blood drawn by an employee 
with an appropriate N-95 respirator.  
 
7. The same precautions are to be adhered to in post-mortem care and autopsy that were used prior 
to death. Respirators/masks are not necessary during post-mortem care unless aerosols are 
expected to be generated. (Special autopsy precautions are to be used for patients diagnosed or 
suspected with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. See Laboratory Administration Manual LBA201). In 
accordance with Louisiana Sanitary Code, the Funeral Home will be notified of the type of 
Isolation Precautions. 
 
8. The Infection Prevention and Control Department has approved the use of the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory 
Committee (HICPAC)’s revised “2007 Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing 
Transmission of Infectious Agents in Healthcare Settings.”  
 
9. The hospital will reserve the right to isolate patients according to CDC Guidelines. The Infection 
Prevention and Control Department or the Medical Director of Infectious Diseases will have the 
ultimate authority to make decisions regarding Isolation Precautions when conflicts arise. 
 
PROCEDURE 
 
Routes of Transmission 
Transmission of infections within a hospital setting requires three elements: (1) a source of infectious 
agents, (2) a susceptible host, and (3) a mode of transmission for the agent.  
 
1. Source 
 The healthcare setting provides many sources of infectious microorganisms. Infectious agents 
transmitted during healthcare derive primarily from human sources, but inanimate environmental 
sources also are implicated in transmission. Human reservoirs include patients, visitors, and staff 
who may have acute disease, who are in the incubation period of a disease, or who are colonized by 
an infectious microorganism.  A person’s own endogenous flora may be a source.   
 
2. Host 
 Resistance among persons to pathogenic microorganisms varies greatly. Some persons may be 
immune to infection or may be able to resist colonization by an infectious agent. Others exposed to 
the same agent may establish a commensal relationship with the infecting microorganism and 
become asymptomatic carriers. Still others may develop clinical disease. Host factors such as age, 
underlying diseases, certain treatments with antimicrobials, corticosteroids, or other 
immunosuppressive agents, irradiation, and breaks in the first line of defense mechanisms caused by 
such factors as surgical operations, anesthesia, and indwelling catheters may render patients more 
susceptible to infection. 
  3 
3. Transmission 
 Microorganisms are transmitted in hospitals by several routes, and the same microorganisms may be 
transmitted by more than one route. There are three main routes of transmission of hospital acquired 
infection: Contact, Droplet, and Airborne transmission.  
 
1. Contact transmission is the most frequent mode of transmission of Healthcare 
Associated Infections (HAI). Contact transmission is divided into two subgroups: 
direct-contact transmission and indirect-contact transmission. 
a. Direct-contact transmission occurs when microorganisms are transferred 
from one infected person to another person without a contaminated 
intermediate object or person. This may occur when a person turns a 
patient, gives a patient a bath, or performs other patient-care activities that 
require direct personal contact. Direct-contact transmission also can occur 
between two patients, with one serving as the source of the infectious 
microorganisms and the other as a susceptible host. 
b. Indirect-contact transmission involves contact of a susceptible host with a 
contaminated intermediate object which is usually inanimate (example: 
contaminated surfaces, instruments, needles, or dressings.) Wearing the 
same pair of gloves for multiple patients or failing to wash contaminated 
hands will spread microorganisms to multiples surfaces by indirect-contact 
transmission. 
 
2. Droplet transmission occurs when respiratory droplets carrying infectious agents 
come into contact with susceptible mucosal surfaces of the recipient.  Droplets are 
generated from the source person primarily during coughing, sneezing, or talking 
and during the performance of certain procedures such as suctioning and 
bronchoscopy. Transmission occurs when droplets containing microorganisms 
generated from the infected person are propelled a short distance through the air 
and deposited on the host's conjunctivae, nasal mucosa, or mouth. Because 
droplets do not remain suspended in the air, special air handling and ventilation 
are not required to prevent droplet transmission. Droplet transmission must not be 
confused with airborne transmission. 
 
3. Airborne Transmission occurs by dissemination of either airborne droplet nuclei 
(small-particle residue [5 micron or smaller in size] of evaporated droplets 
containing microorganisms that remain suspended in the air for long periods of 
time) or dust particles containing the infectious agent. Microorganisms carried in 
this manner can be dispersed widely by air currents and may become inhaled by a 
susceptible host within the same room or over a longer distance from the source 
patient. Special air handling is required to prevent airborne transmission. 
Microorganisms transmitted by airborne transmission include the bacterium 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and the viruses rubeola (measles), varicella (chicken 
pox and shingles), and variola (smallpox). 
   
Isolation Precautions are designed to prevent transmission of microorganisms by these routes in 
hospitals. Because agent and host factors are more difficult to control, interruption of transfer of 
microorganisms is directed primarily at transmission. The recommendations presented in these policies 
are based on this concept.  4 
Types of Isolation 
There are two tiers of Isolation precautions used to prevent the spread of infections. First is Standard 
Precautions, which is used for the care of all patients, including those patients without known infection. 
Implementation of Standard Precautions is the primary strategy for successful hospital-acquired 
infection control. 
Second, Transmission-based precautions are used in addition to Standard Precautions for patients with 
known or suspected infections or colonization with certain infectious agents.  
 
Standard Precautions merges the major features of Standard/Universal (Blood and Body Fluid) 
Precautions (designed to reduce the risk of transmission of blood borne pathogens) and Body 
Substance Isolation (designed to reduce the risk of transmission of pathogens from moist body 
substances). Standard Precautions apply to (1) blood; (2) all body fluids, secretions, and 
excretions except sweat, regardless of whether they contain visible blood; (3) non-intact skin; 
and (4) mucous membranes. Standard Precautions are designed to reduce the risk of transmission 
of microorganisms from both recognized and unrecognized sources of infection in hospitals. 
Standard Precautions are to be practiced with all patients. 
 
Transmission-Based Precautions are designed for patients documented or suspected to be 
infected or colonized with highly transmissible or epidemiologically important pathogens for 
which additional precautions beyond Standard Precautions are needed to interrupt transmission 
in hospitals. The facility utilizes the following types of Transmission-Based Precautions: 
Airborne Precautions, Droplet Precautions, and Contact Precautions, Special 
Contact/Contact-Plus Precautions, and Enhanced Precautions. 
 These precautions may be combined for diseases that have multiple routes of 
transmission. When used either singularly or in combination, they are to be used in addition to 
Standard Precautions.  
 
I. Administrative Controls 
 A. Education 
 The Infection Prevention and Control department, Education department, and the Clinical 
department will be responsible for providing education classes/learnings to all clinical 
department employees about the use of precautions and their responsibility for adherence 
to them. Patients and visitors are educated regarding the use of precautions and their 
responsibility for adhering to them.  
 B. Adherence to Precautions 
Department Heads and Supervisors will be responsible for periodically evaluating 
adherence to precautions and for directing improvement projects based on those findings.  
 
II. Standard Precautions 
 Use Standard Precautions for the care of all patients. 
 Standard Precautions apply to (1) blood; (2) all body fluids, secretions, and excretions except sweat, 
regardless of whether they contain visible blood; (3) non-intact skin; and (4) mucous membranes. 
Standard Precautions are designed to reduce the risk of transmission of microorganisms from both 
recognized and unrecognized sources of infection in the hospital. 
 
A. Hand washing/Hand Hygiene 
Refer to the Hand washing Policy, IC 2005. 
  5 
B. Gloves  
1. Wear gloves (clean, non-sterile gloves are adequate) when touching blood, body fluids, 
secretions, excretions, and contaminated items. Latex and vinyl gloves have equal barrier 
protection. Put on clean gloves just before touching mucous membranes and non-intact skin. 
2. Change gloves between tasks and procedures on the same patient after contact with material 
that may contain a high concentration of microorganisms.  
3. Remove gloves promptly after use, before touching non-contaminated items and 
environmental surfaces, and before going to another patient, and wash hands immediately to 
avoid transfer of microorganisms to other patients or environments. 
 
C. Mask, Eye Protection, Face Shield and Gowns 
1. Wear a mask and eye protection or a face shield to protect mucous membranes of the eyes, 
nose, and mouth during procedures and patient-care activities that are likely to generate 
splashes or sprays of blood, body fluids, secretions, and excretions. 
2. Wear a gown (a clean, non-sterile gown is adequate) to protect skin and to prevent soiling of 
clothes during procedures and patient-care activities that are likely to generate splashes or 
sprays of blood, body fluids, secretions, or excretions.  
 
D. Protective Environment for hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) patient.   
A set of prevention measures termed Protective Environment has been added to the precautions 
used to prevent HAIs. These measures, which have been defined in other guidelines, consist of 
engineering (HEPA filter ventilation in each patient room) and design interventions that decrease 
the risk of exposure to environmental fungi for severely immunocompromised allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) patients. 
 
E. Patient Care Equipment  
1. Handle used patient-care equipment soiled with blood, body fluids, secretions, and excretions 
in a manner that prevents skin and mucous membrane exposures, contamination of clothing, 
and transfer of microorganisms to other patients and environments.  
2. Reusable equipment is not to be used for the care of another patient until it has been cleaned 
and reprocessed appropriately.  Single-use items are to be discarded properly.  Any single-
use items under consideration for third party reprocessing will be approved by the Infection 
Prevention and Control Department. 
3. Refer to General Cleaning and Disinfection Policy IC2012 for reusable equipment and 
appropriate cleaning agents and wet times. 
 
F. Environmental Control 
1. Housekeeping will ensure that adequate procedures for the routine care, cleaning, and 
disinfection of environmental surfaces, beds, bedrails, bedside equipment, and other 
frequently touched surface are being followed. 
2. The room and bedside equipment of patients on Transmission-Based Precautions will be 
cleaned using the same procedures used for patients on Standard Precautions unless the 
infecting microorganism(s) and the amount of environmental contamination indicate special 
cleaning. Washing of walls, blinds, or curtains is indicated if they are visibly soiled. Cubicle 
curtain should be changed if visibly soiled.   
 
G. Dishes, Glasses, Cups, and Eating Utensils 
No special precautions are needed for dishes, glasses, cups, or eating utensils.  6 
H. Linen 
Handle, transport, and process used linen soiled with blood, body fluids, secretions, and 
excretions in a manner that prevents skin and mucous membrane exposures and contamination of 
clothing and that avoids transfer of microorganisms to other patients and environments. All 
patients’ linen will be handled the same using Standard Precautions. 
1. Contaminated linen is to be bagged at the location where it is used and will not be rinsed in 
the location of use. 
2. Employees who have contact with contaminated linen will wear protective gloves and other 
appropriate personal protective equipment. 
3. The standard cloth bags will be used for most of the soiled linen. If contaminated linen is wet 
and presents a reasonable likelihood of soak-through or of leakage from the bag, first place 
the linen in a clear plastic bag, then place the plastic bag inside the cloth bag for transport to 
prevent soak-through and/or leakage of fluids to the exterior.  
4. Utilize the following Linen Bag Color Coded Identification System for appropriate linen 
disinfection: 
a. Yellow Bags: used for bed bugs or chemo linen 
b. Purple Bags: used for C difficile linen 
I. Handling of Trash 
Standard Precautions will be used in handling all patient trash.  
1. Patient trash/waste that must be placed in a biohazard bag include: 
a. liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious materials 
b. contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially infectious materials in 
a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed 
c. items that are caked with dried blood or other potentially infectious materials and are 
capable of releasing these materials during handling 
d. contaminated sharps (use puncture-resistant container)  
e. pathological and microbiological waste containing blood or other potentially infectious 
material 
2. Trash/waste that meet the above definition from patient care areas include items such as 
purulent dressings, wound dressings containing blood, bags (receptacles), and tubing/filters. 
Contain this type of trash in a plastic bag in the patient room, then place into the biohazard 
container in the soiled utility room. 
 
J. Preventing Needle Sticks and Sharp Injuries 
1. Take care to prevent injuries when using needles, scalpels, and other sharp instruments or 
devices, when handling sharp instruments after procedures, when cleaning used instruments, 
and when disposing of used needles. Puncture-resistant containers (needle boxes) are located 
in patient rooms as well as in key areas in all clinical departments.   
2. Never recap used needles or otherwise manipulate them using both hands. Never use any 
other technique that involves directing the point of a needle toward any part of the body. 
Instead use either a one-handed "scoop" technique or a mechanical device designed for 
holding the needle sheath. 
3. Do not remove used needles from disposable syringes by hand, and do not bend, break, or 
otherwise manipulate used needles by hand. 
4. Place used disposable syringes and needles, scalpel blades, and other sharp items in 
appropriate puncture-resistant containers, which are located as close as practical to the area in 
which the items were used. Place reusable syringes, needles, and instruments in a puncture-
resistant container for transport to the reprocessing area.  7 
K. Resuscitation Devices 
Use mouthpieces, resuscitation bags, or other ventilation devices as an alternative to mouth-
to-mouth resuscitation methods in areas where the need for resuscitation is predictable. One-
way valves are located on each medication cart as well as on the crash carts on the nursing 
units. 
 
L. Patient Placement 
1. Place a patient who contaminates the environment or who does not (or cannot be  
expected to) assist in maintaining appropriate hygiene or environmental control in a private 
room.  
2. If a private room is not available, consult with the Infection Control staff regarding  
patient placement or other alternatives. 
 
M. Respiratory Hygiene/Cough Etiquette Stations 
Alcohol hand sanitizer, tissues and masks are available in waiting rooms. This strategy is 
targeted at patients, accompanying family members and friends with undiagnosed transmissible 
respiratory infections. This applies to any person with signs of illness including cough, 
congestion, rhinorrhea, or increased production of respiratory secretions when entering a 
healthcare facility.  
 
III. Transmission-Based Precautions are designed for patients documented or suspected to be 
infected or colonized with highly transmissible or epidemiologically important pathogens for 
which additional precautions beyond Standard Precautions are needed to interrupt transmission 
in hospitals.  
 
Central Supply is responsible for stocking isolation supplies appropriately.  The nursing unit is 
responsible for ensuring the receipt of the isolation supplies from Central Supply.  The nursing 
unit is also responsible for placing the appropriate isolation sign on the patient’s door. 
 
 A. Airborne Precautions 
Examples of Illnesses Requiring Airborne Precautions 
  Measles 
Tuberculosis (TB) 
Varicella (Chicken Pox) requires Airborne and Contact. 
Zoster (Shingles) that are disseminated OR in the immunocompromised host require 
Airborne and Contact precautions. 
  See IC 3001 Table 1. 
 
1. Patient Placement 
Place the patient in an Airborne Infection Isolation (AII) room, which is a single-patient 
room that is equipped with special air handling and ventilation capacity that meet the 
American Institute of Architects/Facility Guidelines Institute standards for AII room (i.e., 
monitored negative pressure relative to the surrounding area, 12 air exchanges per hour for 
new construction and renovation and 6 air exchanges per hour for existing facilities, air 
exhausted directly to the outside or recirculated through HEPA filtration before return.)  AII 
rooms must be monitored daily when a patient is admitted to an AII room for a suspected or 
diagnosed airborne illness.   
  8 
2. Respiratory Protection 
A NIOSH certified particulate respirator (N-95) that meets the CDC performance criteria for 
a TB respirator is to be worn for Airborne Precautions with patients that have known or 
suspected infectious TB. See TB Control Plan. 
 
3. Patient Transport 
Limit the movement and transport of the patient from the room for essential purposes only. If 
transport or movement is necessary, minimize patient dispersal of droplet nuclei by placing a 
surgical mask on the patient, if possible. 
 
4. Additional Precautions for Preventing Transmission of Tuberculosis 
Consult CDC’s "Guidelines for Preventing the Transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
in Health-Care Settings, 2005" and see the Tuberculosis Control Plan (Policy IC 2011). 
 
 B. Droplet Precautions 
Droplet Precautions are designed to reduce the risk of pathogen transmission by respiratory 
droplets (i.e., large-particle droplets >5µ in size) that are generated by a patient who is coughing, 
sneezing, or talking. Wear a mask when performing direct patient care. 
 
Examples of Illnesses Requiring Droplet Precautions 
 Invasive Haemophilus influenzae type b disease, including meningitis, pneumonia, 
epiglottitis, and sepsis 
 Invasive Neisseria meningitidis disease, including meningitis, pneumonia, and sepsis  
Diphtheria (pharyngeal) 
Mycoplasma pneumonia 
Pertussis 
Pneumonic plague 
Streptococcal pharyngitis, pneumonia, or scarlet fever in infants and young children 
Adenovirus and Respiratory syncytial virus -requires Droplet and Contact Precautions 
Influenza 
Mumps 
Parvovirus B19 
Rubella 
See IC 3001 Table 1 
 
1. Patient Placement 
Place the patient in a private room. When a private room is not available, place the patient in 
a room with a patient(s) who has active infection with the same microorganism but with no 
other infection (cohorting). When a private room is not available and cohorting is not 
achievable, maintain spatial separation of at least 3 feet between the infected patient and 
other patients and visitors. Special air handling and ventilation are not necessary, and the 
door may remain open. 
 
2. Mask 
In addition to Standard Precautions, wear a surgical mask upon entering the patient’s room or 
environment.  
 
  9 
3. Patient Transport 
Limit the movement and transport of the patient from the room to essential purposes only. If 
transport or movement is necessary, minimize patient dispersal of droplets by placing a 
surgical mask on the patient, if possible. 
 
 C. Contact Precautions 
Contact Precautions are designed to reduce the risk of transmission of epidemiologically 
important microorganisms by direct or indirect contact. Direct-contact transmission involves 
skin-to-skin contact and physical transfer of microorganisms to a susceptible host from an 
infected or colonized person, such as occurs when personnel turn patients, bathe patients, or 
perform other patient-care activities that require physical contact. Direct-contact transmission 
also can occur between two patients (e.g., by hand contact), with one serving as the source of 
infectious microorganisms and the other as a susceptible host. Indirect-contact transmission 
involves contact of a susceptible host with a contaminated intermediate object, usually 
inanimate, in the patient's environment.  
 
Examples of Illnesses Requiring Contact Precautions 
a. Multidrug-Resistant Organisms (MDROs): 
MDROs are defined as microorganisms, predominantly bacteria, that are resistant to 
one or more classes of antimicrobial agents.  MDROs can be isolated from various 
body sites including but not limited to gastrointestinal, respiratory, skin/wounds, and 
genitourinary. 
 
Patients infected or colonized with MDROs as judged by the Infection Control 
program based on current state, regional, and/or national recommendations are to be 
placed in contact precautions. 
 
Patients who have tested positive for targeted MDROs in the 6 months prior to 
admission to the facility are placed on contact precautions for the duration of their 
hospitalization.  
Special considerations: 
• Patients who have ever tested positive for Carbapenem-resistant 
Enterobacteriaceae (CRE) are placed on contact precautions every encounter.   
 
b. Enteric infections with a low infectious dose or prolonged environmental survival, 
including: 
Rotavirus 
Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli 0157:H7 or Shigella in diapered or 
incontinent patients 
 
c. Parainfluenza virus or enteroviral infections in infants and young children 
 
 
d. Skin infections that are highly contagious or that may occur on dry skin, including: 
  Diphtheria (cutaneous) 
  Herpes simplex virus (neonatal or mucocutaneous) 
  Impetigo  10 
  Major (non-contained) abscesses, cellulitis, or decubiti 
  Pediculosis 
  Scabies 
  Staphylococcal furunculosis in infants and young children 
Varicella (Chicken Pox) requires Contact and Airborne precautions. 
  Viral/hemorrhagic conjunctivitis 
  See IC3001 Table 1. 
 
 Contact-Plus Precautions 
Contact-Plus Precautions is adopted by the facility to reduce the risk of transmission of 
Clostridioides difficile, Hepatitis A, and Candida auris by direct or indirect contact. Contact-Plus 
requires the same precautions as Contact with the addition of using bleach for disinfection and 
soap and water for hand washing. Clean objects in the patients room daily with appropriate agent 
to reduce transmission. Wear a gown and gloves during patient care. 
 
Illnesses Requiring Contact-Plus Precautions 
Hepatitis A 
C. difficile 
• Patients with a positive C. difficile PCR or toxin test should be placed on Contact-
Plus precautions and remain in isolation for the duration of their hospital stay. 
Candida auris 
• Patients who have ever tested positive for Candida auris are placed on Contact-
Plus precautions every encounter. 
 
1. Patient Placement 
Place the patient in a private room. When a private room is not available, place the patient in 
a room with a patient who has an active infection with the same microorganism but no other 
infection (cohorting). When a private room is not available and cohorting is not achievable, 
consider the epidemiology of the microorganism and the patient population when 
determining patient placement. Consultation with Infection Control staff is advised before 
patient placement. 
 
2. Gloves and Gown 
Don a clean non-sterile gown each time you enter the patient’s room to keep your clothing 
clean from contact with the patient, environmental surfaces, items in the patient's room, or 
wound drainage not contained by a dressing.  Gloves should be donned last and should fit 
snugly around the wrist and gown cuff. Remove the gown and gloves before leaving the 
patient's environment. After gown removal, ensure that clothing does not contact potentially 
contaminated environmental surfaces to avoid transfer of microorganisms to other patients or 
environments. 
 
 
 
3. Hand Washing 
When providing care for a patient, change gloves after having contact with infective material 
that may contain high concentrations of microorganisms (such as fecal material and wound 
drainage). Remove gloves and gowns before leaving the patient's environment and wash  11 
hands. Ensure soap and water is used for hand hygiene when caring for patients on Contact-
Plus precautions. After hand washing, ensure that hands do no touch potentially 
contaminated environmental surfaces or items in the patient's room as leaving. 
 
Patients in Contact or Contact-Plus isolation who require therapy will be allowed to go to the 
gym providing any open wounds, lesions, or tracheotomy sites can be well covered, and the 
patient understands and practices good hygiene (i.e. hand washing).  If a patient has C. diff, 
the patient must be continent. A patient who cannot reliably follow basic hygienic measures 
will not be allowed in the gym. All mats and equipment used by the patient in the gym will 
be disinfected with an appropriate hospital-approved disinfectant when the patient has 
completed the therapy session. 
 
4. Patient-Care Equipment and Personal Items 
 When possible, dedicate the use of noncritical patient-care equipment to a single patient (or 
cohort the patients infected or colonized with the pathogen requiring precautions) to avoid 
sharing between patients. If use of common equipment or items is unavoidable, then 
adequately clean and disinfect them before use on another patient. 
  
 Isolation carts/kits are equipped with individual disposable equipment such as 
sphygmomanometer and stethoscopes that remain in the room for the duration of isolation. 
After isolation is discontinued all reusable equipment must be cleaned and disinfected prior to 
use on other patients. Refer to General Cleaning and Disinfection Policy IC2012 for reusable 
equipment and appropriate agents and wet times. 
  
D. Enhanced Precautions 
 Enhanced Precautions is adopted by the facility to reduce the risk of transmission of COVID-
19, MPOX, or any novel pathogen. Enhanced Precautions requires a combination of Droplet 
and Contact Precautions, with the use of a N95 respirator instead of a surgical mask.  Refer 
to the Special Communicable Disease Management Plan, IC2013b 
 
 E. Additional Considerations 
1. Patient Transport 
Limit the movement and transport of the patient from the room. If transport or movement is 
necessary, place a clean gown on the patient.  Place a clean sheet over the patient prior to 
transport.  
  
Notify the receiving areas and staff that the patient is on Isolation Precautions.  If patient is 
transported via ambulance, notify external and receiving personnel that the patient is on 
Isolation Precautions. 
 
2. Ambulating a Patient 
Patients in isolation may be ambulated in the hallway for physical therapy purposes.  If the 
patient has a draining wound, it must be contained by a clean dressing and covered to prevent 
any breakthrough.  Patients should be continent of urine and bowels.  If the patient has a 
MDRO in the sputum, they are instructed to wear a surgical mask.  Patients are instructed to 
perform hand hygiene before and after walking.  Patients in isolation are not allowed in 
lounges or nourishment rooms, etc.  Staff that are assisting the patient with ambulation are to  12 
wear a clean isolation gown and gloves and place the patient in a clean gown prior to 
entering the hallway. 
 
3. Discharge Center Considerations 
A patient on contact/contact plus isolation during admission may be appropriate upon 
hospital discharge to utilize the Discharge Center if: 
a) The patient with any MDRO in the urine or stool is continent. 
b) The patient with any MDRO in the wound or blood has been treated for the infection 
and the wound does not require a dressing. 
c) The patient with C. difficile does not have diarrhea and is continent. 
 A patient on contact/contact plus isolation during admission will not meet Discharge Center 
utilization criteria if: 
a) The patient exhibits any open or actively draining wounds, or any wound that needs a 
dressing.   
b) Any MDRO in the urine or stool in a patient with incontinence. 
 
4. Visitor Instructions 
a) Do not visit if you have an active illness. 
b) Wash hands with soap and water when entering and exiting a patient’s room with C. 
difficile. Perform hand hygiene with alcohol-based cleanser prior to entering all other 
rooms. 
c) Do not use the restroom in the patient’s room. 
d) Avoid placing personal items on the floor. 
e) Avoid eating or drinking while in the patient’s room. 
f) If visiting more than one patient, please visit the patient on Contact or Contact- Plus 
Precautions last. 
g) Limit items taken in and out of the patient’s room.  
 
 
F. Sections in Appendix 
1. Type and Duration of Precautions Recommended for Selected Infections and Conditions, IC 
3001 table 1 
2. Isolation Type and Duration 
3. Clinical Syndromes or Conditions Pending Confirmation of Diagnosis Warranting Empiric 
Transmission Based Precautions in Addition to Standard Precautions, IC 3001 table 2 
4. Infection Control Considerations for High-Priority (CDC Category A) Diseases that May 
Result from Bioterrorist Attacks or are Considered to be Bioterrorist Threats, IC3001 table 3 
5. Recommendations for Application of Standard Precautions for the Care of All Patients in All 
Healthcare Settings, IC 3001 table 4 
6. Components of a Protective Environment, IC 3001 table 5 
7. Example of Safe Donning and Removal of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), IC 3001 
table 5 
 
REFERENCES: 
CDC, 2007 Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing Transmission of Infectious Agents in Healthcare Settings; Isolation Precautions 
Guideline | Infection Control | CDC; Page last reviewed: July 22, 2019.  13 
CDC, Guidelines for Preventing the Transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in Health-Care Settings, 2005; https://www.cdc.gov/tb-
healthcare-settings/hcp/infection-control/?CDC_AAref_Val=https://www.cdc.gov/tb/publications/guidelines/infectioncontrol.htm; Page 
last reviewed: October 23, 2020 
OSHA, Occupational Exposure to Blood borne Pathogens, Final Rule 2001; Sanitary Code of the State of Louisiana. Online Publications of 
the Louisiana Administrative Code; Title 51, Public Health- Sanitary Code. Last amended December 2022. 
Policy IC2012 General Cleaning and Disinfection  
Our Lady of the Lake Microbiology Antibiotic Reporting Procedure 
 
 
 