IC-3001- Table 4 
Recommendation for Application of Standard Precautions for the Care of all Patients in All Healthcare 
Settings (CDC page last reviewed: November 5, 2015) 
Isolation Precautions Guideline | Infection Control | CDC 
Appendix A: Table 4. Recommendations for Application of Standard Precautions for the Care of All Patients in All 
Healthcare Settings | Infection Control | CDC                                                                Last Reviewed September 2024 
TABLE 4 
 
Recommendations for Application of Standard Precautions for the Care of all 
Patients in All Healthcare Settings 
 
COMPONENT  RECOMMENDATIONS  
Hand Hygiene  After touching blood, body fluids, secretions, excretions, contaminated 
items; immediately after removing gloves; between patient contacts.  
 
Personal protective equipment 
(PPE)  
Gloves  
For touching blood, body fluids, secretions, excretions, contaminated 
items; for touching mucous membranes and nonintact skin. 
 
Personal protective equipment 
(PPE)  
Gown  
During procedures and patient-care activities when contact of 
clothing/exposed skin with blood/body fluids, secretions, and excretions 
is anticipated. 
 
Personal protective equipment 
(PPE)  
Mask, eye protection (goggles), 
face shield  
During procedures and patient-care activities likely to generate splashes 
or sprays of blood, body fluids, secretions, especially suctioning, 
endotracheal intubation. During aerosol-generating procedures on 
patients with suspected or proven infections transmitted by respiratory 
aerosols wear a fit-tested N95 or higher respirator in addition to gloves, 
gown and face/eye protection. 
Soiled Patient-Care Equipment  Handle in a manner that prevents transfer of microorganisms to others 
and to the environment; wear gloves if visibly contaminated; perform 
hand hygiene.  
Environmental Control  Develop procedures for routine care, cleaning, and disinfection of 
environmental surfaces, especially frequently touched surfaces in 
patient-care areas.  
Textiles and Laundry  Handle in a manner that prevents transfer of microorganisms to others 
and to the environment. 
Needles and other sharps  Do not recap, bend, break, or hand-manipulate used needles; if 
recapping is required, use a one-handed scoop technique only; use 
safety features when available; place used sharps in puncture-resistant 
container. 
Patient Resuscitation  Use mouthpiece, resuscitation bag, and other ventilation devices to 
prevent contact with mouth and oral secretions.  
Patient Placement  Prioritize for single-patient room if patient is at increased risk of 
transmission, is likely to contaminate the environment, does not 
maintain appropriate hygiene, or is at increased risk of acquiring 
infection or developing adverse outcome following infection.  
Respiratory Hygiene / Cough 
Etiquette 
(source containment of infectious 
respiratory secretions in symptomatic 
patients, beginning at initial point of 
encounter e.g., triage & reception areas in 
emergency departments & physician 
offices)  
Instruct symptomatic persons to cover mouth/nose when 
sneezing/coughing; use tissues and dispose in no-touch receptacle; 
observe hand hygiene after soiling of hands with respiratory secretions; 
wear surgical mask if tolerated or maintain spatial separation, >3 feet if 
possible.  
(See Sections II.D.-II.J. and III.A.1) 
 