IC-3001- Table 3 
Infection Control Considerations for High-Priority (CDC Category A) Diseases That May Result from 
Bioterrorist Attacks or are Considered to be Bioterrorist Threats (CDC page last reviewed: November 5, 2015) 
Page 1 of 4 
                                                                                                Revised March 31, 2024/Reviewed September 13, 2024 
TABLE 3 
 
Infection Control Considerations for High-Priority (CDC Category A) Diseases 
That May Result from Bioterrorist Attacks or are Considered to be Bioterrorist 
Threats 
 
Abbreviations used in this table:  
RT = respiratory tract; GIT = gastrointestinal tract; CXR = chest x-ray; CT = computerized axial tomography; CSF = 
cerebrospinal fluid; and LD50 – lethal dose for 50% of experimental animals; HCWs = healthcare worker; BSL = 
biosafety level; PAPR = powered air purifying respirator; PCR = polymerase chain reaction; IHC = 
immunohistochemistry 
Disease  Anthrax  
Site(s) of Infection;  Cutaneous (contact with spores). Respiratory Tract: (inhalation of spores).  
Gastrointestinal Tract: (ingestion of spores – rare). 
Transmission Mode 
Cutaneous & inhalation disease 
have occurred in past 
bioterrorist incidents 
Comment: Spores can be inhaled into the lower respiratory tract. The infectious 
dose of B. anthracis in humans by any route is not precisely known. In primates, 
the LD50 (i.e., the dose required to kill 50% of animals) for an aerosol challenge 
with B. anthracis is estimated to be 8,000–50,000 spores; the infectious dose may 
be as low as 1-3 spores. 
Incubation Period  
Cutaneous: 1 to12 days. Respiratory Tract: Usually 1 to 7 days but up to 43 days 
reported.  
Gastrointestinal Tract: 15-72 hours. 
Clinical Features  Cutaneous: Painless, reddish papule, which develops a central vesicle or bulla in 
1-2 days; over next 3-7 days lesion becomes pustular, and then necrotic, with black 
eschar; extensive surrounding edema. Respiratory Tract: initial flu-like illness for 
1-3 days with headache, fever, malaise, cough; by day 4 severe dyspnea and 
shock, and is usually fatal (85%-90% if untreated; meningitis in 50% of Respiratory 
Tract cases.  
Gastrointestinal Tract: if intestinal form, necrotic, ulcerated edematous lesions 
develop in intestines with fever, nausea and vomiting, progression to hematemesis 
and bloody diarrhea; 25-60% fatal 
Diagnosis  Cutaneous: Swabs of lesion (under eschar) for immunohistochemistry, 
polymerase chain reaction and culture; punch biopsy for immunohistochemistry, 
polymerase chain reaction and culture; vesicular fluid aspirate for Gram stain and 
culture; blood culture if systemic symptoms; acute and convalescent sera for ELISA 
serology. Respiratory Tract: Chest X-ray or CT scan demonstrating wide 
mediastinal widening and/or pleural effusion, hilar abnormalities; blood for culture 
and polymerase chain reaction; pleural effusion for culture, polymerase chain 
reaction and immunohistochemistry; cerebrospinal fluid if meningeal signs present 
for immunohistochemistry, polymerase chain reaction and culture; acute and 
convalescent sera for ELISA serology; pleural and/or bronchial biopsies 
immunohistochemistry.  
Gastrointestinal Tract: blood and ascites fluid, stool samples, rectal swabs, and 
swabs of oropharyngeal lesions if present for culture, polymerase chain reaction 
and immunohistochemistry. 
Infectivity  Cutaneous: Person-to-person transmission from contact with lesion of untreated 
patient possible, but extremely rare. Respiratory Tract and Gastrointestinal 
Tract: Person-to-person transmission does not occur.  
Aerosolized powder, environmental exposures: Highly infectious if aerosolized. IC-3001- Table 3 
Infection Control Considerations for High-Priority (CDC Category A) Diseases That May Result from 
Bioterrorist Attacks or are Considered to be Bioterrorist Threats (CDC page last reviewed: November 5, 2015) 
Page 2 of 4 
                                                                                                Revised March 31, 2024/Reviewed September 13, 2024 
Recommended Precautions  Cutaneous: Standard Precautions; Contact Precautions if uncontained copious 
drainage. Respiratory Tract and Gastrointestinal Tract: Standard Precautions.  
Aerosolized powder, environmental exposures: Respirator (N95 mask or 
Powered Air Purifying Respirators), protective clothing; decontamination of persons 
with powder on them (Notice to Readers: Occupational Health Guidelines for 
Remediation Workers at Bacillus anthracis-Contaminated Sites — United States, 
2001–2002). 
 
Hand hygiene: Handwashing for 30-60 seconds with soap and water or 2% 
chlorhexidine gluconate after spore contact (alcohol handrubs inactive against 
spores [Weber DJ JAMA 2003; 289:1274]). 
 
Post-exposure prophylaxis following environmental exposure: 60 days of 
antimicrobials (either doxycycline, ciprofloxacin, or levofloxacin) and post-exposure 
vaccine under IND. 
Disease  Botulism  
Site(s) of Infection; 
Transmission Mode  
Gastrointestinal Tract: Ingestion of toxin-containing food. Respiratory Tract: 
Inhalation of toxin containing aerosol cause disease.  
Comment: Toxin ingested or potentially delivered by aerosol in bioterrorist 
incidents. LD50 (lethal dose for 50% of experimental animals) for type A is 0.001 
μg/ml/kg. 
Incubation Period  1-5 days.  
Clinical Features  Ptosis, generalized weakness, dizziness, dry mouth and throat, blurred vision, 
diplopia, dysarthria, dysphonia, and dysphagia followed by symmetrical descending 
paralysis and respiratory failure.  
Diagnosis  Clinical diagnosis; identification of toxin in stool, serology unless toxin-containing 
material available for toxin neutralization bioassays.  
Infectivity  Not transmitted from person to person. Exposure to toxin necessary for disease.  
Recommended Precautions  Standard Precautions.  
Disease  Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever  
Ebola Virus Disease for 
Healthcare Workers [2014] 
Recommendations for healthcare workers can be found at  Ebola for Clinicians. 
Site(s) of Infection; 
Transmission Mode  
As a rule, infection develops after exposure of mucous membranes or respiratory 
tract, or through broken skin or percutaneous injury.  
Incubation Period  2-19 days, usually 5-10 days.  
Clinical Features  Febrile illnesses with malaise, myalgias, headache, vomiting and diarrhea that are 
rapidly complicated by hypotension, shock, and hemorrhagic features. Massive 
hemorrhage in < 50% pts.  
Diagnosis  Etiologic diagnosis can be made using respiratory tract--polymerase chain reaction, 
serologic detection of antibody and antigen, pathologic assessment with 
immunohistochemistry and viral culture with EM confirmation of morphology . 
Infectivity  Person-to-person transmission primarily occurs through unprotected contact with 
blood and body fluids; percutaneous injuries (e.g., needle stick) associated with a 
high rate of transmission; transmission in healthcare settings has been reported but 
is prevented by use of barrier precautions.  IC-3001- Table 3 
Infection Control Considerations for High-Priority (CDC Category A) Diseases That May Result from 
Bioterrorist Attacks or are Considered to be Bioterrorist Threats (CDC page last reviewed: November 5, 2015) 
Page 3 of 4 
                                                                                                Revised March 31, 2024/Reviewed September 13, 2024 
Recommended Precautions  Hemorrhagic fever specific barrier precautions: If disease is believed to be 
related to intentional release of a bioweapon, epidemiology of transmission is 
unpredictable pending observation of disease transmission. Until the nature of the 
pathogen is understood and its transmission pattern confirmed, Standard, Contact 
and Airborne Precautions should be used. Once the pathogen is characterized, if 
the epidemiology of transmission is consistent with natural disease, Droplet 
Precautions can be substituted for Airborne Precautions. Emphasize: 1) use of 
sharps safety devices and safe work practices, 2) hand hygiene; 3) barrier 
protection against blood and body fluids upon entry into room (single gloves and 
fluid-resistant or impermeable gown, face/eye protection with masks, goggles or 
face shields); and 4) appropriate waste handling. 
Use N95 or higher respirators when performing aerosol-generating procedures. In 
settings where AIIRs are unavailable or the large numbers of patients cannot be 
accommodated by existing AIIRs, observe Droplet Precautions (plus Standard 
Precautions and Contact Precautions) and segregate patients from those not 
suspected of VHF infection. Limit blood draws to those essential to care. See text 
for discussion and Appendix A for recommendations for naturally occurring VHFs.  
Disease  Plague  
Site(s) of Infection; 
Transmission Mode  
Respiratory Tract: Inhalation of respiratory droplets. Comment: Pneumonic 
plague most likely to occur if used as a biological weapon, but some cases of 
bubonic and primary septicemia may also occur. Infective dose 100 to 500 
bacteria. 
Incubation Period  1 to 6, usually 2 to 3 days.  
Clinical Features  Pneumonic: fever, chills, headache, cough, dyspnea, rapid progression of 
weakness, and in a later stage hemoptysis, circulatory collapse, and bleeding 
diathesis.  
Diagnosis  Presumptive diagnosis from Gram stain or Wayson stain of sputum, blood, or 
lymph node aspirate; definitive diagnosis from cultures of same material or paired 
acute/convalescent serology.  
Infectivity  Person-to-person transmission occurs via respiratory droplets risk of transmission 
is low during first 20-24 hours of illness and requires close contact. Respiratory 
secretions probably are not infectious within a few hours after initiation of 
appropriate therapy.  
Recommended Precautions  Standard Precautions, Droplet Precautions until patients have received 48 hours of 
appropriate therapy. Chemoprophylaxis: Consider antibiotic prophylaxis for 
HCWs with close contact exposure.  
FOOTNOTES: 
1. Wu L-T. A treatise on pneumonic plague. Geneva: League of Nations, 1926. III. Health.  
2. Kool JL. Risk of person-to-person transmission of pneumonic plague. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 2005; 40 (8): 
1166-1172 
3. Butler TC. Plague and other Yersinia infections. In: Greenough WB, ed. Current topics in infectious disease. New 
York: Plenum Medical Book Company, 1983. 
Disease  Smallpox  IC-3001- Table 3 
Infection Control Considerations for High-Priority (CDC Category A) Diseases That May Result from 
Bioterrorist Attacks or are Considered to be Bioterrorist Threats (CDC page last reviewed: November 5, 2015) 
Page 4 of 4 
                                                                                                Revised March 31, 2024/Reviewed September 13, 2024 
Site(s) of Infection; 
Transmission Mode  
Respiratory Tract: Inhalation of droplet or, rarely, aerosols; and skin lesions 
(contact with virus). Comment: If used as a biological weapon, natural disease, 
which has not occurred since 1977, will likely result. 
Incubation Period  7 to 19 days (mean 12 days).  
Clinical Features  Fever, malaise, backache, headache, and often vomiting for 2-3 days; then 
generalized papular or maculopapular rash (more on face and extremities), which 
becomes vesicular (on day 4 or 5) and then pustular; lesions all in same stage.  
Diagnosis  Electron microscopy of vesicular fluid or culture of vesicular fluid by WHO approved 
laboratory (CDC); detection by polymerase chain reaction available only in select 
LRN labs, CDC and USAMRID. 
Infectivity  Secondary attack rates up to 50% in unvaccinated persons; infected persons may 
transmit disease from time rash appears until all lesions have crusted over (about 3 
weeks); greatest infectivity during first 10 days of rash.  
Recommended Precautions  Combined use of Standard, Contact, and Airborne Precautions until all scabs have 
separated (3-4 weeks).  
Transmission by the airborne route is a rare event; Airborne Precautions is 
recommended when possible, but in the event of mass exposures, barrier 
precautions and containment within a designated area are most important.  
 
Only immune HCWs to care for patients; post-exposure vaccine within 4 days. 
 
Vaccinia: HCWs cover vaccination site with gauze and semi-permeable dressing 
until scab separates (≥21 days). Observe hand hygiene. 
 
Adverse events with virus-containing lesions: Standard plus Contact 
Precautions until all lesions crusted. 
 
Vaccinia adverse events with lesions containing infectious virus include inadvertent 
autoinoculation, ocular lesions (blepharitis, conjunctivitis), generalized vaccinia, 
progressive vaccinia, eczema vaccinatum; bacterial superinfection also requires 
addition of contact precautions if exudates cannot be contained. 
Disease  Tularemia  
Site(s) of Infection; 
Transmission Mode  
Respiratory Tract: Inhalation of aerosolized bacteria. Gastrointestinal Tract: 
Ingestion of food or drink contaminated with aerosolized bacteria. Comment: 
Pneumonic or typhoidal disease likely to occur after bioterrorist event using aerosol 
delivery. Infective dose 10-50 bacteria. 
Incubation Period  2 to 10 days, usually 3 to 5 days.  
Clinical Features  Pneumonic: malaise, cough, sputum production, dyspnea; Typhoidal: fever, 
prostration, weight loss and frequently an associated pneumonia.  
Diagnosis  Diagnosis usually made with serology on acute and convalescent serum 
specimens; bacterium can be detected by polymerase chain reaction (LRN) or 
isolated from blood and other body fluids on cysteine-enriched media or mouse 
inoculation.  
Infectivity  Person-to-person spread is rare. Laboratory workers who encounter/handle 
cultures of this organism are at high risk for disease if exposed.  
Recommended Precautions  Standard Precautions  
 
 
Reference: Appendix A. Table 3. Infection Control Considerations for High-Priority (CDC Category A) 
Diseases that May Result from Bioterrorist Attacks or are Considered to be Bioterrorist Threats | Infection 
Control | CDC 