POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL   Manual: Organizational  
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   Chapter: Imaging Services 
Subject: Iodinated Contrast                            Section: CT  
Date of Origination: 6/1/2006     Supersedes:           
Date Last Revised: 01/13/2019; 6-14-19             Serial Code: ICT 013 
Reviewed: 01/17, 6/19, 1/21, 3/23, 8/24                   
          
PURPOSE: 
Reduce the incidence of nephrotoxicity associated with iodinated contrast by determining which 
patients are at highest risk. 
POLICY: 
Screening: All patients do not necessarily need an estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate (eGFR) 
determination before an exam with contrast. All patients should be screened for the following 
risk factors of contrast nephrotoxicity to determine if eGFR is needed: 
• > 60 years of age 
• Renal disease, including dialysis, transplant, single kidney, cancer, or surgery 
• Hypertension requiring medical therapy 
• Diabetes mellitus 
• Metformin or metformin-containing drug combinations 
 
A serum creatinine will be obtained to calculate an eGFR in all patients with any of the above 
stated risk factors.  Normal values less than 30 days will be adequate. Abnormal values less than 
10 days old will be adequate. Otherwise they should be repeated. All ER patients meeting 
screening criteria should have a result within the last 48 hours.   
 
If an ER patient that is >= 18 has a pending creatinine in the lab (regardless of risk factors 
above), contrast will not be administered until the eGFR value is resulted.  Any results with an 
eGFR Below 30 are reported to the Radiologist for contrast determination. If an eGFR is not 
available, any results with a creatinine above 1.9 are reported to the Radiologist for contrast 
determination. 
In patients with acute kidney injury, the administration of iodinated contrast medium should only 
be undertaken with appropriate caution, and only if the benefit to the patient outweighs the 
risk.   
These are guidelines and may vary based upon a certain clinical situation.  For example, trauma 
activations, stroke alerts, or other medical emergencies may warrant contrast administration prior 
to obtaining a serum creatinine. 
  
Metformin: 
Category 1 
In patients with no evidence of acute kidney injury and with eGFR greater than, or equal to 30, 
there is no need to discontinue metformin either prior to or following the intravenous 
administration of iodinated contrast media, nor is there an obligatory need to reassess the 
patient’s renal function following the test or procedure.  
Category 2 
In patients taking metformin who are known to have acute kidney injury or severe chronic 
kidney disease (stage IV or stage V, eGFR<30), metformin should be temporarily discontinued 
at the time of or prior to the procedure and withheld for 48 hours subsequent to the procedure 
and reinstituted only after renal function has been re-evaluated and found to be normal.  
History of Contrast Allergy: 
If a patient has a documented allergy to iodinated contrast with minor reaction, a 13-hour oral 
premedication is recommended as follows: 
• 50 mg prednisone by mouth at 13 hours, 7 hours, and 1 hour before contrast 
administration, plus 50 mg diphenhydramine intravenously, intramuscularly, or by 
mouth 1 hour before contrast administration  
In emergent situations with no alternatives, the following regimen may be considered.  It should 
be noted that this regimen, and all other regimens with a duration less than 4-5 hours, has no 
evidence of efficacy.  
• Solu-Medrol 40 mg IV, plus diphenhydramine 50 mg IV, each 1 hour before contrast 
administration.  
Pregnancy: 
The ACR does not recommend withholding the use of iodinated contrast agents in pregnant or 
potentially pregnant patients when it is needed for diagnostic purposes.   The radiation dose to 
the mother and fetus is the primary consideration when performing CT scan on pregnant patients.  
The pelvis should be shielded, when possible. 
Breastfeeding: 
Because of the very small percentage of iodinated contrast medium that is excreted into the breast milk 
and absorbed by the infant’s gut, available data suggest that it is safe for the mother and infant to continue 
breast-feeding after receiving such an agent.  Ultimately, an informed decision to temporarily stop breast-feeding should be left up to the mother after 
these facts are communicated. If the mother remains concerned about any potential ill effects to the infant, 
she may abstain from breast-feeding from the time of contrast administration for a period of 12 to 24 
hours. There is no value to stop breast feeding beyond 24 hours. The mother should be told to express and 
discard breast milk from both breasts during that period. In anticipation of this, she may wish to use a 
breast pump to obtain milk before the contrast-enhanced study to feed the infant during the 24-hour 
period following the examination.  
 (Adapted from the ACR Manual on Contrast Media, 2023, ACR Committee on Drugs and 
Contrast Media)   
 
 
Contrast Injection Coverage 
The following providers may be considered capable of providing direct supervision of intravenous 
contrast material administration. 
 • A radiologist (MD/DO) 
Or – one of the following under the general supervision of a radiologist:  
• Non-radiologist physicians (MD/DO)  
• Advanced practice provider (NP, PA)  
• Registered nurses following a symptom- and sign-driven treatment algorithm 
**To accommodate this need and for consistency with CMS, the ACR will continue to accept remote 
supervision for contrast administration (Direct Supervision for Contrast Studies (Updated 4/2024) 
 
(Adapted from the ACR Manual on Contrast Media, 2024, ACR-SPR Practice Parameter for the 
use of Intravascular Contrast Media)  
 