 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Imaging Services 
Subject:  Magnetic Resonance Imaging Safety Policies and 
Procedures 
Section:  MRI 
Date of Origination:  1/16/89 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
4/16 , 8/20 
04/16,  5/19, 8/20, 1/21, 3/23, 2/24 
Serial Code:  IMR 003 
  
PURPOSE: 
 The purpose of this policy is to assure a safe environment for patients, visitors, medical staff, and 
hospital personnel in the Magnetic Resonance Imaging Center. 
POLICY: 
 The operation of the Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) equipment is restricted to qualified 
personnel only. Safety procedures apply to all persons entering the Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
facility. 
PROCEDURE: 
I. Operation of the MRI equipment will be limited to qualified personnel, including: 
A.  Service Engineers. 
B.  Registered Radiologic Technologists or other qualified trained individuals who 
possess a degree in the biological services and who have received in-service 
instruction and/or applications training and have read the operators manuals and 
training material, as well as reviewed the procedures in safety precautions. 
C. Radiologists who have been credentialed by the Medical Staff. 
II. Patient Safety: 
Possible Contra-indications 
An MRI System is contra-indicated for persons with the following: 
1. Non-compatible Pacemakers or other electrically, magnetically or mechanically activated 
implants as the magnetic and electromagnetic fields produced by the MRI system may 
interfere with the operation of these devices and greatly endanger the individual.  
2. Patients with specific intracranial aneurysm clips. This restriction is not limited to patients, but 
also apply to hospital employees, visitors, or any individual who might be endangered by entering 
the magnetic field. The only exception would require precise documentation confirming that MR 
imaging on unit at same or higher field strength was accomplished with the clip in place with no 
harm to the patient ensued. 
 
Warnings 
The following conditions could present hazard and require extra caution and careful screening 
and monitoring of individuals entering the scan room: 
1. Implants and prosthesis (the magnetic force exerted on ferromagnetic objects with in the field 
could result in implants, such as aneurysm clips, surgical clips, cochlear implants or prosthesis to 
move or be displaced resulting in injury or death to the individual). 
2. Electrically conductive objects (limb braces, traction mechanisms or stereo tactic devices for 
example) should not be placed into the scanner as the radio frequency field may cause electrical 
discharge or sparks between these conductive objects in the patient or the radio frequencies (RF) 
coils. 
3. Metal fragments or slivers: Patients who have worked in a machine shop or similar environment 
may have small metal slivers or fragments of steel imbedded in their eyes. The force of the 
magnetic field could cause the fragments to move or be displaced and cause injury to the eye or 
surrounding tissue. The patient should be screened for work history and if suspected to be a 
hazard, precautionary measures including orbital x-rays and/or computerized tomography should 
be obtained. 
Pregnancy and Infants 
The safety of MRI at field strengths higher than 1.5 T during pregnancy has not been thoroughly 
assessed. However, the majority of research studies have failed to discover any reproducible 
harmful effects of exposure of the mother or developing fetus to the 3 T or weaker magnetic 
fields used in the routine clinical MRI Process (ACR Manual on MR Safety (2020) – Version 
1.0).  
 All female patients of child-bearing age will be questioned as to their last menses prior to having 
an MRI scan. 
 Orders for MRI imaging patient with known pregnancy should only proceed after ordering 
physician and radiologist have been notified and directs technologist to proceed. Ordering 
physician and radiologist decision to proceed with MRI should be documented by the 
technologist in the medical record prior to proceeding with procedure. 
 
 Pediatric Patients 
  Parent/Caregiver will be allowed to stay with patient during duration of scan after appropriately  
  screened.  
 
 Visitors to MRI Scan Room 
  Any visitor to the MRI scan room will be screened using the same screening form that is used for  
  screening patients. 
Collision Hazard The magnetic field near the MRI system is strong enough to attract ferromagnetic objects with 
great force. The force can be great enough to pull objects and cause them to fly into the magnet, 
becoming a projectile capable of causing severe injury or death. 
  
 FDA Medwatch reporting 
  Any event that results in serious patient injury will be reported to the FDA Medwatch Program.   
  
Radio Frequency and Magnetic Field Interference 
Electronic implants such as pacemakers may be susceptible to interference from the magnetic 
and radio frequency fields produced by the system. Persons with cardiac pacemakers or other 
electronic devices should be carefully screened before entering a zone where the magnetic field 
exceeds 5 gauss. The zone is indicated by warning / zone signs. 
Quench Hazard Asphyxiation Risks 
In the event of a ventilation system failure and rapid boil-off of cryogens, the room can fill with 
extremely cold dense gaseous helium and cause asphyxiation. In the event of a ventilation 
failure, the site should be evacuated immediately, and service personnel notified. 
 
Radio Frequency Antenna Effects 
If metal wires or electrodes (such as electrocardiograph leads) are attached to a patient being 
imaged, the RF energy radiated by the coils of the system may induce sufficient electrical 
currents in the leads to cause burns where the electrodes or wires contact the skin. Patient should 
be screened to ensure that such devices are not introduced into the system. 
Bio-magnetic Hazards 
It is possible that subtle genetic or molecular changes could be caused by the magnetic fields 
produced by the system, however, to date; no harmful biological effects have been demonstrated 
at the magnetic field strength and exposure times used by the system. The likelihood of any 
significant bio-magnetic effects is considered low. 
Clinical Hazards 
The confining conditions of the system can precipitate claustrophobia in some patients. 
Thorough screening and explanation of the procedure can help to eliminate these fears. 
Warning Signs 
Two Security zones are established around the magnet including: 
1. Zone 4 defined as an area within the walls of the scan room where the magnet is located. Patients 
with pacemakers, metallic implants should be carefully assessed before entering and loose metal 
objects must not be taken into this area as serious injury or property damage may result.  
2. Zone 3 is defined as area where the magnetic field is greater than 5 gauss outside of the magnet 
room. People with cardiac pacemakers, neuro-stimulators and other bio-stimulation devices must 
be carefully assessed before entering the area. The security and exclusion zones are identified by 
Zone signs conspicuously posted in the MRI facility. 
Patient Management 
Each patient must be thoroughly screened for pertinent medical history and conditions that may 
contra-indicate scanning prior to performing any MRI examination. 
Screening Procedure MRI facility personnel will complete a Magnetic Resonance Imaging patient history form. The 
form should be completed in full and dated and signed as required. The patient screening form 
should be scanned into EPIC and remain part of the patient's chart. 
 Medical History: 
Each patient should be evaluated for conditions, which may affect safety, and to assist in 
determining study protocol. 
Pacemaker /Implantable Cardiac Defibrillator Precautions: 
Certain patients may suffer from dementia, etc. and may not be aware of having pacemakers or 
other implants. These patients should be physically examined, and the upper torso palpated to 
insure that these devices are not present. 
 
 Dress: 
To insure a metal free environment, the patient should change into examination clothing prior to 
the MR exam. If a patient remains in street clothes the following guidelines should be adhered 
to: 
1. Remove all jewelry, watches, dentures, glasses, hearing aids, hair accessories, including hairpins 
and barrettes, and shoes. 
2. Check pockets for loose metal objects such as keys, pocketknives, pens, etc. 
3. Check small children for safety pins and snaps on diapers, under shirts, etc. 
 
Keeping Metal Objects Out 
Always keep in mind that the magnetic field will attract any ferrous object. These objects can 
become a flying projectile at tremendous speed, or even pin an adult to the equipment. An object 
pulled by the magnet could possibly carry a person along with it. The potential danger of an 
object varies according to several factors including the size, mobility and distance from the 
magnet. A small movement closer to the magnet may make an otherwise harmless item 
extremely hazardous.   
     
Precautions 
To help avoid metal hazards in the magnetic field: 
1. Warning signs will be placed at all entrances to zone 3. 
2. Remove all metal or magnetic objects, including watches, keys, pens, hearing aids, purses, 
magnetic credit cards, beepers, magnetic clipboards, electronic pagers, briefcases, hairpins, and 
jewelry, etc. 
3. Insure people with steel pins, artificial limbs, surgical clips or other metallic objects in their 
bodies; do not enter the exam room. Use hand magnet to determine parts that are ferromagnetic 
on objects that are primarily non-ferromagnetic such as stainless steel, aluminum, etc. before 
allowing these items to enter the scan room. 
4. Whenever there is doubt about the ferromagnetic properties of an item, keep the object away 
from the magnet. Wheelchairs, and other mobile equipment should not be used in the corridor 
near the magnet unless they are the non-ferrous equipment approved for the designated as MRI 
equipment. Plant services, linen services, security and all other personnel who have need to enter 
the MRI facility should receive adequate safety instruction prior to entering the area.  
5. In the event an individual enters the magnetic field with a ferromagnetic item there are multiple ways to avoid injury including: 
A. If the item is in the pocket, place hand over item and leave room. 
B. If holding a large ferromagnetic object that is being pulled toward the magnet; let go of it 
immediately, it is virtually impossible to stop the attraction of large objects to the magnet. 
C. If object flies into the magnet opening, do not reach for it until the item stops moving, 
such an object can fly through the magnet and hit someone on the other side. Always 
avoid standing in the direct line from the scan room door to the magnet. 
6. In the event that information as to whether or not an object is safe for high field magnets, The 
Reference Manual for Magnetic Resonance safety, Frank G Shellock, Ph.D. should be 
referenced. 
   
  
     
A. Transferring Patients 
1. Since the magnetic field is always on, transferring patients, especially non-
ambulatory patients, is more complicated with MR than other modalities. 
2. Non-ambulatory patients should be transferred to an MRI compatible stretcher, 
dockable MRI table, or MRI compatible wheelchair in Zone 2. The patient may 
be transported into zones 3 and 4 once they have been properly screened, and 
transferred to an MRI compatible stretcher, table, or wheelchair. 
3. Conventional ferrous life support equipment cannot be taken into the scan room. 
4. Ensure the transport locks are engaged before transferring the patients. Use 
security straps and move side rails to vertical positions before unlocking 
transport or moving patients on stretchers. For wheelchair or ambulatory 
patients, the transport should be lowered completely and locked before the 
patient is transferred to the transport. 
A. Emergency Buttons 
MRI personnel should become familiar with the location and function of the following 
emergency buttons: 
1. Emergency run-down: 
This button is located on the wall near the magnet and should be used only in a 
magnetic field emergency. Example: If someone is pinned against the magnet by 
a heavy object. Pressing this button causes a quench of the static magnetic field 
within two minutes basically. A quench is a reaction to heat which causes the 
systems cryogen to boil-off rapidly. When this occurs, you will hear a loud 
hissing sound. A magnetic quench results in several days of down time, so do not 
try to test this button. Service personnel will perform this function. 
2. Emergency Stop: 
Press this button only if there is a patient emergency, magnetic field related 
emergency or serious problem with the MRI system. Pressing this button 
disables all electrical power forces near the patient.  
B. Cryogen Emergencies: 
For the magnet to operate correctly it must be filled with liquid helium and liquid nitrogen refrigerant called cryogen. The cryogens are kept at several 
hundred degrees below zero and can cause frostbite. If they become too 
hot, they can boil off, a dangerous situation that could lead to 
asphyxiation. The cryogens are supplied in large vacuum containers called 
dewars. For optimum safety, the cryogens should remain in the dewars at 
all times. They should never be heated or tipped as handling can damage 
the vacuum seal. For the same reason, never tamper with any of the 
dewars valves.  
If clouds of gas escape from a dewar, evacuate the area immediately. The 
gas quickly displaces oxygen and people in the room may lose 
consciousness in as little as 5 to 10 seconds. Also evacuate the area if 
liquid seeps out of the containers. Never attempt to clean up the spill and 
do not step in it.  
If you see clouds near the magnet, an indication of a magnet quench 
without venting, or if the oxygen monitor alarm sounds, evacuate the room 
immediately. It is recommended that Medical Center personnel avoid the 
exam room when a Service Engineer is refilling cryogens in the magnet. If 
you are present, ensure that you have proper gloves, face shields and even 
ear protectors. The Service Engineer should be notified immediately 
whenever a problem is encountered with cryogens or the area is evacuated.  
When a condition occurs that the magnet is quenched, re-booting of the 
system can only be done by a qualified service engineer dispatched by the 
manufacturer to the site. 
S. First Aid: 
Move anyone suffering from asphyxiation to an area with normal 
atmosphere immediately. Have supplemental oxygen available in case a 
patient is not breathing. Beware that exposure to cryogens or cryogen 
vapors could cause extensive tissue damage or burns. For effective burn 
treatment, flush affected area with large volumes of tepid (105-115 
degrees Fahrenheit, 41-46 degrees Celsius) water to reduce the risk of 
freezing. Cover the area with sterile protective dressing or clean sheets, if 
a large area, protect the burn from further injury. Notify physician 
immediately. A copy of the following emergency procedure review will be 
posted near the cryogen room for quick reference in the event of an 
emergency. 
Additional safety information may be found in the operator manuals that 
accompany each MRI system. 
Patient Emergencies 
In the event of a patient emergency a staff member will initiate the patient emergency response 
team. Designated MRI personnel will use the MRI compatible stretcher, or dockable table to 
transfer the patient from the MRI suite to a safe area where the emergency response team can 
respond to the patient emergency. Non MRI personnel will not be allowed to enter the MRI suite 
during a patient emergency. Once the patient has been removed from the MRI suite the door will 
be closed and secured.  
  
Acoustic Noise 
  Hearing protection is available and will be offered to anyone entering the MRI suite during   image acquisition.   
 
MRI Medical Director: 
  The designated medical director for Imaging Services will serve as the MRI Medical Director.  
 