 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Imaging Services 
Subject:  Package Receipt and check-in of Radioactive 
Materials 
Section:  Nuclear Medicine 
Date of Origination:  July 2003 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
January 14, 2019 
02/2019, 1/21, 3/23, 2/24 
Serial Code:  INM 011 
    
POLICY: PACKAGE RECEIPT AND CHECK-IN OF RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS 
 
PROCEDURE: 
Upon receipt of radioactive materials a registered/certified or eligible Nuclear Medicine Technologist, licensed 
by the state of Louisiana will inspect the package for any damage or wetness. If either of these conditions exists 
the technologist will perform protocols defined in ACTION PROTOCOLS, listed below.  
The package will be assayed by the technologist with a survey meter equipped with a "pancake" G-M detector. 
The readings will be recorded on the package check-in register, or Syntrac where applicable. 
The package check-in register/or Syntrac, will include the following data: 
A. The date and the time of check-in. 
B. Label type. 
C. Transportation index on label. 
D. Reading in MR/HR both at the surface and at 1 meter. 
E. Background reading in MR/HR. 
F. Initials of technologist doing the check-in. 
 
RECEIVING AND OPENING PACKAGES OF RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL 
As a matter of radiation safety to the employees and the general public, the following procedure should be 
followed when receiving packages of radioactive material. 
All shipments of radioactive material shall be delivered to the Nuclear Medicine department. The technologist 
in charge or designee, shall be responsible for receipt and logging of the shipment. 
All packages shall be subject to visual inspection promptly, upon receipt in the facility. If there is no physical 
damage or surface wetness observed, accept the package and proceed to package survey.  
If the package arrives by exclusive use vehicle such as pharmacy delivery, no wipe testing is required unless the 
shipment is more than 20 Ci of Mo-99 or if the package contains more than 10 Ci in the aggregate of Tc-99m, 
Ga-67, T1-201, and/or I-131.  2 
If these limits are exceeded, contamination surveys (wipes) must be done. If the results of the wipe testing is 
higher than 2,200 DPM, the Carrier and the LADEQ must be notified promptly.      (*Net CPM x 9.1 = DPM) 
The following is not required by regulation, but it is advised for safety of the Nuclear Medicine personnel. 
On every shipment of radioactive material, survey the exterior of the package with the survey meter at the 
surface or at 3 feet from the surface. If the level at the surface exceeds 200 mr/hr or 10 mr/hr at 3 feet, notify the 
carrier and the LADEQ at once. 
ACTION PROTOCOLS 
If a package is received and is wet, or obvious damage has occurred, the package is to be surveyed and wipe 
tested immediately. If the results of these tests reveal activity levels two (2) times background (NET), isolate 
and shield the shipment immediately, call the vendor or pharmacy, notify the Radiation Safety Officer and the 
department manager. 
 
 
 