 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Imaging Services 
Subject:  De-contamination - Radioactive Materials Section:  Nuclear Medicine 
Date of Origination:   Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
January 16, 2019 
02/2019, 1/21, 3/23, 2/24 
Serial Code:  INM 009 
    
POLICY:   De-contamination - Radioactive Materials 
PROCEDURE:    
In the event an accident involving radioactive material occurs, emergency and decontamination procedures are 
used to minimize radiation exposure to others and to prevent the spread of contamination. 
Uncontrolled releases (spills) of radioactive material require immediate , emergency and decontamination 
procedures. Each individual spill must be evaluated to determine the pote ntial hazard to personnel. When ever 
necessary, personnel should be evacuated from the contaminated areas, THE CONTAMINATED AREAS 
SHOULD BE ISOLATED, and the spill should be contained and cleaned up as soon as possible. If the initial 
clean-up does not reduce the radiation levels below 2 x background, then the areas should be either segregated 
or covered with absorbent material pending final cleanup. 
 
A. GENERAL RULES: 
 
1)   ISOLATE THE CONTAMINATED AREA AND SECURE IT. 
2) Put on gloves to prevent contamination of hands, wash hands first if they are 
contaminated as a result of the accident. Wear protective clothing. 
3) Minimize the amount of radioactive material entering the body by ingestion, inhalation, 
or through any wounds. 
4) Prevent the spread of contamination from the area of the accident. Survey all personnel in 
the area of the spill. 
5) Remove radioactive contamination on personnel. 
6) Start area decontamination procedures under qualified supervision. Inexperienced 
personnel should not attempt unsupervised decontamination. 
7) If radioactive contamination cannot be removed, cover with lead shielding and or isolate 
the area 10 x the half life of the isotope. 
 
B. MINOR SPILLS: 
 
1) ISOLATE THE CONTAMINATED AREA AND SECURE IT. 
2) Notify persons in the area that a spill has occurred. Survey all personnel in the area of the 
spills for contamination.  2 
3) Remove radioactive contamination on personnel. 
4) Put on gloves to prevent contamination of hands. Wash hands first if they are 
contaminated as a result of the accident. Wear protective clothing. 
5) Drop absorbent paper or cloth on spill to limit spread of contamination. 
6) Mark off contaminated area. Do not allow anyone to leave contaminated area without 
being monitored. 
7) Notify the Radiation Safety Officer (RSO) of the accident. 
8) Start decontamination procedures as soon as possible. Normal cleaning agent should be 
adequate. Keep cleaning supplies to the minimum needed to do the job and place in 
sealed bags after use. Proceed from the outer-most edges of the contaminated area 
inward, reducing systematically the contaminated area. 
 
C. MAJOR SPILLS: 
 
1) ISOLATE THE CONTAMINATED AREA AND SECURE IT. 
2) Notify the Radiation Safety Officer of the accident and all persons in the area of the spill. 
Decontamination of highly radioactive areas requires the supervision of the Radiation 
Safety Officer. 
3) Put on gloves to prevent contamination of hands. Wash hands if they are contaminated as 
a result of the accident. Wear protective clothing. 
4) Drop absorbent paper or cloth on spill to limit spread of contamination. 
5) If possible, cut off the release of radioactive material from the source to the environment 
but avoid breathing in high concentrations of radioactive material. Close windows. 
6) Evacuate room and close doors. Remove contaminated shoes and laboratory coats at door 
to avoid tracking radioactive material around. 
7) If possible, the spill should be shielded, but only if it can be done without further 
contamination or without significantly increasing your radiation exposure. 
8) Lock or guard the doors and post the appropriate signs, warning against entry. 
9) Assemble in nearby room with other personnel suspected of being contaminated. Wash 
off possible exposed areas of the skin, if there is a delay in performing survey. Do not 
leave the control area until you have been monitored for contamination. Personnel 
decontamination measures should be instituted if significant contamination is found. 
10) The RSO will issue specific instructions for decontamination of major spills, dependent 
upon the type of spill (i.e., liquid, gaseous), potential airborne radioactive contaminants, 
and dose rates.  