 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Imaging Services 
Subject:  Nuclear Medicine Pregnancy/Breast-Feeding Section:  Nuclear Medicine 
Date of Origination:  June 2019 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
6/15/19, 1/21, 3/23, 2/24 
Serial Code:  INM 014 
    
  
PURPOSE:  
 To identify possible pregnant and or breast -feeding patients and address issues relating to the 
administration of radioactive material.  
POLICY: 
 The pregnant or potentially pregnant patient is not to have nuclear medicine procedure unless it is 
absolutely essential for a diagnosis or treatment.  If the patient is pregnant, the patient will be consulted by the 
physician.  
 Patients who are breast-feeding a child are not to have a nuclear medicine procedure unless the benefits 
of the diagnostic or the therapeutic test fully outweighs the possible risk of the radiation received from the 
procedure.  If a nuclear medicine procedure is performed on a patient who is nursing a child, the patient must be 
counseled before administration of the radiopharmaceutical and must agree to discontinue breast -feeding during 
the time specified. 
 Every effort must be made to keep all patients radiation exposure as low as reasonably ac hievable 
(ALARA).  ALARA is an important principle in radiation protection and stands for “AS Low As Reasonably 
Achievable”.  This aim is to minimize the risk of radiation exposure.  There are three principles that assist when 
exercising the ALARA concept.  Shielding, time, and distance. 
PROCEDURE:  
1. Signs are posted within the waiting area, camera rooms, and injection area that state: “If you are 
pregnant or breast-feeding, please notify the technologist.” 
2. The technologist must ask all female patients 12 and older if they are or may be pregnant and if 
they are breast-feeding an infant or child.  
3. All non-urgent procedures should be postponed until pregnancy status can be verified. 
4. If the patient could be pregnant: Notify the authorized user, radiation safety officer, or health 
physicist before the radiopharmaceutical is administered.  The authorized user, radiation safety 
officer, or health physicist must discuss the potential risk to the fetus and document the general 
content of the discussion.  2 
5. If the patient is breast-feeding:  Notify the authorized user, radiation safety officer, or health 
physicist before the radiopharmaceutical is administered.  The authorized user, radiation safety 
officer, or health physicist must discuss the potential risk to the infant/child and document the 
general content of the discussion.  If it is decided that the procedure is necessary, the patient 
must agree to discontinue breast-feeding for the period of time prescribed by the authorized 
user, radiation safety officer, or health physicist. 
6. Pregnancy/ breast-feeding status will be documented in patients chart.  
  