 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Imaging Services 
Subject:  Contamination Surveys Section:  Nuclear Medicine 
Date of Origination:  July, 2003 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
January 15, 2019 
2/2019, 1/21, 3/23, 2/24 
Serial Code:  INM 003 
    
POLICY: Contamination Surveys  
PROCEDURE:  
Nuclear Medicine Technologists are responsible for the daily performance of area surveys and weekly 
performance of wipe tests in all areas where radioactive materials are routinely prepared for use or 
administered, and where radioactive materials are stored, as required by regulatory agencies. 
 
WIPE TESTING AND AREA MONITORING 
 
Area monitoring will be conducted within regular operating hours and on regular clinical days. 
 
The area monitoring will be conducted by a registered/certified or eligible Nuclear Medicine Technologist, 
licensed by the State of Louisiana. 
 
All data from these wipe tests and area surveys will be recorded and the records retained as per LADEQ Rules 
and Regulations. 
 
Dose rate action levels have been established for these surveys.  In the event that these levels are exceeded, the 
RSO would be notified immediately.  John Paul can be reached at (225) 603-8198. 
 
DAILY AREA SURVEYS 
 
The daily surveys are performed to control contamination and minimize exposure. The surveys are to be 
performed and recorded at the end of the work day and at any time that there is an indication or suspicion of a 
condition of uncontrolled radioactivity. 
 
All radiation levels shall be measured at usual (routine) positions of technologist occupancy and compared with 
ambient background, measured in a low background area.  
 
Action level for direct survey = 2 X Bkg. @ surface 
 
WEEKLY WIPE SURVEYS 
 
Surveys are performed, with the use of wipes, to assay for removable contamination. The surveys are to be 
performed and recorded at the end of the work week and at any time that there is an indication or suspicion of  2 
removable contamination. 
 
Action level for removable contamination = 2,200 disintegrations per minute **(net cpm X 9.1 = dpm) 
 
All areas indicated on the department sketch and/or monitoring form will be wiped with a suitable wipe, 
counted and compared with background, measured in a low background area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 