OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 1 
LBA001 
 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA001 
MISSION 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 2/27/19 7/5/2019 7/5/2019 
Blood Donor Service  and Core Lab Director Review J Teague 6/25/2019 Origination Date 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 6/27/2019 2/1989 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 7/2/2019  
 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Laboratory and all OLOL Affiliate 
Laboratories, sponsored by the Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady, are an extension 
of the healing ministry of Jesus, in the Church. 
 
The healing ministry is demonstrated by our caring for the sick without discrimination and 
according to the principles of Christian Social Justice and Natural Law.  Our love flows 
from the love of God and serves Jesus Christ in the person of the sick.  Our service is based 
on the recognition of the sanctity of life and the essential dignity of each individual. 
 
The Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady and the Staff of Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center are committed to respect the life of each human being from the moment of 
conception to the moment of death. 
 
We are committed to the maintenance of the highest standards of quality patient care; to 
furthering the continuing education of physicians, nurses, and other hospital personnel; to 
promoting research in medicine, nursing, the allied fields and health care administration; 
and to exercising responsible stewardship for institutional resources.  In the spirit of St. 
Francis of Assisi we dedicate ourselves to these principles. 
  
Lake Laboratory Services is dedicated to enhancing patient care by providing dependable, 
accurate clin ical data in a timely manner.  Teamwork, founded on individual and 
professional accountability, serves as the cornerstone of our commitment to service 
excellence.  Our expertise in meeting healthcare challenges through innovative solutions 
ensures our success in exceeding the expectations of our clients. 
 
REVISIONS 
2/1989 (created), 3/15/15, 2/27/19 
 
 
 
 