OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 3 
LBA012 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA012 
EMPLOYEE TRAINING, COMPETENCY ASSESSMENTS AND PERFORMANCE 
EVALUATIONS  
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 11/12/17 12/13/2017 12/13/2017 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 12/12/2017 Origination Date 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 12/12/2017 2/1989 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 12/12/2017  
Medical Director Review A Harton 12/13/2017  
 
 
POLICY 
The Laboratory Director or authorized designee shall train, evaluate the performance and 
assess the competence of Laboratory staff.  All laboratory personnel are subject to the 
facility’s Performance Evaluation Policy and all other facility policies, procedures, rules, 
and regulations relating to job performance. 
 
 
INITIAL TRAINING 
Before performing any tasks related to patient care, all personnel – Technical and Non-
Technical – must be trained to perform their assigned duties.  This applies to new 
employees and any new methods or instruments. Each individual must have training and 
be evaluated for proper test performance, prior to releasing patient results.   Retraining 
and reassessment of employee competency must occur when problems are identified with 
employee performance. 
 
Initial Training will be performed and documented using only approved Laboratory 
Training Checklists.  The following Initial Training Checklist Templates have been 
approved for use: 
• LBA012-A – Initial Training Checklist Template 
• LBA012-B – Initial Training Checklist Template 
 
COMPETENCY ASSESSMENT 
After initial training is complete and employees are determined to be competent to 
perform and release patient results, ongoing competency assessments will be performed.  
Initial Training and ongoing Competency Assessments are separate programs and are 
clearly documented to distinguish between the two. 
 
Competency Assessment will be performed and documented using only approved 
Laboratory Competency Assessment Checklists.  The following Competency Assessment 
Templates have been approved for use: OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 3 
LBA012 
• LBA012-C – Competency Assessment Template 
• LBA012-D – Direct Observation Audit Template 
• LBA012-E – Competency Assessment Template 
 
 
FREQUENCY OF COMPETENCY ASSESSMENTS 
For waived testing:  
● Competency assessment must be performed at least annually (semi-annual assessment  
    not required)  
● The laboratory may select which elements to assess for each test system                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
For non-waived testing: 
● During the first year of an individual's duties, after initial training is complete,   
   competency must be assessed at least semiannually 
● After an individual has performed his/her duties for one year, competency must be  
    assessed at least annually  
● Competency assessment must include all six elements described below for each  
    individual on each test system during each assessment period, unless an element is not  
    applicable to the test system. 
 
 
REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPETENCY ASSESSMENT 
The following six (6) elements are the minimal regulatory requirements for assessment of 
competency for all personnel performing laboratory testing:  
1. Direct observations of routine patient test performance, including patient preparation, 
if applicable, specimen handling, processing and testing; 
2. Monitoring the recording and reporting of test results; 
3. Review of intermediate test results or worksheets, quality control records, proficiency 
testing results, and preventive maintenance records; 
4. Direct observations of performance of instrument maintenance and function checks; 
5. Assessment of test performance through testing previously analyzed specimens, 
internal blind testing samples or external proficiency testing samples; and 
6. Assessment of problem solving skills. 
 
The department shall define specific tasks needed to perform a job function and identify 
qualifications of staff that perform these functions.  Competency requirements shall be 
updated when work processes change as a result of performance improvement activities, 
new developments in health care, and changing patient care needs. 
         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
CERTIFICATION OF COMPETENCY 
Documentation of the initial training, six (6) month competency assessment, and yearly 
competency assessments must be maintained in the employee personnel file.  When an 
employee fails to demonstrate competency in a given task, whether during competency 
assessment or routine testing duties, retraining and reassessment is performed.   
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 3 
LBA012 
 
COMPETENCY REASSESSMENT PROTOCOL 
If an employee fails to demonstrate satisfactory performance on the competency 
assessment, the section supervisor will follow the plan of corrective action to retrain and 
reassess as outlined below: 
1. Retrain the employee in deficient area 
2. Allow 30 days for employee to demonstrate competency 
3. If competency still not demonstrated, retrain again 
4. If employee is still unable to satisfactorily pass the assessment, the 
disciplinary process will be followed up to and including termination 
 
Reassessment will be documented on the employee competency form, maintained in the 
individual’s personnel record. 
 
 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS 
The Laboratory Director or Supervisor shall evaluate the performance of each staff 
member within the first six months of hire, and annually thereafter. 
 
 
BASIS OF PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS 
Performance evaluations shall be based on the individual's job description and standards 
of performance contained in the job description. 
 
RECORDS OF PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS 
Records of performance evaluations shall be maintained in the individual’s personnel 
record in Human Resources. 
 
REFERENCES 
CAP Checklist GEN.55450, GEN.55500, GEN.55525, GEN.57000 
 
 
REVISIONS 
2/1989(created), 3/23/15, 11/12/17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 