OLOLRMC AND AFFILIATE LABS 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 5 
LBA032 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA032 
INDIVIDUALIZED QUALITY CONTROL PLAN (IQCP) 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 2/23/2021 5/13/2021 5/13/2021 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 4/8/2021 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 4/15/2021 4/2015 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 4/19/2021  
 
 
PURPOSE 
To define the process for developing an Individualized Quality Control Plan (IQCP) for 
applicable test systems used at OLOLRMC Main and Affiliate Laboratories. 
 
BACKGROUND FOR CMS REGULATION (Transition from EQC to IQCP) 
• The Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988 (CLIA) are the 
federal regulations that govern all U.S. laboratory testing used for the “diagnosis, 
prevention, or treatment of any disease or impairment of the health of human 
beings. “When CLIA became effective in 1992, the minimum requirement for QC 
was established as testing two levels of control materials each day of patient 
testing. 
• When the final CLIA regulations became effective in early 2004, they included 
Appendix C, the Interpretive Guidelines for Laboratories.  These guidelines allow 
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to modify the 
interpretation of the CLIA regulations without having to change the actual law. 
This allows new methodologies, new technologies, and new ideas to be 
considered as needed.  The Interpretive Guidelines allow an alternative to daily 
external Quality Control as long as “equivalent quality testing” is assured. Since 
2004, this alternative has been Equivalent Quality Control (EQC). 
• When implemented, EQC allowed laboratories to decrease the frequency of 
running external controls for eligible tests, after they performed a successful 
standardized qualifying study. For a test to be eligible for EQC, one requirement 
was that it had internal controls.  Due to the many errors that went undetected 
with this process, CMS challenged the laboratory community to develop a new 
QC guideline.  An alternative to EQC.   
• A laboratory Quality Control guideline based on Risk Management was 
developed from the ideas exchanged and published in October 2011.  The CLIA  
Interpretive Guidelines incorporated key concepts from the guideline to develop a  
new alternative QC policy. CMS named this policy “Individualized Quality  
Control Plan” (IQCP), which replaces EQC.  OLOLRMC AND AFFILIATE LABS 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 5 
LBA032 
• Although EQC is no longer an acceptable QC option after January 2016, it is 
expected that laboratories that formerly used EQC will implement IQCP for those 
same tests, and possibly for additional test methods. 
DEFINITION 
IQCP is comprised of three parts, a Risk Assessment, a Quality Control Plan, and a 
Quality Assessment.  
• The Risk Assessment is the identification and evaluation of potential failures and 
errors in a testing process.  
• The Quality Control Plan is a laboratory’s standard operating procedure that 
describes the practices, resources, and procedures to control the quality of a 
particular test process.   
• The Quality Assessment is the laboratory’s policy for the ongoing monitoring of 
the effectiveness of the IQCP. 
IQCP also broadens the definition of Quality Control from just running controls to 
encompass all activities laboratories do to control errors throughout the testing process. 
POLICY 
In response to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) approved Quality 
Control option, Individualized Quality Control Plan (IQCP) will be used in the laboratory 
to develop and customize Quality Control procedures specific to OLOLRMC 
Laboratories.   
The task of developing the IQCP may be performed by the Laboratory Director or 
delegated to other qualified personnel. If delegated, the Laboratory Director remains 
ultimately responsible for the proper development and implementation of each IQCP. The 
Laboratory Director must approve and sign each IQCP before it is implemented.  
APPLICABLE TEST SYSTEMS 
Like the other CLIA QC requirements, IQCP is intended for non-waived testing; 
however, you may choose to perform a Risk Assessment and develop an individualized 
plan for ANY test, including waived testing. 
All specialties (except Pathology, and its associated subspecialties of Histopathology, 
Oral Pathology, and Cytology) are eligible for IQCP.  IQCP may be used for all, some, or 
none of the tests performed in your laboratory.  
• For non-waived tests, laboratories can continue to run the CLIA “default” QC – 
two levels of external control each day of patient testing – instead of 
implementing Individualized QC Plans. 
• The manufacturer’s QC recommendation will remain the minimum acceptable 
QC protocol, but it may be necessary to develop an IQCP if you choose to follow 
this protocol. If the manufacturer’s QC recommendations for the test are less than 
the default CLIA requirement of two levels per day (for instance, the 
manufacturer’s instructions say to run controls with each lot number change), 
your laboratory may: OLOLRMC AND AFFILIATE LABS 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 5 
LBA032 
o Perform the default requirement of two levels per day AND run controls 
with each lot number change (to satisfy the manufacturer’s requirement); 
OR 
o Develop an IQCP for the test to confirm that all relevant errors will be 
detected if the manufacturer’s protocol is followed.  
 Note: The manufacturer’s less stringent QC requirements may not be an 
option without first performing a Risk Assessment to determine if this QC 
protocol will be effective for your laboratory. 
• An IQCP is not necessary if the manufacturer’s stated number, type, and 
frequency of control procedures meet or exceed the CLIA default requirement of 
two levels of external controls each day.  
• If the manufacturer’s instructions specify more than two levels per day, you may 
NOT use an IQCP to reduce the number of daily controls to less than the 
manufacturer’s recommendation. The manufacturer’s QC recommendations 
remain the minimum acceptable QC requirement.  
• For test systems without internal monitoring systems, the frequency of external 
controls may not be reduced, and traditional external quality control is required 
each day of patient testing. 
PROCEDURE 
OLOLRMC Lab Administration has purchased the CRI® IQCP Program to assist in 
customizing the QC Plans for the appropriate tests in each Lab/Department.   
The QC plans will optimize the current QC/QA processing in each department and make 
certain all federal, state and accrediting agency regulations are adhered to.  This program 
helps to perform a meaningful Risk Assessment unique to our laboratory by utilizing 
such tools as: Process Mapping, Fishbone Diagram, risk identification table and risk 
manageability matrix.   
I. List of Individualized Quality Control Plans – IQCP plans will be listed and 
maintained on a summary form for each OLOLRMC lab.  CAP accredited labs will 
use the CAP-specific “List of Individualized Quality Control Plan” form.  
II. Risk Assessment 
A. Before beginning, gather the following information and documents for the test 
being reviewed.   
1. Current manufacturer’s package insert 
2. Owner’s manual for the test 
3. Graded results from the last three PT events* for this test. 
4. Incident reports related to this test. 
5. QA activities (and their conclusions) related to this test. 
6. Customer or physician complaints related to this test. 
7. Minimally, the last three months* of storage temperature records, for 
the storage location (refrigerator, freezer, or room temperature) of the 
reagents and supplies for this test. OLOLRMC AND AFFILIATE LABS 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 5 
LBA032 
8. Minimally, the last three months* of QC records for this test. 
9. Data from any EQC qualifying study previously done for this test. 
10. Written competency assessment procedures, for testing personnel as 
well as specimen collection personnel, for this test. 
*New Tests/Methods being implemented may not have historical data  
B. Perform consecutive days of external QC to support the intended reduction.  
QC performance must incorporate Operator Variance.  
1. Perform 31 days if intention is to run external QC once per month. 
2. If an EQC plan was previously in place, and a 21-day QC study was 
performed, external QC must be performed at least every 21 days 
until further studies are performed.  
3. Perform IQCP Risk Assessment based on the performance of this 
external QC data. 
C. Using the package insert, owner’s manual, and any other relevant documents, 
such as the lab’s relevant QA conclusions or PT investigations, answer all 
applicable questions.  This will identify the potential sources of error that may 
occur during the three phases of testing, pre-analytic, analytic and post 
analytic as they relate to the specimen.   
D. The Risk Assessment used by OLOLRMC labs includes all elements of the 
Quality Control Plan such as: 
1. The number, type (external and internal quality control systems), and 
frequency of quality control  
2. The criteria for acceptable performance  
3. The process for monitoring of the testing environment and reagents  
4. Specimen quality 
5. Instrument calibration, maintenance, and function checks 
6. Training and competency of testing personnel 
7. Provisions for multiple identical devices and variation for uses 
covered under one IQCP (if applicable) 
E. Review this assessment and determine if the level of risk identified is 
acceptable for your laboratory.  If acceptable proceed to section III. 
III. Quality Control Plan (Form LBA032-A) 
A. The Quality Control Plan summarizes all the information captured by the Risk 
Assessment by listing: 
1. Manufacturer’s QC recommendation 
2. Lab/Department’s QC Plan: 
a. Internal QC 
b. External QC 
c. Acceptability Criteria OLOLRMC AND AFFILIATE LABS 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 5 of 5 
LBA032 
d. Plan for Multiple identical devices (if applicable) 
3. Risk Assessment Score 
B. Submit completed Quality Control Plan (Form LBA032-A) along with all 
documentation to Laboratory Medical Director for review and approval. 
C. File approved QC plans in lab’s IQCP binder. 
IV. Quality Assessment (Form LBA032-B) 
A. Once an IQCP is developed and implemented, it must continue to be 
monitored and revised as changes occur in the laboratory. 
B. IQCP plans must be re-evaluated and reviewed for continued effectiveness at 
least biennially or sooner if modifications to the IQCP are needed. 
C. Using the Ongoing Quality Assessment Form (LBA032-B), review the 
performance of the IQCP plan and respond to one of the three following 
statements: 
1. The IQCP for this test continues to be sufficient to mitigate risk in my 
laboratory 
2. The IQCP for this test will be modified, as described below, based 
upon test performance since the IQCP was first developed 
3. The Lab Director recommends the following modification to the 
IQCP, even though there have been no performance failures 
D. Submit to Compliance Officer for initial review of information. 
E. Submit to Laboratory Medical Director for Review and Approval. 
F. File re-approved QC plans in lab’s IQCP binder. 
REFERENCES 
CRI® IQCP Program- E-Optimizer and Implementation Guide 
CLIA Brochures 
CAP Standards – COM.50200, COM.50300, COM.50400, COM.50500, COM.50600 
REVISIONS 
4/1/15 (created), 1/10/18, 2/23/2021 
 
 