OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
DEPARTMENT OF MICROBIOLOGY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 1 of 5 
LBA012-MIC 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA012-MIC 
 MICROBIOLOGY COMPETENCY ASSESSMENT 
       Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D. Leger 6/29/2020 7/14/2020 7/14/2020 
Reviewed By RAC 7/7/2020 Origination Date 
Department Medical Director Review J Jastram 7/8/2020 10/11/19 
Medical Director Review A Harton 7/9/2020  
 
 
PURPOSE 
To evaluate the competence of all testing personnel and verify that the techs maintain their 
competence to perform test procedures and report results accurately and proficiently.  To comply 
with Federal regulations and national accrediting agency guidelines, this procedure describes the 
Microbiology department’s system for initial training of staff and assessment of competence 
twice in the first year of employment and annually thereafter.   
 
POLICY 
Refer to the Parent Policy LBA012-Employee Training, Competency Assessments, and 
Performance Evaluations for 6 required elements of competency assessment. 
 
Competency checklists are given to each new employee.  All areas of the Microbiology 
laboratory will be evaluated by a preceptor before the employee is allowed to perform those 
tasks without supervision. It is the employee’s responsibility to have their preceptor document 
competence for each of the items on the checklist. Once completed, the supervisor will review 
the checklist and place it in the employee’s file.  An ongoing skills competency checklist will 
also be completed annually and be kept in the employee’s file.  
 
PROCEDURE 
The supervisor, senior technologist, or designee will monitor and document employee training 
and competency assessments.  The designated categories of assessment vary somewhat among 
shifts and/or job descriptions/duties.  The categories assessed in the Microbiology lab include 
bacteriology, anaerobes, mycology, molecular, stains, special tests, parasitology, 
mycobacteriology, quality control, specimen processing, and laboratory safety. 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
DEPARTMENT OF MICROBIOLOGY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 2 of 5 
LBA012-MIC 
 
❖ Initial Training: 
Upon employment to the microbiology department of OLOLRMC, each employee is 
given the OLOLRMC Microbiology INITIAL SKILLS & Semi-Annual 
COMPETENCIES/CHECKLIST.   
Once training is successfully completed, new employees are responsible for having each 
item on his/her checklist signed off by a Medical Technologist (Technical Consultant).  
Microbiology is an ever evolving discipline and takes a great deal of time to become 
proficient and competent, and it can take over a year to become competent in all assigned 
areas. Subsequently, it is important to master the core requirements/skills in the 
department before the semiannual assessment takes place.  The highlighted portions of 
the checklist are considered “Core Training Requirements” and must be signed off on 
each employee within 6 months of employment. 
❖ 6 month/Semi-Annual Competency – Reassessment of Initial Training: 
All employees will be reevaluated within 6 months of employment.  Due to the nature 
and proximity of time from the initial to the 6 month (semi-annual) reassessment, OLOL 
Micro reassesses the initial competencies using the following methods to verify 
established competency.  This reassessment of skills will be conducted by supervisory 
staff, as well as, qualified staff Medical Technologists (TC’s) 
• Direct Observations of daily activities, work flow, & performance 
• Staff Interviews to assess peer evaluation and/or recommendations  
• Simulation Exercises to assess problem solving/troubleshooting skills 
• Case study questions 
• Monitoring of test results and reports (final & preliminary) 
• Unknown specimens (when possible) 
❖ Annual Competency: 
 
During the annual assessment of staff competency, the microbiology department will 
utilize the six assessment methods mandated by CLIA to assess laboratory employee 
competency.  These requirements include, but are not limited to:   
 
1.  Direct observation of routine patient test performance: 
 
• Scheduled/Unscheduled direct observations of all patient testing and daily duties 
• Regular staff MT’s/TC’s will be used to assist in the assessment for each discipline 
or test system. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
DEPARTMENT OF MICROBIOLOGY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 3 of 5 
LBA012-MIC 
• Direct observations will be documented in each employees competency folder  
 
2.  Monitoring the recording and reporting of test results:   
 
• All positive results/reports are reviewed daily by senior technologist 
• Monitoring systems in place for passive  review by technologist following other 
technologists 
 
              3.  Review of intermediate test results, QC records, proficiency test results, and 
preventive maintenance records:  
 
• Monitoring systems in place for passive review by technologist following other 
technologists 
• All QC, PT records are reviewed by Senior Medical Technologists. 
• Direct observation will also be utilized to evaluate  all intermediate phases of 
testing 
 
4.  Direct observation of performance of instrument maintenance and function 
checks:   
 
• Direct Observation of any/all maintenance on Micro instrumentation 
• All Quality Control and Maintenance records are reviewed/assessed by senior 
technologists 
 
5.  Assessment of test performance through testing previously analyzed specimens, 
internal blind testing samples, or external proficiency testing samples: 
 
• Testing of unknown specimens utilizing previously tested specimens such as CAP 
survey material, “spiked samples” and/or anonymous Quality Control samples 
o In some cases, unknowns may be used due to unavailability of material 
and/or specimen. 
• Written exams, using picture and images to assess competency. 
• Competency for morphology assessment (MIC.11350) of stains shall be 
accomplished no less than annually and be consistent with all other competency 
testing formats.  Methodologies consisting of slide specimens, photomicrographs, 
digital images and commercially available virtual testing materials will be 
employed for this assessment. Written assessments for problem solving and 
troubleshooting shall follow the guidelines set forth in the Written Exams portion 
of this policy for grading.  
• For cellular/organism morphological and quantitation review, a Gram stain 
element discrepancy of a ≤ 1 fold between the actual and intended result is 
deemed acceptable.  Differentiation from the supervisory interpretation shall be 
applied in grading and assessment of competency.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
DEPARTMENT OF MICROBIOLOGY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 4 of 5 
LBA012-MIC 
o Examples include:  
▪  Few WBCs vs. Moderate WBCs  
▪ Moderate positive cocci resembling Staph vs. Many positive cocci 
resembling Staph  
▪ Any Gram stain element with a > 1-fold discrepancy between the 
actual and intended result will be reviewed a second time by the 
technologist.   
o Examples include:   
▪ Few WBCs vs. Many WBCs  
▪ Few Gram Negative Rods vs. Many Gram Negative Rods seen 
 
6.  Assessment of problem-solving skills: 
 
• Written exams requiring critical thinking, problem solving and/or troubleshooting 
skills 
 
 
Report and Result Monitoring: 
 
Monitoring of reports and results are accomplished in several ways.  In addition to the daily 
monitoring of all positive reports, other reports and results are reviewed intermittently and upon 
necessity, by utilizing all logs, forms, paper copies and computer based inquiries.  These forms 
of review often consist of technologists following fellow technologists, daily required pending 
reports, exemption reports, problem forms, corrective action logs and through statistical analysis 
of daily reporting functions and result monitoring. 
Systems put in place to monitor reports daily also serve the capacity of observing some 
intermediate testing.  This form of review often consists of technologists following fellow 
technologists, daily required pending reports, and CAP PT exception reports and through 
statistical analysis of daily reporting functions and result monitoring. 
 
Direct Observation: 
 
The supervisor, senior technologist, or designee will monitor and document direct observation of 
employee competency assessments.  The designated categories of assessment vary somewhat 
among shifts and/or job descriptions/duties. Categories of assessment consist of Processing, 
Stains, Special Tests, Rapid Tests, Molecular, Instrumentation and Bench testing/interpretation. 
 
Quizzes: 
 
Two attempts will be allowed to achieve a score of 80%.  Remediation will be implemented and 
no further testing allowed until an acceptable test score is achieved.  For hands-on competency 
challenges where a score of either pass or fail is given, all technologists must obtain a score of OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
DEPARTMENT OF MICROBIOLOGY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 5 of 5 
LBA012-MIC 
PASS.  Any technologist that does not receive an acceptable score will be given the opportunity 
to correct their mistakes and/or repeat testing. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
CAP Microbiology checklist, 9/25/2013; 325 Waukegan Road, Northfield, IL 60093-2750 
Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendment – CLIA (Public La 100-578); CDC, CMS. 
Department of Health and Human Services, 7500 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, Maryland 
21244-1850 
 
REVISIONS 
10/11/19 (created), 6/29/2020 