OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 6 
LBA009 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA009 
PROFICIENCY TESTING   
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 10/25/17 12/12/2017 12/12/2017 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 12/11/2017 Origination Date 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 12/11/2017 3/15/15 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 12/11/2017  
Medical Director Review A Harton 12/12/2017  
 
 
POLICY 
The Laboratory is dedicated to providing quality patient care through active participation in 
accreditation activities, CMS approved proficiency testing, quality control, performance 
improvement, alternative proficiency testing and ongoing monitoring of the overall quality 
management plan.   
 
 
 
PROFICIENCY TESTING 
 
Ordering  
• Proficiency testing is ordered to meet the scope of testing performed in the Laboratory. 
 
• Each laboratory subscribes to surveys from CMS approved proficiency testing providers.   
  
• Annual orders:  
CAP- In the last quarter of each year, the Compliance Officer and the department 
supervisors/managers review the CAP Surveys book and place the order for the following 
year’s surveys.   
 
COLA- In the last quarter of each year, the supervisor/manager reviews the testing 
performed in the lab and places the order to the appropriate CMS approved PT provider 
for the following year’s surveys.     
 
• New tests: 
When adding a new test, the lab must be enrolled in a PT program for the new test (if PT 
enrollment is required) before the laboratory begins reporting patient results for the 
analyte. 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 6 
LBA009 
• For test procedures with no commercial proficiency testing available, the laboratory 
performs an alternative assessment at a minimum of twice a year.    
 
Handling and Performance 
• Upon receipt of proficiency test material/kits, the kits are inspected for any damaged, 
broken, or missing material.  The kits are immediately stored according to storage 
instructions until use of the kit.   
• In order to ensure that the designated employee is aware of PT assignment, due date, and 
rules that surround Proficiency Testing, Lab Testing Personnel will sign Employee 
Proficiency Testing Acknowledgement Form (LBA009-A) and return to supervisor upon 
receiving the proficiency test materials/kit.  Signed form will be kept by Supervisory 
Staff and will be attached to the survey once complete.  This requirement is not 
applicable to Non-Laboratory Personnel performing Point of Care PT. 
 
• Analysis of the proficiency test specimens/material must be performed by personnel who 
routinely perform the testing in the laboratory and in the same manner as regular patient 
specimens. The laboratory integrates all proficiency testing samples within the routine 
laboratory workload, and those samples are analyzed by personnel who routinely test 
patient/client samples, using the same primary method systems as for patient/client/donor 
samples. 
 
o NOTE: Duplicate analysis of any proficiency sample is acceptable only if 
patient/client specimens are routinely analyzed in the same manner. With respect to 
morphologic examinations (identification of cell types and microorganisms; review of 
electrophoretic patterns, etc.), group review and consensus identifications are 
permitted only for unknown samples that would ordinarily be reviewed by more than 
one person in an actual patient sample.  If the laboratory uses multiple methods for 
an analyte, proficiency samples should be analyzed by the primary method.  
 
• The educational purposes of proficiency testing are best served by a rotation that allows 
all testing personnel to be involved in the proficiency testing program.  
 
• Proficiency testing records must be retained and can be an important part of the 
competency and continuing education documentation in the personnel files of the 
individuals.  
 
• When commercial proficiency testing materials are not available, the semi-annual 
alternative performance assessment process should also be integrated within the routine 
workload.  
 
• Testing personnel must follow all instructions carefully, and the results must be reported 
within the allocated time period specified by the proficiency testing provider.   
 
• Inter-laboratory communication regarding proficiency testing samples before the deadline 
of submission to the provider is strictly prohibited.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 6 
LBA009 
o NOTE: PT specimens tested on interfaced instruments are run using aliased 
downtime labels.  Specimen ID named by the PT provider will not be entered into 
the computer system in order to ensure that results are not available between 
testing labs using the shared LIS. 
 
• The laboratory also prohibits referral of proficiency testing specimens to an outside 
laboratory as well as receiving proficiency testing specimens from another laboratory.   
o NOTE: This prohibition takes precedence over the requirement that proficiency 
testing specimens be handled in the same manner as patient specimens. For example, 
a laboratory's routine procedure for review of abnormal blood smears might be 
referral of the smear to a pathologist located at another site. For proficiency testing 
specimens, the referring laboratory must NOT follow its routine procedure in this 
situation. Rather, the laboratory must submit a PT result of "test not performed 
“since the review does not occur within the referring laboratory.  For laboratories 
subject to US regulations, this applies even if the second laboratory is in the same 
health care system. It is the responsibility of the laboratory director to ensure that 
this prohibition is enforced. 
 
Completing and Submitting the Results 
• Method codes, instrument codes and/or reporting units are reviewed on the survey results 
form prior to submission.  Corrections are made to the form when changes occur.  
• Raw result data is to be printed or documented on manual downtime forms and attached 
to the survey.   
• The performing Technical Personnel must sign the attestation form. 
• Attestation statement is signed by Laboratory Medical Director or designee (Department 
Supervisor). 
• Prior to submitting data to the PT provider, Lab Medical Director or designee 
(Department Supervisor) will ensure that the above criteria has been met. 
• The departmental supervisor or designee will submit all data to the PT provider.  
o If submitted on-line, data is entered, saved, then reviewed and approved.  The 
result pages are printed.   
o If faxed, a fax confirmation receipt is saved.  Faxing is not recommended.  
Designee should attempt to send data online until the due date.  If the website is 
unavailable on the due date, then faxing is advised. 
 
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 6 
LBA009 
 
PT Result Review 
• PT results may be printed from the PT provider’s website or for CAP surveys paper 
copies will also be received by mail.  Results are initially reviewed by the Laboratory 
Compliance Officer.  
• The survey results are then forwarded to the department supervisor for review and 
investigation, if indicated.  
• Unacceptable results, unacceptable coded results (ie. educational challenges, etc.), and 
results showing bias and trending results are marked/circled.  Any missing acceptable 
limits may be written on the form. 
• For every unsatisfactory or unsuccessful result, there is detailed and documented analysis 
and evaluation.  Findings are documented on the PT Exception Report form and 
submitted for review and approval by the department’s medical director. 
o CAP PT Survey Exception Report Forms: 
▪ CAP PT Survey Exception Report – OLOL (LBA009-B)  
▪ CAP PT Survey Exception Report – Livingston (LBA009-C)  
▪ CAP PT Survey Exception Report – NBR Lab (LBA009-D) 
▪  CAP PT Survey Exception Report – Assumption Lab (ACH-Accreditation-A)  
• All Proficiency testing challenges that were intended to be graded but were not MUST be 
evaluated by the laboratory supervisor/designee.  Results should be compared to reported 
results in the Participant Summary and documentation of this comparison must be 
included with the survey results.  For those labs that are CAP accredited, refer to the CAP 
Laboratory Accreditation Manual, for guidance on the approach to these situations.   
 
▪ If results are acceptable, no investigation is required.  Acceptable limits may 
be handwritten by the test results using the Participant Summary.   
▪ If coded results are unacceptable, investigate and complete PT Exception 
Report (LBA009-B).   
• The laboratory recognizes and corrects problems identified through proficiency testing 
and alternative performance assessment. Each department is responsible for the 
investigation of results that, although acceptable, show bias or trends suggesting a 
problem. Documentation of corrective action is filed in the individual sections of the lab.   
o Bias or trending of results.  Even if numeric results are acceptable, the lab will 
monitor for bias and trending that may suggest a problem.   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 5 of 6 
LBA009 
 
▪ Bias:  If numeric results for a test are acceptable, but are all graphed on 
one side of the mean AND at least one SDI is >2.0, bias is present:   
 If bias is present on this kit AND the previous PT kit, an investigation 
is performed and documented.   
 Bias is present on this kit BUT not present on the previous PT kit, an 
investigation is NOT required.   
▪ Trending: If numeric results are acceptable, but graphed with 3 of 5 on 
one side of the graph and one or more results exceed 2SDI for this and the 
prior test kit results, trending is present: 
 If trending is present on this kit AND the previous PT kit, an 
investigation is performed and documented.   
 If trending is present on this kit BUT not present on the previous PT 
kit, an investigation is NOT required.   
• All PT reports are reviewed with the performing personnel to provide performance 
feedback. 
 
• All reports and exception documents will be submitted to the departmental medical 
director for review and approval and shall filed in the department along with the survey 
results.    
• Results of these surveys are retained for at least two (2) years. 
 
• In the event that the laboratory is notified by CAP to cease patient testing due to repeat 
unsuccessful proficiency testing: 
o The laboratory will immediately cease patient testing for the analyte or 
subspecialty as indicated by CAP. 
o Patient Testing for the affected analyte(s) will be referred to one of OLOL lab’s 
approved referral testing labs. 
▪ Records will be kept for each test forwarded for testing during the affected 
period. 
o The laboratory will meet all conditions as outlined in the CAP cease patient 
testing notification. 
o No patient results will be released until the laboratory receives approval from 
CAP to resume patient testing. 
 
Alternative Assessment (PT not available) 
• Testing is accomplished in one of three ways: 
 
1.  Split Sample Testing with reference lab or other accredited laboratory: 
▪ Preferred method for quantitative results. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 6 of 6 
LBA009 
▪ A single biological sample (e.g. tube of blood) is divided into aliquots.  
Testing is performed by this laboratory and a reciprocating laboratory on the 
sample aliquots. 
▪ Lab determines number of samples to compare. For many analytes, two 
samples is adequate. 
▪ Test results are recorded and compared  
▪ This evaluates interlaboratory agreement and testing errors, but not trueness 
(bias) unless the outside lab uses a method that is calibrated to a reference 
method or reference material. 
 
2.  Internal Split-Sample Testing: 
▪ Preferred method for operator-dependent testing such as morphological 
analysis. 
▪ In-house testing by two technologists 
▪ Two technologists test the same sample or aliquots of that sample. 
▪ Test results are compared and recorded  
• Interpreting results: 
o For quantitative testing, results should fall within test limits indicated in the 
Participant Summary.   
▪ The CMS limits are also found at the Westgard.com website. 
▪ CMS limits for several tests are not available; the same website has the 
Australian limits that may be used for these tests.  
 
o For qualitative testing or operator-dependent testing (e.g. morphological analysis), 
if results do not agree, rerun test using a different operator and/or increase number 
of samples.  Ex. 5 of 6 must match for agreement within 20%.  If competency of 
personnel is questionable, retrain.  
 
o If the test still does not meet the previously stated criteria, testing will be halted.  
Information will be forwarded to the Compliance Officer who will research and 
refer the matter to the appropriate Laboratory Medical Director for further action. 
 
 
REVISIONS 
3/15/15 (created), 7/6/16, 6/23/17, 10/25/17 
 
 
 
 
 