OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 1 of 4 
LBA018 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA018 
CRITICAL VALUES 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 10/21/2020 1/11/2021 1/11/2021 
Blood Donor Service and Core Lab Director Review J Teague 1/8/2021 Origination Date 
Outreach Director Review N/A – Outreach Dept retired 7/2020 N/A 3/23/15 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 1/3/2021  
 
 
I. PURPOSE  
To provide guidelines for the timeliness of reporting diagnostic critical results to the 
licensed healthcare provider that can act on the results. 
 
II. DEFINITIONS 
A. Physician/designee (responsible licensed caregiver) - is the on-call physician, 
physician assistant, nurse practitioner or physician office nurse/staff who has 
been permitted to accept the results immediately and relay to the ordering 
physician. This may include, but is not limited to, physicians, physician’s 
assistants, registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, certified registered nurse 
practitioners, and certified registered nurse anesthetists.  
B. Critical (Panic) Value/Results – These are tests that have a defined upper or 
lower limit panic or critical value or a critical finding that could significantly 
impact a patient’s well-being.  These are generally considered to be the initial 
first-time diagnostic results that are considered to be immediately or potentially 
life, limb or organ threatening, thus requiring an urgent response. 
C. Other diagnostic test results that are not included in the policy but may be 
defined as Critical based on a clinical situation, changes in results, or any other 
outstanding Clinical monitoring result that requires urgent response are to be 
handled the same as Critical test results. 
III. POLICY 
A. Critical Values are determined by OLOL Medical Executive Committee (MEC). 
B. Critical values are flagged in the Computer system.   
C. All initial first-time Critical (Panic) Value test results require a call to the 
patient’s physician/designee.  (see OrgClin 044 for OLOLRMC Main Lab and 
Affiliate Labs approved list of tests with critical results)  
D. A verbal read back with confirmation of accuracy is performed and documented 
in the computer.   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 2 of 4 
LBA018 
E. Inpatients 
1. Inpatient critical values/results are to be reported to the physician/designee 
within 15 minutes of being resulted.  
2. When the Inpatient’s test results remain within the Critical (Panic) Value 
range within a 48-hour period the results are not called, unless requested by 
a physician. These results are posted with a statement indicating results 
match previous test results.  
3. When a significant change in the patient’s test results occurs within 48 hours 
the result is called. 
F. Outpatients 
1. Outpatient critical values/results are to be reported to the physician or 
physician’s designee within 30 minutes of being resulted.  
2. ALL Critical (Panic) results are called for Outpatients. 
IV. PROCEDURE 
A. TESTING - The Medical Technologist determines the validity of the critical 
test result: 
1. by repeating the test, 
2. by checking for specimen issues (ex. hemolysis, clots, QNS, over- or under-
filled tubes, mislabeling) when indicated, 
3. by testing of controls or calibrators when indicated.   
B. Exceptions to repeat testing:     
1. If a similar critical result has already been reported.  
2. If there is a previous test result and no delta check occurs. 
3. Elevated troponin result. 
Note:  Some abnormal chemistry tests automatically repeat (ex. NA, calcium). 
C. Within the designated time frame (inpatients: 15 minutes, outpatients: 30 
minutes) of determining this to be a valid laboratory test result, the tech directly 
communicates the report to the patient’s caregiver.  See “Documenting Critical 
Results Notification” Job Aid. 
D. INPATIENTS - Laboratory personnel will call the physician/designee 
responsible for the patient upon the identification of all critical values/results. 
1. Call the report to the appropriate healthcare provider and document in 
Comm Log.  See “Documenting Critical Results Notification” Job Aid. 
a. Record First and Last name of the physician/designee to whom the result 
was called beneath the critical result information. 
b. Ask the receiver of the report to Read Back (RB) the values called.  
2. If the patient’s nurse cannot take the call results can be given to the unit’s    OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 3 of 4 
LBA018 
charge nurse, nurse manager, or house manager.   
3. Discharged Inpatients call critical results to the ordering physician’s office. 
4. If the ordering physician was a hospitalist, call hospital medicine to report 
result. 
5. Discharged ER patients - call critical results to ER. 
6. Livingston ER and North Baton Rouge ER departments referring testing to 
OLOLRMC Main Lab should be treated as Inpatient departments of 
OLOLRMC and critical results will be called to the respective ER’s as 
outlined in this section. 
7. If test is referred from one FMOLHS facility to another that has an in-house 
lab - call the criticals to the lab who will then contact the appropriate 
caregiver.   
E. OUTPATIENTS - Call the report to the client or physician/designee. 
1. Call the report to the appropriate physician/designee and document in Comm 
Log. See “Documenting Critical Results Notification” Job Aid. 
a. Record First and Last name of the physician/designee to whom the result 
was called. 
b. Ask the receiver of the report to Read Back (RB) the values called. 
2. If ordered by a physician office, the office is called, and results are given to 
a caregiver/designee. If the office/clinic is open, but the doctor or nurse 
cannot take the phone call, the Technologist can give the result to a 
designated staff member who will report to the caregiver immediately.  
Document all information.   
3. If ordered by an outreach site such as a nursing home or a home health 
agency, the critical result is called to the caregiver there, who will then 
contact the physician. 
4. If test is referred by an Outpatient facility that has an in-house lab - call 
the criticals to the lab who will then contact the appropriate caregiver.   
5. If the ordering physician cannot be reached, continue trying to contact the 
physician/designee on-call for that group, or an appropriate representative 
for the physician.   
a. Continue trying to call until successful or office closed. 
b. Document individually in Comm Log each attempt to notify the 
appropriate person; defer to AM after 3 failed attempts.   
c. Document each time you get “no answer”.   
d. Leave for supervisor to have called in the A.M. if 3-11 or 11-7 is    
unsuccessful.   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 4 of 4 
LBA018 
e. It is against Laboratory and Hospital policy to release diagnostic 
testing results to an answering service or voicemail – no matter the 
circumstances. 
F. POINT-OF-CARE TESTING   
If the test is not performed by the licensed caregiver, the results are 
communicated by the test operator to the caregiver within 15 minutes.  
Communication and documentation requirements are followed as stated in this 
procedure and in the POC procedure manual. 
 
G. REFUSAL TO ACCEPT VALUES  
1. Notify the Department Supervisor or pathologist on-call (after hours) of the 
refusal.  Department Supervisor and/or the pathologist will give the tech 
further instructions on contacting an MD.  
2. Document all calls, attempts, and refusals in Epic.  
H. CRITICAL RESULT MONITORING 
In the Lab, critical result monitoring is done by the department supervisor or 
senior tech using the Supervisor Review of Criticals Follow-up Task List.  
1. All critical results are monitored for appropriate documentation and call 
times.  
2. All information is reported in the monthly laboratory PI data. 
3. Nursing documentation and times are monitored by medical record review 
performed in the organization’s Quality Department.   
 
Refer to OLOLRMC Organizational Policy- OrgClin/044 for the current approved 
list of CRITICAL VALUES / RESULTS.  This list applies to OLOLRMC Lab and 
Affiliate Labs and is additionally listed on lab form LBA018-A – OLOLRMC and 
Affiliate Labs Critical Values. 
 
 
V. REFERENCES 
CAP Standards:  GEN.41316, COM.30000, COM.30100 
 
VI. ASSOCIATED POLICIES 
OrgClin/044 – Critical Values/Results 
LBA026 – Infectious Disease Reporting 
 
VII. REVISIONS 
3/2015 (created), 3/30/2017, 10/21/2020 
 
 
 
 