OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 1 of 3 
LBA031 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA031 
 
CONTINUING EDUCATION 
 
 
PRINCIPLE 
Continuing education programs utilized by Laboratory personnel are designed to provide 
comprehensive resources for maintaining licensure, competency assessment and 
supplemental training.  A variety of programs are offered throughout the year for all 
levels of personnel that are flexible and coordinated with the scope of practice for each 
staff member. 
 
Throughout the calendar year, opportunities for continuing education arise through new 
instrumentation training, vendor “Lunch and Learn” presentations, and webinars where 
all personnel are encouraged to attend.  There are also on-line training opportunities for 
employees.   
 
SCOPE 
This procedure applies to Medical Technologists/Clinical Laboratory Scientists, Medical 
Technicians/Clinical Laboratory Technicians, Laboratory Assistants, and Phlebotomists 
employed by Our Lady of the Lake that must submit proof of yearly renewal of licensure 
which requires continuing education.   
 
 
PROCEDURE 
A. Each licensed Medical Technologist/Clinical Laboratory Scientist, Medical 
Technician/Clinical Laboratory Technician, Laboratory Assistants, and 
Phlebotomist is required to obtain a minimum of 12 contact hours of 
continuing education (12 Continuing Education Units, or CEU’s) each 
calendar year.  
 
B. Each registered Medical Technologist/ Clinical Laboratory Scientist, 
Medical Technician/Clinical Laboratory Technician, Laboratory Assistant, 
and Phlebotomist may obtain the required continuing educational 
requirements by the following: 
1. Completing training modules/ competency assessments through on-
line sources for PACE credits. 
2. Attending qualified Presentations/Lectures for credits. 
3. Purchasing materials (i.e. quizzes/books) and completing for credits. 
 
 
NOTES / LIMITATIONS 
A.  There are a limited number of available continuing education opportunities.  It  
       is the responsibility of each licensed technologist, technician, assistant, and  
       phlebotomist to obtain the required number of continuing education  
       requirements. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 2 of 3 
LBA031 
B.  It is the responsibility of each licensed technologist, technician, assistant, and  
      phlebotomist to ensure the material is an approved source of continuing  
      education.  
 
 
EXAMPLES OF APPROVED CEU PROVIDERS (list is not all inclusive) 
(some may be free to users, some may be associated with a fee) 
www.ascls.org 
www.cap.org 
www.AbbottDiagnostics.com/Ei 
www.ascp.org 
www.mayomedicallaboratories.com 
www.mlo-online.com 
www.andersonce.com  
www.CACMLE.org 
www.alliedhealth.lsuhsc.edu/ClinicalLaboratory  
www.nhanow.com 
www.aspt.org 
Media Lab 
WWW.AAFP.ORG 
 
 
REFERENCES 
A. Louisiana State Board of Examiners; Professional and Occupational 
Standards; Title 37, Clinical Laboratory Personnel Chapter 15 part 11:R.S. 
37:1311-1329  
B. Louisiana State Board of Examiners; Professional and Occupational 
Standards; Title 46, Chapter 35 Clinical Laboratory Personnel, Subchapter 
D. Continuing Education R.S. 35: 3501-3545.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 3 of 3 
LBA031 
    By    Date 
 Prepared/Revised A. Landry 3/24/15 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 5/1/2015 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 3/30/2015 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 4/1/2015 
Medical Director Review A Harton 6/13/2015 
 Effective Date 6/24/2015 
 Origination Date 3/24/15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 