OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 1 of 3 
LBA030 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA030 
 
LABORATORY PERSONNEL DRESS CODE 
 
PURPOSE  
To define personal appearance guidelines for laboratory personnel that represent our image 
of professionalism to our patients, their families and our community.   
 
Outlined below are general guidelines and basic expectations for appearance that all lab 
team members and contracted services employees are required to follow.  This policy is  
applicable for work and training on all shifts, seven days a week. 
 
 
POLICY  
Dress and grooming of all Team Members must be consistent with the safety and hygiene 
standards necessary for a health care organization.  This policy applies to all individuals who 
are providing services on behalf of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center. 
 
The employee provides all uniforms and other work related items unless otherwise 
indicated.   
 
All personnel will conform to the following standards: 
1. Name badges must be worn at all times. Name badge should be visible and worn above 
the waist (on the collar, chest pocket, or, on a lanyard). Wearing a name badge on the 
sleeve or on a hat is unacceptable.  The name badge should also be free and clear of any 
holes, stickers or obstructions of the picture, name or job title. 
2.  Personal Hygiene and other exclusions: Refer to the Administrative policy (see  
     LakeLink) OrgOps/HR/E/009 for additional hospital dress requirements. 
 
3.  If working in technical areas with potential for splash hazards an impermeable lab coat  
     must be worn.   
 
4.  Dress standards: 
 a.  In all job classes, only white or the same color as scrub top  turtlenecks or  tee  
     shirts may be worn under primary shirt or scrub top. 
b.  Laboratory Administration personnel: appropriate uniform for area or casual  
     business attire with optional lab coat.  Can include OLOL polo top. 
c.  Laboratory Technical personnel: patriot blue scrub suits with optional same  
     color jacket or casual business attire.  Can include OLOL polo top.  Polo must  
     have the OLOL emblem monogram. 
  Note: Off-site labs located inside another facility may be assigned  
          other colors based on the facilities requirements  
d.  Phlebotomy personnel:  Caribbean blue scrub suits with optional same color  
     jacket.  Can include OLOL polo top in white or Caribbean blue.  Polo must  
     have the OLOL emblem monogram. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 2 of 3 
LBA030 
e.  LLS Outreach personnel:  casual business attire or Caribbean blue scrub suits.   
     Personnel stationed in offsite locations must follow departmental policies in  
     accordance with supervisor’s direction. 
f.  Blood Donor personnel:  navy blue scrub suits with optional same color jacket.  
    Can include OLOL polo top in white or navy blue.  Polo must have the OLOL  
    emblem monogram. 
g.  Casual attire shirts must have a collar or be conservative.  Shirts are to be worn  
     buttoned (except top button), and tucked-in with no loose shirttails. 
h.  Clerical staff/service representatives:  May wear appropriate color scrubs for  
     their service location/job class or casual attire, based on supervisor’s  
     recommendations. 
 
5.  Footwear standards: 
a.  Shoes designed to be worn in clinical areas are to be clean, polished and in  
     good repair.   
b.  Shoelaces will be tied.  Socks must not have decorative bands/balls.   
     Coordinating, plain hosiery or socks must be worn. 
c.  No open toed shoes are acceptable in technical areas. 
d.  Clogs are acceptable if they do not interfere with safe or effective job  
     performance.   
e.  Tennis shoes and/or forms of athletic shoes are acceptable  
 
6.  Hair standards 
 a.  Men must wear their hair neat, clean, and well-kept.  
  1.  Facial hair must be neatly trimmed.   
  2.  Hats or other head coverings are not allowed. 
b.  Women are to wear their hair neat and clean with no extremes in hairstyles. 
1.  No hairbeads are permitted.  Conservative headbands (2” or less in  
     width), barrettes, clips, ribbons, and bows are permitted.  Bows must be  
     no more than 4” across and must coordinate with the color of the  
     uniform or hair.   
2.  Hair coverings including hats are not allowed. 
 
7.  Jewelry 
 Earrings are limited to two per ear.  Males may only wear one small earring per  
ear.  Tattoos and piercings (other than ear piercings) should be covered at all  
times. 
 
8.  High Heels 
High heels are not permitted in technical areas for safety purposes. 
 
9.  “Fun Clothes” 
Scrub suits will not be “accessorized” with other items (belts, ribbons, scarf’s, 
etc).  Clothes such as soft, knit/spandex outfits, stirrup pants, Capri pants, denim 
material (any color), halter/tank tops, shorts, jogging outfits/sweatshirts, t-shirts, 
sandals or novelty shoes, hats of any kind, sunglasses, and military fatigues are OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 3 of 3 
LBA030 
not considered professional wear and are not permitted.  Holiday scrubs are 
permitted 7 days prior to a holiday and the hospital may allow additional “fun” 
clothes to be worn such as football team jerseys, OLOL t-shirts, etc. but these 
garments must only be worn on the designated days. 
 
 
Note:  This policy is to serve as a broad set of guidelines for attire and appearance of 
staff; it is not a conclusive set of rules.  OLOL reserves the right to interpret these 
guidelines, as well as establish and enforce new standards as appropriate. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
    By    Date 
 Prepared/Revised A. Landry 3/15/15 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 5/1/2015 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 5/5/2015 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 4/1/2015 
Medical Director Review A Harton 6/13/2015 
 Effective Date 6/24/2015 
 Origination Date 3/15/15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 