OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 1 of 3 
LBA025 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA025 
 
MAINTENANCE AND FUNCTION CHECKS 
 
 
PRINCIPLE 
Due to extensive usage and age, instrumentation and other systems must be maintained to 
continue their reliability and function.  Careful attention must be given to the 
manufacturer guidelines for calibration and validation to ensure that all systems are 
operating satisfactorily to be used clinically for reagents and patient samples.  Lack of, or 
insufficient maintenance can jeopardize the functioning of the system, and potentially 
risk patient care. 
 
Function checks are designed to check the critical operating characteristics to detect 
drifts, instability or malfunction prior to affecting patient testing results; therefore, 
maintenance and function checks are performed for all instruments and equipment prior 
to testing patient samples.  All maintenance and function checks are performed on a 
regular schedule and documented on their respective log sheet which includes the specific 
tolerance limits for each system.   
 
Service history records of maintenance, recalibration, repair, and component replacement 
must be kept near the system to be referenced by the operating Technical Personnel.  
Service records should include dates, observations, problems discovered, and the 
service/troubleshooting performed by the Service Representative. 
 
Service on Lab Equipment is performed routinely as part of preventative maintenance 
and as needed by the OLOL Biomedical Department.  The Biomedical Department is in 
contract with and managed by Trimedx Healthcare Services. 
  
PROCEDURE 
1. Temperature Checks:  All thermometers are certified and NBS (NIST) 
Traceable. 
A. Departmental staff observe and document the temperatures of all refrigerators, 
freezers, and room temperatures on the respective log sheet in their department.   
1. If the temperature of the refrigerator or freezer is out of the specified tolerance 
limits: 
a. recheck in two (2) hours for the correct temperature 
b. if the temperature is still out of range, remove all contents from the 
refrigerator/freezer and place in a stable environment 
c. call Plant Management (enter work order) to investigate 
d. upon completion of repair, recheck the temperature 
e. the temperature must be stable for 24 hours prior to placing back in 
service 
2. Document all corrective action taken on the log sheet. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 2 of 3 
LBA025 
B. On each day of use, the temperature of the dry bath (heat block) is observed and 
documented on the respective log sheet 
C. On a scheduled basis a defrost and clean on all freezers is performed and 
documented on the respective log sheet  
 
2. Centrifuges and Timers: 
A. Daily, personnel perform interior and, if necessary, exterior cleaning of the 
laboratory centrifuges and document on the respective log sheet. 
B. Annually or as required by departmental standards (Blood Bank= quarterly), the 
RPM and Timer Verification checks are performed by Trimedx at the appropriate 
operating speeds/time and documented in the Trimedx operating system.  Copies 
can be obtained from Biomedical Department upon request. 
C. As required by standards, laboratory timers are verified using Coordinated 
Universal Time and documented on the respective log sheet in the department 
where located.   
3. Microscopes: 
A. Daily, personnel perform an external surface cleaning of all microscopes and 
document on the respective log sheet. 
B. As needed, the lamp source is replaced. 
C. Bi-annually microscopes are serviced by Trimedx 
4.  Balances/Scales: 
     A.  Calibrated annually by Trimedx.   
5.  Laboratory Instrumentation: 
A. Daily, weekly, and monthly maintenance protocols are performed by the assigned 
Technical Personnel that have been properly trained.  “As needed” maintenance is 
performed by any Technical Personnel operating the instrument.  
B. Each instrument maintenance log book is located at or near the instrument and is 
reviewed monthly to ensure that policy/procedure has been followed. 
1. Once performed, all daily, weekly and monthly preventative maintenance 
must be documented and initialed by the performing Technical Personnel. 
2. The date reviewed and the signature of the reviewer must be documented on 
the log sheet where indicated. 
3. Any discrepancies discovered must be documented.   
 
PROCEDURE NOTES 
1. All laboratory equipment is maintained as indicated by the instrument manufacturer.  
To ensure compliance of all maintenance protocols, the following must be used to 
define maintenance requirements: 
A. DAILY MAINTENANCE must be performed within a 24 hour period. 
B. WEEKLY MAINTENANCE must be performed within a 7 calendar day 
period. 
C. MONTHLY MAINTENANCE must be performed within a calendar month 
which cannot exceed 30 days.  
2. All maintenance and function checks are reviewed for performance and compliance 
by the departmental supervisor or their designee.   
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 3 of 3 
LBA025 
REFERENCES 
College of American Pathologists (C.A.P.), Laboratory Accreditation Program checklists 
 
Revision 
3/24/15 (created), 9/26/17 
 
    By    Date 
 Prepared/Revised D.  Leger 9/26/17 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 10/3/2017 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 10/2/2017 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 10/4/2017 
Medical Director Review A Harton 10/1/2017 
 Effective Date 10/6/2017 
 Origination Date 3/2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 