OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 5 
LBA006 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA006 
ACCREDITATION  
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 8/9/2023 9/1/2023 9/1/2023 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 8/25/2023 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 8/26/2023 2/1989 
 
 
The Laboratory is dedicated to providing quality patient care through active participation 
in accreditation activities, CMS approved proficiency testing, quality control, 
performance improvement, alternative proficiency testing assessment, and ongoing 
monitoring of the overall quality management plan.   
 
The labs of OLOLRMC are accredited/certified by the following agencies: 
• CLIA - Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act 
• CAP -College of American Pathologists  
• AABB - American Association of Blood Banks 
• FDA – Food and Drug Administration (Blood Bank, Tissue) 
• COLA- Commission on Lab Accreditation  
 
 
Laboratory Accrediting 
Organization 
ID # CLIA Number 
OLOLRMC Main Lab CAP 2007001 19D0649172 
OLOLRMC Transfusion and Blood Donor Services AABB 7413   
OLOLRMC Transfusion and Blood Donor Services FDA BB-2370424   
OLOL Livingston Lab CAP 8659018 19D2044119 
OLOL North BR Lab  CAP 8263308 19D2138973 
OLOL Children's Hospital Lab CAP 8607379 19D2170426  
OLOL Ascension Lab CAP 3044401 19D0462188 
Assumption Community Hospital Lab COLA 15219 05D0697094 
Woman’s MOB Lab COLA  28847 19D2142350 
 
 
ACCREDITATION 
 
Interim Self Inspection 
All OLOL CAP accredited labs must conduct a thorough interim self-inspection.  All 
efforts to correct deficiencies identified during that process will be documented and 
maintained.  Interim self-inspection will be completed at the start of the second year of OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 5 
LBA006 
the laboratory’s two-year accreditation cycle. Attestation of this inspection will be 
submitted to CAP.   
 
Terms of Accreditation 
All accredited OLOL labs comply with all terms of the terms of accreditation for their 
respective accrediting organization.  
 
CAP Terms of Accreditation 
The laboratory shall comply with the terms of accreditation for the accrediting agencies.  
Compliance with these terms includes, but is not limited to: 
• Cooperation in any CAP investigation or inspection and prompt notification to the 
CAP if the laboratory becomes the subject of: 
o An investigation by a government entity (including national, federal, state 
(or provincial), local, or foreign) or by another accreditation organization. 
o A validation inspection 
o Adverse media attention relating to laboratory performance. 
• Prompt notification to the CAP: 
o If the laboratory discovers laboratory personnel actions that appear to 
violate national, federal, state (or provincial), or local laws that regulate 
laboratories. 
o Of any changes in laboratory activity menu prior to beginning that testing 
or implementing scope of service/analytic method changes, or the 
laboratory permanently or temporarily discontinues some or all testing. 
o Of any changes in directorship, location, ownership, name, insolvency, or 
bankruptcy in the 30 days prior to the change.  Laboratories subject to the 
US CLIA regulation must also notify the CMS of pertinent changes. 
• Provision of a trained inspection team comparable in size and scope to that 
required for its own inspection during the two-year accreditation period, if 
requested by the regional and/or stat commissioner. 
• If the laboratory is subject to the US CLIA regulations: 
o Availability, on a reasonable basis, the laboratory’s annual PT results upon 
request of any person 
o Provisions to allow the CMS or its agent to perform a validation or 
compliant inspection at any time during the laboratory’s hours of 
operations and permit the CMS to monitor the correction of any 
deficiencies found during such an inspection 
• Adherence to the Certificate Mark Terms of Use/Agreement for the CAP 
Certification Mark and Design if the laboratory is/or will use the CAP 
Certification Mark for accreditation.  The agreement can be downloaded and 
printed from cap.org. 
• Have a written procedure for employees to communicate concerns about quality 
and safety to management and for management to investigate employee 
complaints. Incorporate corrective or preventive actions into the laboratory 
Quality Management Plan OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 5 
LBA006 
• Participate annually in a CAP accepted proficiency testing program, if applicable 
and, if subject to US CLIA regulations, meet the proficiency testing requirements 
in subpart H of the US CLIA regulations. 
• Authorize the CAP to release its inspection and proficiency testing data and other 
information required by law to the appropriate regulatory or oversight agencies 
such as CMS, Department of Veterans Affairs, Department of Defense, Joint 
Commission, HFAP(AOA), UNOS, or state/provincial agencies. 
• Obtain a CLIA Certificate of Accreditation and pay all applicable fees as a CLIA-
certified laboratory if it will use CAP accreditation to meet CLIA certification 
requirements. 
• Submit a completed Self-Inspection Verification Form in the interim year. 
• Submit only documentation and other materials to CAP that have been de-
identified of all protected health information (PHI) in accordance with the 
requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
and its implementing regulations unless the laboratory must submit PHI to CAP in 
order to respond to a deficiency or patient complaint. 
• Refrain from copying or distributing the CAP Checklists or any content thereof 
except for use by inspectors in conducting a CAP inspection and by the laboratory 
in preparing for such an inspection. 
 
 
COLA Accreditation Responsibilities 
• Obtaining a Certificate of Accreditation from CMS every two years 
• Paying CMS the appropriate fees 
• Obtaining a state license, if applicable in your state 
• Complying with all state laboratory regulations, including personnel licensure, 
when applicable 
• Complying with COLA standards 
• Permitting CMS to conduct an inspection if a complaint is lodged against your 
laboratory 
• Permitting CMS to conduct a random validation inspection 
• Notifying CMS and COLA within 30 days of any changes in ownership, name, 
location, or director of the laboratory 
• Notifying COLA within 60 days of any changes to personnel, instruments, or test 
menu, especially when adding new specialties of testing 
 
 
AABB Conditions of Accreditation 
• Accreditation is granted and/or maintained if a facility is in conformance with all 
requirements. The decision to accredit a facility is based on the information 
gathered during the assessment process. Information gathered during the course of 
the assessment with respect to items which are not in conformance with 
accreditation requirements, is classified as a failure to meet requirements and 
constitutes a nonconformance. All failures to meet requirements stated in the 
assessment summary report must be responded to by the facility and documented OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 5 
LBA006 
in the corrective action plan submitted by the facility in response to the 
assessment summary report. The response must include an implementation plan 
and, when appropriate, proof of implementation. 
o A facility must respond to the assessment summary report with a 
corrective action plan within 30 days of the exit meeting. If no response is 
received within 30 days, a facility will be placed on a conditional status. If 
a facility has submitted a response that is determined to be incomplete or 
unacceptable, a request for clarification will be sent. The requested 
clarification must be submitted in writing by the facility within the stated 
timeframe. 
o The facility is responsible for implementation of the corrective action 
plan, as submitted. If it is unable to meet the proposed time frame for 
implementation, or the approach for actions changes significantly, the 
facility must notify AABB and submit proof of implementation within the 
time frame designated by AABB.  Documentation of modifications must 
be available for review during their next accreditation assessment. 
o After 60 days, if a corrective action plan has not been submitted in 
response to the assessment summary report, the facility’s accreditation is 
withdrawn. 
o Documentation of changes to the accreditation status is kept as part of the 
permanent record of the facility. 
• Requests for cycle changes or one-time extensions by the facility  
o Requests for cycle changes or one-time extensions must be submitted in 
writing by the facility to the AABB National Office. Requests must be 
submitted at least 6 months prior to the accreditation expiration date. The 
request must include the name and address of the facility, the date of the 
upcoming assessment, the desired cycle, and the reason for the request. 
• Extension beyond the expiration date of accreditation will be granted under the 
following conditions:  
o The assessment is delayed past the assigned quarter due to an unforeseen 
event such as a weather event (i.e. tornado, hurricane) 
o The facility wishes to coordinate its accreditation cycle with the College 
of American Pathologists inspection cycle (see AABB Process for CAP 
Coordinated Assessments) 
o A problem occurs at the AABB National Office that delays the assessment 
past the assigned quarter 
o The facility is moving or a merger with another facility is occurring  
o In all of the above cases the assessment will take place as soon as possible 
following the event. All other instances will be handled by the Director of 
Accreditation on a case-by-case basis. Any unusual requests or requests OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 5 of 5 
LBA006 
for changes greater than 2 cycles will be reviewed by the Accreditation 
Review Committee. A response will be sent to the facility within 30 days 
of receipt of the request in the AABB National Office. 
• If AABB is the CLIA provider for a facility, the cycle CANNOT be extended 
beyond two years from the last assessment except in extraordinary circumstances 
(ex: natural disaster). CMS must be notified if the cycle is changed 
• Delays of current accreditation by the facility should a delay of greater than 30 
days past the timeframes specified in the Accreditation Process Description due to 
non-response by a facility occur, the accreditation status will change to 
conditional. After 60 days of conditional status due to non-response, the facility’s 
accreditation status will change to withdrawn. A withdrawn status will also result 
in a loss of AABB institutional membership. The facility will be notified of their 
changed accreditation and membership status. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
CAP Accreditation Standards: GEN.23584, GEN.26791 
CAP Terms of Accreditation 
AABB Accreditation Standards 
COLA Accreditation Standards 
 
REVISIONS 
2/1989 (created), 3/2015,5/2016, 6/2017, 5/22/2020, 8/9/2023 
 
 
 
 