OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R8 
Page 1 of 3 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA204-R8 
FIRE (CODE RED) RESPONSE PLAN– BLOOD DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 6/11/19 8/27/2019 8/27/2019 
Blood Donor Service  and Core Lab Director Review J Teague 6/26/2019 Origination Date 
Blood Donor Service Medical Director Review T Rauch 6/29/2019 5/1/18 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 7/30/2019  
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of Lab Administration or designee. 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
If a Fire occurs in the Blood Distribution Center: 
• Perform RACE and Pass.   
• Evacuation will proceed as outlined below.   
  If the Fire occurs in an area other than Blood Distribution Center, remain in place: 
• Until given the all-clear or OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R8 
Page 2 of 3 
• Instructed to evacuate or 
• It becomes apparent that evacuation is necessary (smoke compartment has been breached). 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exit Locations - Door of Blood Distribution Center exits to main hallway of Plaza 1. 
• Smoke Compartments - The Blood Distribution Center does not contain any smoke 
compartments. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
NOTE:  The Blood Distribution Center operates Monday – Sunday from 8am until closing.  There is 
no set closing time for this area.  
• Blood Distribution Center Supervisor, Operations Coordinator, or designee in charge will 
close any open doors. 
• Blood Distribution Center Supervisor, Operations Coordinator, or designee in charge will 
instruct Blood Distribution Techs to turn off and unplug Blood/Blood Product Component 
Production equipment if necessary. 
• In the extremely rare event that there are visitors to the Blood Distribution Center, the Blood 
Distribution Center Supervisor, Operations Coordinator, and Blood Distribution Techs 
will assist in moving all Distribution Center visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety”.   The Blood Distribution Center does 
not receive patients or donors to this area.  
• Blood Distribution Center Supervisor, Operations Coordinator, or designee in charge will 
ensure that all employees are accounted for. 
• Blood Distribution Center Supervisor, Operations Coordinator, or designee in charge will 
ensure that each room is empty. 
• There are no automatic Fire Doors, elevators, carts and equipment blocking the hallway, located 
in the Blood Distribution Center. 
The location of medical gas shut off valves: 
  There are no medical gas shut off valves located in the Blood Distribution Center 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• The Blood Distribution Center does not house patients and there is no transport equipment 
available. 
 
Location of Fire Pull Stations – There are no pull stations inside of the Laboratory.  The nearest 
pull stations are located: 
• On the wall in the main hallway of Plaza 1 between the Distribution Center and the Atrium. 
 
Location of Fire Extinguishers: 
• Inside of the Blood Distribution Center next to the entry/exit door. 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R8 
Page 3 of 3 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Blood/Blood Product Component Production Equipment will be turned off as designated in the 
specific employee response section. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o The Blood Distribution Center will evacuate through the exit of the Blood Distribution 
Center, and turn Left.  Immediately make the next 2 Lefts to exit out of the building to 
the back of the hospital.  Proceed across the Service Road to rendezvous at the Blood 
Donor Bus parking space. 
o Team Members outside of the Blood Distribution Center when a Code Red is called will 
shelter in place and will not attempt to return to the Blood Distribution Center until an 
all-clear is given.   If it becomes necessary to evacuate from the current location, Blood 
Distribution Center team members should attempt to make their way to the Blood 
Distribution Center Rendezvous point if it is safe to do so.     
 
• Secondary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o If the primary evacuation route is inaccessible, the Blood Distribution Center will turn 
right and proceed into the atrium to exit out the back of the building.  Proceed across the 
Service Road to rendezvous at the Blood Donor Bus parking space. 
 
 
 
RELATED POLICIES 
LBA204-Emergency Preparedness 
ECEP001-Emergency Operations Plan  
ECEP007-OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan  
ECLS-012-Department Specific Code Red Response Plan (Template) 
 
REVISIONS 
5/1/18 (created), 6/11/19 