OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R3 
Page 1 of 3 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA204-R3 
FIRE (CODE RED) RESPONSE PLAN– ASSUMPTION COMMUNITY HOSPITAL LAB 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 9/30/2022 3/16/2023 3/16/2023 
Supervisory Review K. Coots 3/8/2023 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 2/11/2023 9/30/2022 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of Lab Administration or designee. 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
If a Fire occurs in the Laboratory: 
• Perform RACE and Pass.   
• Evacuation will proceed as outlined below.   
  If the Fire occurs in an area other than lab, remain in place: 
• Until given the all-clear or 
• Instructed to evacuate or 
• It becomes apparent that evacuation is necessary (smoke compartment has been breached). OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R3 
Page 2 of 3 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exit Locations: 
o Front of Laboratory facing Supervisor’s Office 
o Back of Laboratory facing ED 
 
• Smoke Compartments: 
o Laboratory does not contain any smoke compartments. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
NOTE:  The Laboratory operates 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.  Responses during evening and night 
shifts will be performed by the Section designee. 
• Any Lab Team Member performing a procedure on an outpatient will remain with the patient 
and any visitors and will assist them to safety. 
• Supervisor, Senior Technologist, or designee after-hours from each Lab section will: 
o Clear exit routes in the event that evacuation is needed 
o Ensure that all employees in their section are accounted for 
o Ensure that each room in their section is empty by marking the door/door frame with 
chalk to indicate that the room is empty. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Laboratory does not house patients and there is no transport equipment available. 
• All outpatients and visitors in the laboratory will be at least partially ambulatory.   
• Any outpatients and visitors in the laboratory will be assisted by lab staff member that is 
available. 
Location of Fire Pull Stations – There are no pull stations inside of the Laboratory.  The nearest 
pull stations are located: 
• Outside of Front entrance of the lab in the corridor next to the employee entrance. 
• Outside of the Back entrance of the lab in the patient solarium. 
 
Location of Fire Extinguishers: 
• In the back of the lab next to the fume hood. 
• In the hallway leading to the outpatient draw room. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Instruments do not need to be turned off 
• All Lab Departments have flammable Reagents/Chemicals used in testing 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o All Lab Team Members will proceed to the front exit of the lab, turn right, and exit the 
building to the Rendezvous Point in the employee parking lot.  
o Team Members outside of the Laboratory when a Code Red is called will shelter in 
place and will not attempt to return to the laboratory until an all-clear is given.   If it OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R3 
Page 3 of 3 
becomes necessary to evacuate from the current location, Lab Team Members should 
attempt to make their way to the Lab Rendezvous Point if it is safe to do so.     
• Secondary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o If the primary evacuation route is inaccessible, All Lab Team Members will proceed to 
the back exit of the lab, turn left, and exit the building through the patient solarium to 
the lab Rendezvous Point on the back lawn. 
 
 
RELATED POLICIES 
LBA204-Emergency Preparedness 
ECEP001-Emergency Operations Plan  
ECEP007-OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan  
ECLS-012-Department Specific Code Red Response Plan (Template) 
 
REVISIONS 
9/30/2022 (created) 