OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
LAB ADMINISTRATION
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL

| LBA204-Y6 |
MASS CASUALTY (CODE YELLOW) RESPONSE — CHILDREN’S HOSPITAL LAB _ |

Effective Date

Issue Date
19319

2/1989

Date

Lab Supervisor Review m‘A Ay, e ‘
Laboratory Medical Director Review "4 ’ " ‘ 744 i

PURPOSE

To provide the appropriate laboratory response in the event of a Mass Casualty Incident (MCI).
To delineate authority, responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a Code Yellow
or Mass Casualty Incident.

PROCEDURE

A Mass Casualty Incident (MCI) is either an internal or external incident or disaster which
generates more patients than available resources can manage using routing procedures. A Mass
Casualty Incident is described at OLOLRMC and Affiliate Hospitals using the phrase CODE
YELLOW. When a Mass Casualty Incident (MCI) occurs, the hospital will be notified and if
appropriate, a Code Yellow will be activated. Code Yellow is activated at the discretion of the
hospital’s Administrator on Call or Emergency Room charge Nurse. When a Code is activated,
the Incident Command Center is also activated. The Administrator on Call (AOC) acts as the
head of Incident Command during any emergency event. The Laboratory shall provide disaster
support in accordance with the hospital disaster plan.

A. Code Yellow Activation — Lab Response Duties:
1. Laboratory staff are notified of Code Yellow by the following:
a. Notification through volte phone
b. Notification through Hospital’s Mass Text Alert System
¢. Notification through a departmental call tree.
2. All personnel on duty will remain within the hospital until released by their
Department Head or designee.
3. The Lab Disaster Checklist (LBA204-A) should be followed and completed for all
Code Disasters and Drills. Each department head or designee will, as applicable:
a. Evaluate current departmental staffing.
i.  How many employees are staffed currently?
ii. How many employees are needed to adequately manage the code?
b. Activate the departmental disaster call list. Make note of:
i. How many employees were called?
ii. How many employees were contacted?
iii. How many employees would be able to report to the Hospital?
4. Emergency Events that occur after routine business hours:

Page 1 of 3
LBA204-Y6

OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
LAB ADMINISTRATION
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

a. A Core Lab tech will notify Lab Manager or designee. Designee will be Lab
Supervisor, Sr. Tech, or a member of OLOLRMC Main Lab Administration
such as the Lab Director. Core Lab tech will communicate with Incident
Command Center and other departments under direction of Lab Manager or
designee until or unless that individual can arrive on-site.

5. Specimen Collection will be performed by ECU Nursing Staff.

a. Transport specimens to lab (do not use tube system).

b. Specimens may be transported by any available OLOL Children’s Hospital
Staff.

¢. If Transfusion Services staff is present in ECU and not actively releasing
blood, Transfusion Services staff will transport specimens back to the lab.

6. Transfusion Services:

a. Fill out checklist (LBA204-A) and additionally include a copy of current
inventory.

b. Assess blood and blood product inventory

i.  Provide current inventory numbers to ECU and Incident Command
Center.

ii. Notify Blood Distribution Center (BDC) of Code. Communicate
current need for additional blood/blood products. Communicate
anticipated number of patients and possible usage of blood/blood
products.

c. Report to ECU as needed to provide Emergency Release blood/blood
product support to Code Yellow patients.

i, Refer to CH-BB-015 - Emergency Issue of Blood Products.
ii.  Personnel will respond with at least 2 sets of Emergency
Release/Trauma packets in coolers.
e 4-Pack O Negative Red Cells
iii.  Transfusion Services Staff may use Code Yellow (MCI)
Patient/Product Tracker Form (LBA204-Y-A) to keep track of Code
Yellow patients as they are transfused and/or transported to different
locations rapidly.
7. Core Lab (Hematology/Chemistry):

a. Perform stat hematology and coagulation procedures.

b. Perform stat chemistries; assist in detection of chemical causation of disaster

¢. Discontinue routine testing and shift available staffing to assist Transfusion
Services with preparation of Emergency Release/Trauma packets.

d. Assess reagent supply

8. Central Processing:

a. Receive and distribute Code specimens for STAT testing

b. Assist Transfusion Services with fielding phone calls and requests for
blood/blood products from sources other than the Code Yellow Team.

9. All Lab Areas:

a. Provide a Department status report to the Lab Manager or designee that

includes:
i.  Status of staffing
ii.  Status of supplies including venipuncture supplies

Page 2 of 3
LBA204-Y6


OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
LAB ADMINISTRATION
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808
ii.  Status of blood/blood product inventory (Transfusion Services).
b. Lab Manger or designee will report to Incident Command Center

B. At the conclusion of the drill or event an all clear announcement will be made.
C. Post disaster:

1. Complete checklist and forward to Compliance/Safety Officer.

2. Evaluate the effectiveness of the department's response.

3. Drill information will be forwarded to Disaster Committee Chairman by

Compliance/Safety Officer.

RELATED POLICIES

LBA204-Laboratory Emergency Preparedness

TSPOL-1-26-Transfusion Services emergency Operations Plan in Response to a Disaster
XMTCH-16-Emergency Issue of Blood

CH-BB-114- Transfusion Services emergency Operations Plan in Response to 2 Disaster
CH-BB-015-Emergency Issue of Blood

REFERENCES
OLOLRMC Environment of Care Disaster policies
CAP Checklist: GEN.73800, GEN.73900

REVISIONS
2/21/19 (created)

Page 3 of 3
LBA204-Y6

