OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 4 
LBA204 
 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA204 
LAB EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 6/11/19 7/5/2019 7/5/2019 
Blood Donor Service  and Core Lab Director Review J Teague 6/26/2019 Origination Date 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 10/27/2019 2/1989 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 7/2/2019  
 
I. POLICY 
The purpose of this policy is to define the codes used at OLOLRMC Main Laboratory 
and its affiliate labs for emergency or disaster situations.  OLOLRMC Main Laboratory 
and its affiliate laboratories shall respond to internal and external disasters and acts of 
terrorism affecting the community, hospital, and/or laboratory.   
 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Environment of Care Department has 
performed a risk assessment to determine the types of hazards most likely to occur that 
also have the potential to disrupt services.  Those codes have been incorporated into an 
Emergency Codes List.  In addition, applicable policies have been established 
organizationally.  All policies are located online:  TeamLink > Policies > Lake. 
 
II. EMERGENCY CODES LIST 
The following codes are used to communicate disaster or emergency situations as 
follows: 
Description of 
Emergency 
Code Org Policy Number Lab Specific Policy 
(where applicable)  
Bomb or Bomb Threat Code Black ECEP006 Refer to Org Policy 
Chemical Contamination 
/ Exposure Code Orange ECEP010 Refer to Org Policy 
Fire Code Red ECEP007 LBA204-
R1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8 
Infant or Child 
Abduction Code Pink ECSE001 Refer to Org Policy 
Mass Casualty Code Yellow ECEP016 LBA204-
Y1,2,3,4,5,6 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 4 
LBA204 
Medical Emergency / 
Cardiopulmonary Arrest Code Blue OrgClin003 Refer to Org Policy 
Radiation Contamination 
/ Exposure Code Green ECEP013 Refer to Org Policy 
Security Emergency Code White ECSE007 Refer to Org Policy 
Staffing Emergency in 
ECU or Nursing Unit Code D NNA007 Refer to Org Policy 
Communications  Failure Code Purple ECEP009 Refer to Org Policy 
Severe Weather Alert Code Gray ECEP004 (Tornado) 
ECEP005 (Hurricane) 
Refer to Org Policy 
Active Shooter/Hostage Code Silver ECSE019 LBA204-
S1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8 
 
 
III. EMERGENCY/DISASTER EVENT PROCEDURE GENERAL LAB 
GUIDELINES 
A. Emergency situation occurs in the lab: 
1. Call the code operator at 5-3333 to report the appropriate code/event 
2. Notify Supervisory Staff 
3. Take appropriate actions using the closest Red Emergency Code Book or 
appropriate policy as your guide. 
B. Outside of the lab: 
1. Notification by overhead announcement occurs OR Notification by Lake 
Alert Texting System 
2. Code (___) signals that an Emergency Event is occurring. 
3. Take appropriate actions using the closest Red Emergency Code Book or 
appropriate policy as your guide. 
C. The department head or designee will evaluate current departmental staffing as 
applicable.  See section E.2. Instructions for Emergency Notification List. 
D. Emergency Events that occur after routine business hours:  
1. OLOL Main Lab Heme charge tech will notify Lab Administration 
(Director or Manager as applicable).  Lab Administrator will determine 
if individual Departmental Supervisors should be notified.  Heme charge 
tech will communicate with Incident Command Center (located in 
Administration Office across the hall from lab) and other lab 
departments under direction of Lab Administrator until Lab 
Administrator can arrive on-site. 
2. OLOL affiliate Lab tech will notify the Lab Administrator (Lab 
Manager, Supervisor, or Senior Technologist as applicable).  Lab tech 
will communicate with Incident Command Center under the direction of 
the Lab Administrator until the Lab Administrator can arrive on-site. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 4 
LBA204 
E. Some events will require notification of all staff to support response to the event.   
Weather threats such as hurricane, flooding, or ice storms may require 
implementing Activation and Recovery teams.  
1. OLOLRMC and its affiliated facilities utilize a mass text system to 
communicate information to all employees at once.  The Lab Supervisor 
at the direction of hospital administration’s incident command center 
will communicate more specific instructions to employees as needed. 
2. Instructions for Emergency Notification List: 
a. In the event that Disaster has not yet been communicated 
through the mass text system, the individual receiving 
notification that a Disaster Plan Code is in effect will notify the 
Supervisor who will then provide further direction.   
b. Supervisor, Senior Technologist, or designee will notify Lab 
Manager, Lab Director, and Lab Medical Director as needed. 
c. The Laboratory is responsible for maintaining their 
Disaster/Emergency Call Tree. 
d. All persons recalled will report to the Supervisor, Senior 
Technologist, or designee on duty.  The Supervisor/Sr. 
Technologist/designee will give a report of new arrivals at 30 
minute intervals to the Director of the Laboratories or Acting 
Director until all personnel are accounted for, or until the 
Director delegates the requirement.   
e. During a telephone exercise in which no one is recalled to duty, 
the Supervisor/Sr. Tech/designee will notify all employees on 
the list and document staff availability. 
f. Emergency notification of laboratory personnel should be 
initiated only after the Disaster Plan of the Medical Center has 
OFFICIALLY been put into effect and the laboratory will be 
understaffed.  If the Medical Center telephones are out, send a 
messenger with the Employees Emergency Notification List to 
give to the Civil Defense or local law enforcement agencies. 
F. Internal Disasters 
1. In the event of an internal disaster directly affecting the laboratory’s 
ability to perform testing, Lab Administration along with the Lab 
Medical Director will determine the best course of action.  An SOP 
Variance (LBA004-C) will be completed and filed with the Lab 
Compliance Officer. 
2. For internal disasters that prevent testing from being performed in the 
laboratory, the affected OLOL laboratory will refer all testing to another 
OLOL affiliated Lab that is unaffected.  If the unaffected lab’s test menu 
doesn’t support all necessary testing, specimens will be forwarded to an 
approved referral lab.  See Lab Administration policy, LBA115-
Referrals Department, for the full list of OLOLRMC Lab approved 
referral labs.   
3. If the nature of the disaster also prevents transport of specimens, testing 
could be moved and performed in another area of the building.  However OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 4 
LBA204 
this option will be used as a last resort with prior approval of Lab 
Medical Director.  
IV. TESTING OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN PROCEDURE 
A. At least annually OLOLRMC and affiliate facilities take part in regional 
Emergency Preparedness exercises.  Laboratory will participate in testing the 
Emergency Management Plan by contacting employees for a mock emergency 
activation.     
B. Code (___) Drill signals that an Emergency Plan Exercise or Drill is    
occurring.  
C. During emergency event plan exercises, staff will advise guests that the alert is a 
“test of the hospital’s emergency plan.” Verbiage will include “this is a drill/this 
is an exercise” with every communication made whether it is to staff, patients, 
or visitors. 
D. During an emergency plan exercise, all departments will implement their 
emergency plan appropriate to the event. One exception is that personnel will 
not proceed to the Hospital when contacted. The Lab Disaster Checklist 
(LBA204-A) will be followed and completed for the drill evaluation and 
forwarded to the Safety Officer.  
V. RECOVERY 
A. Incident Command Center will communicate “Code (___) All Clear” overhead 
and/or through text notification system. 
B. Routine operations will resume. 
C. Staffing will be adjusted to allow for recovery of team members. 
D. Laboratory or Main Lab departments will complete the Lab Disaster Checklist 
(LBA204-A) and forward to Lab Compliance Officer. 
E. Physical Plant/Facility - Plant Services will assess the hospital building for 
structural damage, if necessary. If structural damage has occurred, Plant 
Services will ensure that the area is safe for use before it is repopulated. In the 
event Utility service was interrupted, Plant Services will ensure the service is 
repaired and returned as soon as possible. 
F. Financial  
1. Each department is responsible for ongoing tracking of expenses related 
to the emergency event and submitting these documents to the 
appropriate department as soon as possible following the event. 
2. Expenses include personnel, equipment, materials, and supplies. 
G. Risk Management and Claims will investigate any workers compensation 
general or professional liability claims as appropriate. 
H. Information Technology – See FMOLIS Disaster Recovery Plan 
 
REFERENCES 
OLOLRMC Environment of Care Disaster policies 
CAP Checklist: GEN.73800, GEN.73900 
 
REVISIONS 
2/1989 (created), 3/20/15, 10/6/17, 6/11/19 
 