OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 19 
LBA202 
 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA202 
CHEMICAL HYGIENE PLAN  
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 6/11/19 7/5/2019 7/5/2019 
Blood Donor Service  and Core Lab Director Review J Teague 6/26/2019 Origination Date 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 6/27/2019 8/2009 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 7/2/2019  
 
PURPOSE  
To establish the minimum requirements for compliance with OSHA's "Standard for 
Exposure to Hazardous Chemicals in Laboratories", 29 CFR 1910.1450 and to minimize 
exposure of laboratory personnel to health and physical hazards presented by hazardous 
chemicals used in laboratories.  
 
SCOPE  
This policy applies to all employees and students.  
 
DEFINITIONS 
• Chemical Hygiene Plan (CHP) - A written document that details how the 
laboratory will manage the hazardous chemicals that are present and used in the 
laboratories.  
• Departmental Laboratory Safety Coordinator (LSC) - The individual who has 
responsibility for administering a particular department's Chemical Hygiene Plan.  
• Hazard Communication Program- A written program developed and instituted 
order to comply with the OSHA Hazard Communication Standard (29 CFR 
1910.1200). This program sets forth the policies and procedures regarding Safety 
Data Sheets, container labeling, and employee training.  
• Hazard Communication Program Administrator- the Laboratory Director has 
overall management responsibility for the establishment of practices and 
procedures to implement the Hazard Communication Program. 
• Hazardous Chemical- Any chemical that may present a physical hazard or a 
health hazard.  
• Health Hazard- A chemical for which there is statistically significant evidence 
that acute or chronic health effects may occur in exposed employees.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 19 
LBA202 
• Hazardous Material Identification System (HMIS) - A labeling and hazard 
rating system developed by the National Paint and Coatings Association.  
• Label- Any written, printed or graphic sign or symbol displayed on or affixed to 
containers of hazardous chemicals. A label should identify the hazardous material, 
appropriate hazard warnings, and name and address of the manufacturer or other 
responsible party.  
• SDS (Safety Data Sheet) - A document developed and provided by the chemical 
manufacturer to inform employers of the properties and hazards of the chemical.  
• Non-Routine Task- A task that is conducted on an infrequent or non-routine 
basis that involves the potential exposure to hazardous chemicals (i.e., tank 
cleaning).  
• The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) - OSHA is part 
of the Department of Labor and is the regulatory and enforcement agency for 
safety and health in the industrial sector.  
• Physical Hazard- A chemical that is a combustible liquid, a compressed gas, 
explosive, flammable, an organic peroxide, an oxidizer, pyrophoric, unstable 
(reactive), or water-reactive.  
• The Laboratory Safety Officer- The individual designated as the Laboratory 
Safety officer is charged with the overall administration of the laboratory's 
compliance with OSHA's Laboratory Safety Standard.  
 
CHEMICAL HYGIENE PLAN 
In order to comply with the provisions of OSHA's Standard for Exposure to Hazardous 
Chemicals in Laboratories the following written Chemical Hygiene Program has been 
established. It is the intent that this document supplements, and not replaces, the Medical 
Center's Chemical Hygiene Program. It is intended to provide employees with specific 
information concerning departmental practices and procedures. All work units of the 
laboratory are covered by the practices and procedures outlined in this document and the 
Medical Center's Chemical Hygiene Plan. 
 
CHEMICAL HYGIENE PLAN AVAILABILITY 
The Chemical Hygiene Plan is a written policy maintained by OLOL Laboratory 
Administration and is readily available to interested employees.  
 
LABORATORY SAFETY COMMITTEE  
The Laboratory Safety Committee consists of a designated member from each 
department or Laboratory and meets Quarterly.  Offsite laboratories hold a joint meeting 
that consists of both Regulatory Compliance and Safety.  The Lab Safety Committee is 
responsible for the following:  
•  Provide oversight and assistance for managing the laboratory chemical safety 
program.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 19 
LBA202 
• Maintain representation from all affected departments.  
• Establish, implement and maintain a Department Chemical Hygiene Plan (DCHP) 
and ensure compliance with that plan.  
• Principal laboratory supervisors in areas engaged in the laboratory use of 
hazardous chemicals.  
• Ensure all operations are conducted in accordance with Chemical Hygiene Plan 
(CHP).  
• Ensure all students and employees working in their labs comply with CHP.  
• Employees and students engaged in the laboratory use of hazardous chemicals are 
responsible for complying with all requirements.  
• The Departmental Safety Committee is responsible for preparation, coordination 
and review of the Departmental Chemical Hygiene Plan and for providing 
technical assistance to laboratory workers.  
• Assist in the development of Departmental Chemical Hygiene Plan.  
• Determine Hygiene monitoring requirements.  
• Coordinate with Physician the medical examination requirements of exposed 
laboratory workers.  
• Monitor and inspect laboratories to determine compliance with federal, state and 
local health and safety regulations.  
• Assist with the development of safety training and education programs for CHP 
participants.  
• Review departmental Chemical Hygiene Plan.  
• Review of the Chemical Hygiene Plan implementation.  
 
DESIGNATED AREAS FOR THE USE OF PARTICULARLY HAZARDOUS 
MATERIALS  
• OLOL Main Laboratory  
o Chemistry Department 
o Microbiology Department 
o Transfusion Services Department 
o Hematology Department 
o Histology / Anatomic Pathology Department 
• Livingston Laboratory 
• North Baton Rouge Laboratory 
• Assumption Community Hospital Laboratory 
• Ascension Laboratory 
• Children’s Hospital Laboratory 
 
INFORMATION AND TRAINING  
Each department shall ensure that all Laboratory Employees in the department who are 
involved in the laboratory use of hazardous chemicals receive the information and 
training required by this policy.  
• The following information shall be provided to laboratory:  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 19 
LBA202 
o Personnel at the time of initial assignment to the laboratory. Occupational 
Exposure to Hazardous Chemicals in Laboratories "29 CFR 1910.1450”.   
o Location of the Medical Center and Departmental Chemical Hygiene Plan.  
o The permissible exposure limits and recommended exposure limits for 
chemicals are found on the Safety Data Sheet for that chemical. 
Permissible Exposure Levels are also found in OSHA PEL, 29 CFR 1910.  
o Signs and symptoms associated with exposures to hazardous chemicals 
used in the laboratory are found in the "Health Effects" section of the 
Safety Data Sheet for the chemical.  
o Additional safety reference material available includes:  
o Safety Data Sheets (SDS) received from the chemical supplier. SDS of 
chemicals are located on-line on TeamLink and in each applicable 
Department. 
• General training will consist of:  
o The contents of the OSHA standard, which governs the use of potentially 
hazardous chemicals in laboratories [29 CFR 1910.1450].  
o The location, availability and details of this Chemical Hygiene Plan.  
o The signs and symptoms associated with overexposure to hazardous 
chemicals used in the laboratory.  
o How laboratory employees can protect themselves from the potential 
hazards of the chemicals they work with including work practices, 
personal protective equipment, and emergency procedures.  
• Department specific training will consist of:  
o Applicable details of the Department Chemical Hygiene Plan.  
o Methods and observations that may be used to detect the presence or 
release of a unique hazardous chemical they may be using in that lab.  
o The physical and health hazards of unique hazardous chemicals in the 
work area.  
o The measures that can be taken to protect oneself from these hazards, 
including specific procedures the Department has implemented to protect 
persons from exposure to hazardous chemicals, such as engineering 
controls, appropriate safe work/lab practices, emergency procedures, and 
personal protective equipment to be used.  
• General training will be given to all new Laboratory Employees during 
Laboratory Orientation.  
• Records 
• Records documenting training will be kept for length of employment plus 
30 years.  
• Records of audits or inspections will be kept for 5 years by the department 
conducting the audit.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 5 of 19 
LBA202 
 
 
LABORATORY SAFETY RULES 
• Know the location of emergency showers, eyewash fountains, first aid kits, 
emergency exits, spill kits, and fire alarm pull stations. Know the location of the 
nearest telephone.  
• Know the location of Safety Data Sheets. Ensure that you have been trained on 
the Chemical Hygiene Plan.  
• No smoking, food, beverage, smokeless tobacco, or application of cosmetics in 
the laboratory, except in designated areas in which no chemicals are used or 
stored.  
• Dress appropriately. Long hair, neckties, or loose clothing should be tied back or 
otherwise secured. No sandals, open-toed or perforated shoes in the laboratory. 
Shorts or skirts are not to be worn when working with chemicals in a laboratory.  
• Appropriate eye protection will be worn at all times in laboratories.  
• Wear the appropriate personal protective equipment for the chemicals you are 
working with.  
• Gloves shall not be re-used 
• Comply with warning signs and labels.  
• Laboratories with special or unusual hazards should be posted with appropriate 
warning signs including: laser warning signs, radioactivity warning signs, 
biological hazard warning signs, etc.  
• Do not directly smell or taste any chemical. Do not pipette or siphon by mouth.  
• Containers should be closed when not in use.  
• Always add acid to water. (Alphabetically, acid comes before water).  
• Perform only those experiments or procedures that you are authorized to do by the 
person in charge of the lab.  
• Report all injuries, fires, and accidents to your supervisor or instructor.  
• If you have a question about a procedure or the hazards of a chemical, ask your 
supervisor or instructor before performing the procedure.  
• Never work alone in a laboratory or chemical storage area unless other individuals 
know of your presence and appropriate means are available to summon assistance.  
• Access to emergency equipment, safety showers, eye wash stations, and exits 
must never be blocked.  
• All chemicals must be labeled with at least the identity of the contents of the 
container and the potential hazards associated with the chemical.  
• Waste materials must be properly labeled and stored in an appropriate manner.  
• Wash promptly with mild soap and water after any chemical contacts the skin.  
• Avoid inhalation of chemicals. Do not "sniff" chemicals to determine their 
identity or for other reasons.   
 
CHEMICAL MANAGEMENT 
In keeping with overall laboratory policy, no chemical material will be brought into the OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 6 of 19 
LBA202 
department, for any reason, unless it is accompanied by a current SDS and the material 
has been appropriately purchased through the Medical Center's Purchasing Department. 
• An inventory of all chemicals stored in a laboratory will be maintained in each 
laboratory section. 
• Before any containers of chemicals are stored in a lab, they must be entered 
labeled, inventoried, and a SDS must be available.  
• Prior to disposal of any original chemical container, the item will be removed 
from the inventory system.  
 
LABELING 
• All containers of hazardous substances shall be appropriately labeled. The 
manufacturer's label shall not be removed from a container as long as the material 
or residues of the material remain in the container.  
• All containers stored in common use storage areas, refrigerators or cabinets will 
be labeled with person responsible for the material.  
• All secondary containers into which hazardous substances are transferred or 
prepared shall also contain labels that provide the following information:  
o Identity of the hazardous substance.  
o NFPA Diamond. For containers smaller than one pint, descriptions can be 
limited to signal words, such as "FLAMMABLE" or "POISON".  
o Date of preparation or transfer.  
• All hazardous materials collection containers should be labeled with the 
following:  
o Type waste in container. (e.g. Non-Halogenated, Halogenated, Acid, Base, 
etc.)  
o Statement or statements that call attention to the particular hazardous 
properties of the material. (e.g., flammable, corrosive, etc.)  
o List of chemicals added to container.  
• Labeling is not required for portable containers into which hazardous chemicals 
are transferred from labeled containers that are intended only for the immediate 
use of the individual who performs the transfer.  
 
CHEMICAL, FLAMMABLE AND CORROSIVE STORAGE 
• Shelves used for chemical storage shall be of substantial construction and 
adequately braced. Shelves shall be provided with a 0.5 - 1.0 inch lip or guard 
when used for the storage of individual containers, except when containers are 
stored in a hazardous material storage cabinet.  
• Chemicals must not be stored on shelves more than five feet above the floor.  
• Containers are to be arranged in such a manner as to allow all labels to be seen. 
When this is impossible, the shelf may be labeled with a list of contents.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 7 of 19 
LBA202 
• Chemicals should not be stored on the floor and should not protrude into traffic 
areas.  
• Materials that are sensitive to light shall be stored in containers designed to 
protect the contents from light.  
• Food shall not be stored or consumed in areas where toxic chemicals are used or 
stored.  
• Hallways and stairways should not be used as storage areas.  
• Incompatible chemicals must not be stored together. 
• Flammable Liquid Storage  
o Flammable liquids have flash points below 100 F. Combustible liquids 
have flash point below 140 F. For the purposes of this section, any liquid 
having a flashpoint below 140 F will be considered to be flammable.  
o All secondary containers of flammables greater than 1 liter shall be of the 
safety can type meeting NFPA standards.  
o Storage of more than 25 gallons of flammable liquids shall be in 
flammable liquid storage cabinets meeting OSHA or NFPA 30 Flammable 
Liquid Codes.  
o Flammables shall not be stored in the same cabinet as oxidizers or water-
reactive materials.  
• Corrosives Storage  
o Corrosives shall not be stored under sinks or in other areas where 
plumbing, equipment, or shelving could be damaged by corrosive effects.  
o Strong acids (Ph<2) and strong bases (Ph>12.5) shall be stored separately. 
Where amounts are small, separation can be achieved by either all the 
acids or all the bases being stored in separate containers such as bottle 
carriers, spill pans, or other secondary containment.  
  
PRIOR APPROVAL MECHANISM  
Approval for the purchase of chemicals or compounds of an unusual nature must have 
prior authorization from the Laboratory Medical Director 
 
APPROVAL TO INITIATE OR CONTINUE 
Prior approval will be obtained from the appropriate designee for the following:  
• For changes in procedures that may affect reaction rates, changes in temperatures, 
or flammability.  
• When ingredient chemicals in a hazardous operation are substituted, added or 
deleted, or the amounts of chemicals are significantly increased or decreased.  
• For operations that are to be left unattended.  
• For hazardous operations performed by an individual working alone in a 
laboratory.  
• For hazardous operations involving pressurized or very exothermic reactions.  
• For hazardous operations involving use of flammables with flashpoints below 
100F, shock sensitive peroxides or corrosive gases.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 8 of 19 
LBA202 
• Approval to continue or proceed will be obtained from the appropriate designee:  
• When there is a failure of equipment, especially safety control measures such as 
fume hoods, clamp apparatus or temperature control.  
• When the procedure produces unexpected potentially hazardous results.  
• When signs and symptoms of chemical exposure are experienced.  
• The Section Supervisor will institute a review mechanism to give approval for the 
above items.  
 
GENERAL HOUSEKEEPING  
• Laboratories should be kept free of clutter. Working areas should be cleaned up at 
the end of each operation and at the end of each day.  
• Small spills of chemicals should be cleaned up immediately. Spills that require 
cleanup measures beyond general housekeeping by laboratory personnel should 
be reported to the Safety Officer.  
• Safety showers, eyewash fountains, and fire extinguisher shall be free from any 
obstruction that would prevent access and use. Access to emergency exits shall be 
kept clear at all times.  
• Circuit breaker panels shall have an unobstructed clearance of 30".  
• The floor shall be kept clean and free of slip hazards by reasonable cleaning and 
immediate cleanup of spills.  
• Old containers, compromised containers, and solid chemical wastes should be 
disposed of promptly and not allowed to accumulate.  
 
INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF PROTECTIVE DEVICES  
• Temperature control and over-temperature shutoff devices on heating equipment 
should be tested in accordance with manufacturer recommendations to ensure 
proper operation.  
• All automatic shutoff devices should be tested in accordance with manufacturer 
recommendations to ensure proper operation.  
• Records of inspection and testing of above equipment will be maintained in the 
Department for three years.  
• Fume hood performance will be evaluated at least annually by the Section 
Supervisor.  
• Explosion shields and isolation devices should be visually inspected by the user 
for cracks or other damage before each use.  
• Safety showers and emergency eyewash fountains will be inspected monthly and 
periodically tested. Logs indicating date inspected and the inspector's name will 
be attached on or near the shower or eyewash.  
 
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 
• Each Department will coordinate establishing requirements for PPE     
• Safety goggles (liquid and vapor tight) should be worn when setting up, taking OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 9 of 19 
LBA202 
down or monitoring experiments involving non corrosive chemicals.  
• Safety eye protection will be worn at all times in laboratories. 
• Face shields shall be worn for any operation involving corrosives.  
• Skin Protection  
o When working with those substances that are readily absorbed by the skin, 
or with substances that are highly corrosive to the skin, appropriate 
protection shall be provided by the department to protect the laboratory 
worker from skin contact.  
o Skin protection may take the form of shields, isolation of the procedure, 
gloves, aprons, or other such protective equipment.  
o Gloves and aprons should be selected according to the chemical resistance 
of the protective material to the chemical to be used. This information can 
be obtained by the supplier of the product and is usually presented in a 
chemical resistance chart in the supplier's catalog. The Laboratory Safety 
officer should be contacted to assist in selecting the proper personal 
protective equipment.  
 
EMPLOYEE EXPOSURES TO CHEMICALS  
Whenever an employee has reason to believe that he/she has been overexposed to a 
chemical material in the work area, he/she must immediately report the situation to 
his/her immediate supervisor who in turn notify the laboratory Safety Coordinator or the 
Department of Employee Health immediately. The Safety Coordinator and the supervisor 
will investigate the circumstances of the incident. The Medical Center’s Safety Officer 
and Employee Health Dept. will be apprised of the results of the investigation and make a 
determination as to whether any medical consultations or examinations are warranted. 
In the event of a major chemical release, spill, fire, or explosion, the Medical Center's 
Safety Officer, Risk Management, Housekeeping, and Plant Services Departments will be 
notified immediately of the circumstances surrounding the incident and appropriate 
emergency response actions can be instituted.   
 
MEDICAL CONSULTATION AND EXAMINATIONS  
The Medical Center provides all persons involved in the laboratory use of chemicals an 
opportunity to receive medical attention, including any follow-up examinations the 
examining physician determines to be necessary, under the following circumstances:  
• Whenever a laboratory employee develops signs or symptoms associated with a 
hazardous chemical to which the employee or student may have been exposed in 
the laboratory.  
• Where industrial hygiene monitoring in a laboratory reveals an exposure level 
routinely above the action level (or in the absence of an action level, the 
Permissible Exposure Limit) to a substance listed by OSHA requiring medical 
examinations; or  
• Whenever an event takes place in the laboratory such as a spill, leak, explosion or 
other occurrence resulting in the likelihood of a hazardous exposure.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 10 of 19 
LBA202 
• Any employee showing signs or symptoms they believe are due to exposure while 
working in the laboratory must immediately report to ECU for determination of 
need for medical examination.  
• All medical examinations in accordance with this document shall be performed by 
or under the direct supervision of a licensed physician and shall be provided at no 
cost to the exposed laboratory employee.  
• The laboratory is required to provide the following to the physician:  
o The identity of the hazardous chemical(s) to which the laboratory 
employee or laboratory student may have been exposed and a copy of the 
SDS, if available;  
o A description of the conditions under which the exposure occurred 
including quantitative exposure data, if available; and  
o A description of the signs and symptoms of the exposure that the 
laboratory employee or laboratory student is experiencing, if any.  
• The examining physician will submit to Employee Health Department a written 
statement containing the following. The written statement from the physician may 
not discuss or reveal any findings that are not specifically related to the 
occupational exposure to the hazardous chemical(s).  
o Any recommendations for additional medical examinations or follow-up.  
o The results of the medical examination and any tests that were conducted 
in conjunction with the examination that are specifically related to the 
exposure and that are not considered medically confidential.  
o Any medical condition uncovered during the course of the examination 
that may place the employee at increased risk as the result of exposure to 
the hazardous chemical(s).  
o A statement that the physician has informed the employee of the results of 
the consultation or examination and of any medical condition that may 
require further examination or treatment.  
 
LABORATORY VENTILATION AND LABORATORY (FUME) HOODS 
• Per hour General laboratory ventilation should not be less than 8 air changes.  
• All local exhaust ventilation systems shall be checked every six months to assure 
they are mechanically operable. During these checks, routine maintenance, as 
recommended by the manufacturer will also be performed.  
• Any employee who has reason to believe that a local exhaust ventilation system is 
not functioning properly, shall immediately report the suspected problem to their 
supervisor, Laboratory Safety Coordinator, Employee Health Department, or 
Plant Services.  
• All local fume hoods should be checked every six months to assure that there is 
adequate air flow. Fume hoods should have a minimum face velocity of 100 linear 
feet per minute with the sash in the position it will be kept during normal 
operations. ENV Environmental Services provides required hood inspections. 
• Records of all measurements made to check the operability and adequacy of 
laboratory exhaust ventilation systems will be maintained in the Plant Services OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 11 of 19 
LBA202 
Department.  
• Laboratory Hoods  
o The Medical Center's Safety Director is to be consulted before additions of 
safety hoods.  
o Laboratory hoods should not be relied upon to provide explosion 
protection unless specifically designed to do so.  
o When perchloric acid is evaporated or heated above ambient temperatures 
in a laboratory hood, the hood should be specifically designed for 
perchloric acid.  
o For new installations or modifications of existing installations, fixed 
electrical services and their controls should be located external to the hood 
and within easy reach.  
o For new installations of modifications of existing installations, controls for 
other services (gas, air, water, etc.) should be located external to the hood 
and within easy reach.  
o Sash openings should be kept to a minimum.  
o Chemicals and apparatus should be located within the hood and should be 
kept at least six inches behind the plane of the sash.  
o Personnel should keep their faces outside the plane of the sash.  
o Storage in hoods should be kept to an absolute minimum.  
o Laboratory personnel must recognize and be aware that:  
▪ Laboratory fume hoods are a backup for other safety devices 
such as traps and condensers.  
▪ All equipment used in a fume hood should be kept at least six 
inches from the front edge.  
▪ All equipment must be effectively secured to prevent it from 
being inadvertently knocked over and broken.  
▪ Fume hood doors must be kept in a position that will provide 
an adequate air flow while reactions or procedures are being 
conducted.  
▪ Fume hood fans should be left running whenever there are 
chemicals present in the hood, regardless of whether or not a 
procedure is being performed.  
▪ Fume hoods should not be used to store chemicals or 
apparatus.  
▪ Personnel must be aware of procedures to follow if the power 
to a local exhaust ventilation system should fail.  
 
LAB HOOD USAGE 
The following should always be considered when using a hood:  
• Keep fume hood exhaust fans on at all times.  
• If possible, position the fume hood sash so that work is performed by extending 
the arms under or around the sash, placing the head in front of the sash, and 
keeping the glass between the worker and the chemical source. The worker views 
the procedure through the glass, which will act as a primary barrier if a spill, OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 12 of 19 
LBA202 
splash, or explosion should occur.  
• Keep sash closed when an operation is left running.  
• Avoid opening and closing the fume hood sash rapidly, and avoid swift arm and 
body movements in front of or inside the hood. These actions may increase 
turbulence and reduce the effectiveness of fume hood containment.  
• Place chemical sources and apparatus at least 6 inches behind the face of the 
hood. A colored stripe may be painted on, or tape applied to, the hood work 
surface 6 inches back from the face to serve as a reminder. Quantitative fume 
hood containment tests reveal that the concentration of contaminant in the 
breathing zone can be 300 times higher from a source located at the front of the 
hood face than from a source placed at least 6 inches back. This concentration 
declines further as the source is moved farther toward the back of the hood.  
• Place equipment as far to the back of the hood as practical without blocking the 
bottom baffle.  
• Separate and elevate each instrument by using blocks or racks so that air can flow 
easily around all apparatus.  
• Do not use large pieces of equipment in a hood, because they tend to cause dead 
spaces in the airflow and reduce the efficiency of the hood.  
• If a large piece of equipment emits fumes or heat outside a fume hood, then have 
a special-purpose hood designed and installed to ventilate that particular device. 
This method of ventilation is much more efficient than placing the equipment in a 
fume hood, and it will consume much less air.  
• Do not use for storage of equipment or chemicals. Keep only the equipment and 
chemicals needed for current operation.  
• Do not modify fume hoods in any way that adversely affects the hood 
performance. This includes adding, removing, or changing any of the fume hood 
components, such as baffles, sashes, airfoils, liners, and exhaust connections.  
• Function verification for fume hoods are made performed and documented by 
ENV environmental Services.  Verification reports are available in various 
laboratory sections where fume hoods are located. 
 
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 
• General  
o Extension cords shall not be used as permanent wiring. Power strips that 
are equipped with a current protection device (circuit breaker) may be 
used. A power strip will not be plugged into another power strip. 
o Electrical receptacles must not rest on laboratory bench tops.  
o Power cords on appliances should be inspected for damage regularly. 
Frayed or otherwise damaged cords should be replaced before using.  
o To eliminate exposed wiring, outlet boxes or junction boxes shall be 
provided with cover plates and receptacles shall be provided with 
faceplates.  
o Ground-fault circuit interrupters should be used over sinks and in other 
wet areas. Ground-fault circuit interrupters should be actuated every six 
months to insure proper function.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 13 of 19 
LBA202 
o Circuit breakers on panels shall be individual labeled to indicate the 
equipment or location of equipment served by the device.  
• Electrical apparatus  
o Unattended electrical heating equipment should be provided with a 
manual reset over-temperature shutoff switch, in addition to normal 
temperature controls.  
o While air powered mixers are preferred, electric motors may be used to 
drive blenders or stirrers in open containers of flammable liquids or 
combustible liquids heated above their flash points provided they meet 
Class I, Division 2 locations as defined in Article 500-5 of the National 
Electrical Code.  
o Electrical equipment and apparatus in cold rooms should be protected 
from moisture due to condensation. 
o  All apparatus use in the laboratory must be approved by a recognized 
approval agency (UP, ASTM, etc) or meet accepted NFPA or ANSI 
standards.  
 
LABORATORY REFRIGERATORS 
• Laboratory refrigerators used for storing or cooling flammable liquids will be in 
compliance with NFPA 45 - Fire Protection for Laboratories Using Chemicals, 
section 9.2.2.2 and A.9.2.2.2.  
• Self-defrosting refrigerators, either modified or unmodified, will not be used for 
storing or cooling flammable liquids.  
• General purpose refrigerators are not to be used for the storage of flammable or 
reactive liquids or solids. They shall be labeled "Not for Storage of Flammable or 
Reactive Liquids or Solids."  
• Refrigerators used for storage of chemicals must not be used to store food, 
beverages or cosmetics. They shall be labeled "Not for Storage of Food, 
Beverages or Cosmetics."  
 
GLASSWARE 
• Accidents involving glassware are a leading cause of laboratory injuries.  
• Careful handling and storage procedures should be used to avoid damaging 
glassware. Damaged items should be discarded or repaired.  
• Adequate hand protection should be used when inserting glass tubing into rubber 
stoppers or corks or when placing rubber tubing on glass hose connections. 
Tubing should be polished or rounded and lubricated, and hands should be held 
close together to limit movement of glass should fracture occur. The use of plastic 
or metal connectors should be considered.  
• Vacuum-jacketed glass apparatus should be handled with extreme care to prevent 
implosions. Equipment such as Dewar flasks should be taped or shielded. Only 
glassware designed for vacuum work should be used for that purpose.  
• Hand protection should be used when picking up broken glass. (Small pieces 
should be swept up with a brush into a dustpan.)  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 14 of 19 
LBA202 
• Proper instruction should be provided in the use of glass equipment designed for 
specialized tasks, which can represent unusual risks for the first time user. (For 
example, separatory funnels containing volatile solvents can develop considerable 
pressure during use.)  
 
WORKING ALONE  
Working with hazardous chemicals alone, especially after regular hours in a laboratory, 
poses an additional risk to life and property. If an unanticipated event occurs and the 
researcher is incapacitated, available safety equipment, such as emergency showers, fire 
extinguishers, or antidotes, become worthless to provide emergency assistance to injured 
individuals or to mitigate the losses incurred.  
Each Section needs to incorporate a working alone procedure suited to the needs of the 
area served by the Plan.  
Some provisions that may be incorporated into individual or Department Chemical 
Hygiene Plans are as follows:  
• Prohibiting working alone in laboratories, or prohibiting working alone for certain 
procedures.  
• Buddy system  
o Arrange with someone working nearby to periodically check on one 
another.  
o Arrange to take scheduled breaks with another researcher working nearby.  
o Arrange to periodically check in with another person.  
 
UNATTENDED OPERATIONS  
• Unattended electrical heating equipment should be provided with a manual reset 
over-temperature shutoff switch, in addition to normal temperature controls.  
• Unattended operations that depend on a flowing cooling water supply should be 
provided with a manual reset shutoff device that will shut off the heat supply upon 
loss of cooling water.  
• Arrangements should be made, where possible, to periodically check unattended 
operations for abnormal conditions.  
• For operations left running after normal hours, leave the lights on and leave a sign 
on the door indicating that an unattended procedure is in progress. The sign 
should also give emergency phone numbers in case of incident.  
 
HIGH HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES AND CHEMICAL REQUIRING 
APPROVAL TO PURCHASE 
High hazardous substances include "regulated carcinogens," "select carcinogens," 
"reproductive toxins," and "toxic gases," "explosives," and "dioxins." 
These substances require special handling and are expensive to dispose of.  Often the 
disposal fees run into the hundreds of dollars per pound. Prior approval must be received 
before any of these types of chemicals are purchased.   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 15 of 19 
LBA202 
The following High Hazardous Substance Precautions will be followed: 
• Departments will establish designated areas for the use of high hazardous 
substances. A designated area may be the entire laboratory, an area of the 
laboratory, or a fume hood or glove box. High hazard substances shall be limited 
to designated areas.  
• The location of the designated area shall be posted and persons working within 
the designated area shall be informed of the hazardous substances used there.  
• Prior approval must be obtained when planning to use a High Hazard Material. 
See  Approval to Use High Hazard Material. Before using a chemical for the first 
time, always consult the manufacturer's Safety Data Sheet (SDS) to determine if 
the material meets the definition of a high hazard chemical. If the material meets 
the definition, attempt to find a less hazardous substitute material. If a substitute 
material cannot be found, request approval to use.  
• Storage or consumption of food, storage or use of containers of beverages, storage 
or application of cosmetics, smoking, storage of smoking materials, tobacco 
products or other products for chewing, or the chewing of such products, shall be 
prohibited in designated areas.  
• All high hazard materials should be handled so as to prevent skin contact, 
accidental ingestion, and inhalation.  
• Use of containment devices and methods for particularly hazardous substances.  
• Containment devices and methods should be used to minimize exposure to 
persons and to prevent contamination of areas outside the designated area.  
• Use of particularly hazardous substances in a manner that may produce vapors, 
dusts, mists, particularly hazardous gases or other airborne particulates shall be 
under a laboratory hood, in a glove box, or in a closed system.  
• Laboratory fume hoods in which other substances are used shall have an average 
face velocity of 100 linear feet per second, with no area falling below 70 linear 
feet per second.  
• All mouth pipetting of high hazard chemicals is strictly prohibited. Liquid 
transfers must be made using pipette bulbs, automatic pipetting devices, or 
syringes.  
• Work surfaces that may become contaminated with particularly hazardous 
substances shall be protected from contamination.  
• When working with regulated carcinogens, laboratory vacuum systems shall be 
protected with a double cold trap or with disposable absolute filters.  
• When working with beta-propiolactone, bischloromethyl ether, methyl 
chloromethyl ether, or ethyleneimine, a double cold trap shall be used.  
• Persons working in the designated area shall remove protective equipment and 
wash their hands and forearms before engaging in other activities or before eating, 
drinking, smoking, or using toilet facilities.  
• Appropriate protective gloves should be worn. For most solid materials, latex 
gloves are adequate. For most liquids, nitrile rubber gloves provide the greatest 
measure of protection. If there is a question as to the proper glove material for a 
specific purpose, consult laboratory supervision or the SDS.  
• Procedures for safe removal of contaminated waste:  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 16 of 19 
LBA202 
o All waste contaminated with particularly hazardous substances should be 
collected in impervious containers that are compatible with the 
contaminant.  
o Wastes contaminated with different substances that are incompatible shall 
not be placed in the same container.  
o Contaminated sharps, contaminated broken glassware, etc. should be 
placed in a sturdy container such as a cardboard box and sealed before 
placing in a collection container.  
o All containers should be labeled with the contaminant(s) and if the 
contaminant is a carcinogen, the words "Cancer-suspect Agent." 
• Decontamination procedures: 
o Laboratory workers should consider whether or not decontamination of 
designated areas is appropriate. Decontamination procedures will vary 
according to the type of substance used.  
o Small spills should be cleaned up immediately and the area 
decontaminated.  
o All spills that cannot be cleaned up by lab employees are to be reported 
immediately to the Medical Center Safety Officer, Laboratory Safety 
Coordinator or a laboratory Supervisor. 
• Special precautions for Reproductive Toxins  
o Women of child bearing age must be apprised of the chemicals in their 
work area that are known to be embryotoxic and/or affect the reproductive 
system. Males must also be apprised of the chemicals in their work area 
that are known to affect the male reproductive system. Documentation of 
such notification will be maintained by laboratory supervision. 
o  All employees who believe they may be pregnant or have confirmation of 
pregnancy should notify their supervisor immediately. Following 
notification, a determination will be made if there are chemicals being 
used in the individual's work area that may present a potential hazard to 
the developing fetus. If such materials are being used, the employee must 
be informed and directed to consult with her physician to determine need 
for temporary transfer.   
 
COMPRESSED GASES 
• Compressed gases should not be transferred from one container to another except 
by the manufacturer or distributor. Exception - refilling SCBAs from breathable 
air cylinders by authorized personnel.  
• Containers shall be legibly marked to identify the contents and give the 
appropriate precautionary information (e.g., flammable).  
• Containers shall be stored upright and secured, with caps on when not being used. 
Combustible material or formed metal chains are not recommended to secure 
cylinders. Chains or other securing mechanisms should be located between one-
third and two-thirds of the height of the container.  
• Oxygen and oxidizing gases shall be stored separately from flammable and highly 
combustible material.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 17 of 19 
LBA202 
• Pressure reducing regulators should be used when withdrawing contents from the 
cylinder.  
• Valve outlets and pressure relief valves should be directed away from personnel at 
all times.  
• Valves on cylinders being moved, cylinders that are not in use, or on empty 
cylinders shall be closed and capped.  
• Do not exchange regulators or other appliances used with one gas with similar 
equipment used with other gases. Oils and lubricants should not be used on 
fittings for oxygen or other oxidizing gases. 
•  Do not force connections that do not fit.  
• Use transport dollies to move cylinders.  
 
CRYOGENIC MATERIALS 
• The primary hazard of cryogenic materials is their extreme coldness. They and all 
surfaces they cool can cause severe burns if allowed to contact the skin.  
• Cryogenic fluids are stored or handled only in containers designed for such use.  
• When personal contact with a cryogenic fluid is possible, (as when preparing cold 
baths or dispensing liquid nitrogen) full face shields should be worn. Wearing of 
watches, rings, or other items that may trap the cryogenic material should be 
avoided.  
• When gloves are worn while handling cryogenic materials, they should be dry, 
impervious and loose enough to be easily tossed off the hands. Potholders are 
preferred for handling cryogenic materials.  
• Lab coats should be worn while handling cryogenic materials. Open toe shoes and 
sandals should not be worn.  
• Cryogenic materials should be dispensed and used in areas with good ventilation. 
Laboratory workers should avoid lowering their head into dry ice chests or 
directly over cooling baths. When transporting dry ice, or materials packaged in 
dry ice, the package should not be carried in the passenger compartment of the 
vehicle. 
•  Cryogenic material may provide an oxygen enriched atmosphere by condensing 
and fractionating air. This situation may increase the fire and explosion hazard of 
flammable and combustible materials being cooled or materials located in the 
vicinity of the operation.  
• Dry ice should be added to cooling baths (or liquid added to dry ice) in small 
increments, allowing the foaming to stop before each addition.  
 
PEROXIDIZABLE MATERIALS 
• Peroxidizable materials should be purchased in amounts that are expected to be 
used within six months to one year. This practice will help ensure that others are 
used up before the manufacturer's expiration date.  
• Peroxidizables, opened or unopened, should be disposed of or tested for peroxides 
upon reaching the manufacturer's expiration date, or upon one year after receipt. If 
positive for peroxides, the peroxides may be removed or the materials may be OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 18 of 19 
LBA202 
disposed of by contacting the Safety Coordinator. Please be sure to label the date 
that the test for peroxides was performed and the date peroxides removed (if 
applicable). The new expiration date will be three months after the date tested for 
materials in List A, and one year after the date tested for materials in List B.  
o Containers should be marked with the date opened and, in the absence of a 
manufacturer's expiration date, with the date received. Containers should 
also be marked with the date that the last test for peroxides was done. 
o Ethers should be disposed of without opening if there are visible crystals 
around the cap, or if the container is in a grossly corroded condition. 
Crystals visible in the container should be brought to the attention of the 
supervisor or Safety Coordinator.  
o Test for peroxides before distilling (even previously unopened ethers) and 
upon three months after opening List A and after one year of opening List 
B materials:  
▪ List A Peroxide hazard on storage - Test or dispose in 3 months  
• Isopropyl ether;  
• Divinyl acetylene;  
• Vinylidene chloride;  
• Potassium metal;  
• Sodium amide  
▪ List B Peroxide hazard on concentration - Test or dispose in 12 
months  
• Isopropyl ether;  
• Diethyl ether;  
• Divinyl acetylene;  
• Tetrahydrofuran;  
• Vinylidene chloride  
• Diacetylene;  
• Potassium metal;  
• Methyl acetylene;  
• Sodium amide;  
• Dioxane;  
• Acetal  
• Decahydronaphthalene (Decalin);  
• Tetrahydronaphthalene (Tetralin) 
•  Ethylene glycol dimethyl ether;  
• Cyclohexene;  
• Vinyl ethers  
• Diethylene glycol dimethyl ether;  
• Dicyclopentadiene  
 
PERCHLORIC ACID  
• Use goggles for eye protection whenever the acid is handled.  
• In wet combustion with perchloric acid, treat the sample first with nitric acid to OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 19 of 19 
LBA202 
destroy easily oxidizable matter.  
• Any procedure involving heating of the perchloric acid should be conducted in a 
ventilated hood equipped with water wash down. 
•  Perchloric acid hoods should be constructed of materials that are acid resistant, 
non-reactive and impervious to perchloric acid, such as stainless steel.  
• Organic material should not be stored in the perchloric hood. 
•  Do not allow perchloric acid to come in contact with strong dehydrating agents. 
(Concentrated sulfuric acid, anhydrous phosphorous pentoxide, etc.)  
• Perchloric acid should be used only in standard analytical procedures from well 
recognized analytical texts. Researchers should take the properties and hazards of 
perchloric acid into consideration before use.  
• If a laboratory hood or exhaust system has been exposed to perchloric acid heated 
above ambient temperature, tests should be conducted for explosive perchlorates 
before any inspection, cleaning, maintenance, or any other work is done on any 
part of the exhaust system or hood interior.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
29 CFR 1910.1450 OSHA Standard for Exposure to Hazardous Chemicals in 
Laboratories.  
Prudent Practices for Handling Hazardous Chemicals in laboratories. National Research 
Council. Washington, D.C. National Academy Press, 1995.  
CRC Handbook of Laboratory Safety 4th edition. A.K. Furr, ed. Boca Raton, Fl: CRC 
Press, 1995.  
Improving Safety in the Chemical Laboratory: A Practical Guide 2nd ed. J. A. Young, ed. 
New York: Wiley: 1991.   
 
  
REVISIONS 
8/2009 (created), 3/20/2015, 9/29/17, 6/11/19 
 
 
 
 