OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 2 
LBA305 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA305 
 
PATIENT REPORTING  
 
PURPOSE  
To describe the process of reporting patient data using the computer system at OLOL. 
 
 
PROCEDURE 
Upon completion and verification by the laboratory staff, laboratory results appear in the 
EPIC computer system and are available for review in the patient’s chart by the clinical 
staff.  Anatomic pathology reports and certain referral lab results are interfaced into 
EPIC.  Reports are faxed/printed to physician offices as requested.   Cumulative reports 
can be found in the patient’s medical record.  When required, a complete copy of 
archived patient results may be reprinted and will include original reference ranges and 
interpretive comments, including any flags or footnotes that were present in the original 
report, including the time and date of the original report. 
 
Outpatient and outreach patient reports are interfaced into the Atlas system or autofaxed 
by the computer system to printers or fax machines that have been verified to be secure 
lines.  In addition, doctor report hard copies are mailed to physician offices and clinics 
when requested. 
 
All manual and automated results are checked against reportable range and critical value 
criteria before each test is accepted and reported by the computer.  System data tables are 
set up to detect alert values before results are reported.  All results are checked against a 
defined reportable range, feasible limits, and critical values for the test in question.  It is 
ensured that the appropriate number of decimal places are present.  The ranges are set up 
when each individual laboratory tests is built.  These ranges can be found on the data map 
for each test.  The computer system audits the trail of this process. 
 
The system provides for commenting on specimen quality that may compromise the 
accuracy of analytic results such as hemolysis, lipemia, and hypercoagulation.  Certain 
tests are set up to autoverify by the system if the results fall within set parameters.  Tests 
that do not autoverify are reviewed by authorized personnel who then verify the accuracy 
of the input data before final acceptance.  In the event of critical or aberrant results, 
appropriate actions are taken. 
 
When multiple identical analyzers are used, they are uniquely identified so that test 
results may be appropriately traced back to the appropriate instrument.   
 
Periodic compliance audits are performed to verify that patient results are accurately 
transmitted from the point of data entry to the point of reporting.  Calculations, 
algorithms, and/or rules involving reportable patient results are rechecked and 
documented to ensure accuracy.  Calculations which are performed on patient data by the 
computer system are reviewed monthly within the chemistry and hematology department, OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 2 
LBA305 
or when a system change is made that may affect calculations.  All calculated values are 
reviewed at least every two years. 
 
REVISIONS 
10/2009 (created), 3/15/15, 10/4/17 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    By    Date 
 Prepared/Revised D. Leger 10/4/17 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 10/13/2017 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 10/12/2017 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 10/16/2017 
Medical Director Review A Harton 10/7/2017 
 Effective Date 10/16/2017 
 Origination Date 10/2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 