OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 1 of 2 
LBA401 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA401 
LABCORP PROCESSES 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 6/11/2020 7/22/2020 7/22/2020 
Lab Administration Review J. Teague 7/21/2020 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 7/10/2020 6/11/2020 
 
 
I. SCOPE: 
To provide guidance on LabCorp processes for specimens received into OLOLRMC and 
Affiliate Laboratories. 
II. POLICY: 
Upon receipt of LabCorp specimens into the laboratory, collection, handling, processing, and 
requisitioning is performed in accordance with the specifications of LabCorp. 
III. PROCEDURES: 
A. Patient Demographic Update Procedure: 
Incoming interface updates for patient demographics will not process into Epic 
Beaker. The updates will create an error message that will default into a work queue 
which will be resolved with the assistance of LabCorp personnel when needed. To 
update patient demographics such as patient name, gender, and date of birth, use the 
Requisition Entry application. 
1.  Enter the Beaker Specimen ID in the Specimen Inquiry application and then 
select the Requisition Hyperlink. 
2. Select Requisition Entry, update the necessary information, and then Accept 
to close the activity. 
3. Enter the Beaker Specimen ID into Result Entry and then select Result 
Correction Authorization. 
4. Upon authorization, open the specimen in Result Entry by selecting Edit. 
5. Prior to final verification of the result, ensure that the information is updated 
and correct. 
6. An updated result message will be sent to LabCorp. 
B. Test Cancellation Procedure:  
Test cancellations from LabCorp do not interface into Epic Beaker. If LabCorp test 
requests interface into Epic Beaker and are not performed, the test requests must be 
manually cancelled with a reason for the cancellation. 
C. Additional Testing Requests (Add-On Testing) Procedure: 
Additional testing requests will interface into Epic Beaker using the same patient 
account but will be assigned a different Specimen ID from the original specimen. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 2 of 2 
LBA401 
Additional testing requests placed in the Epic Beaker Specimen Update application 
will add the tests to the original specimen ID. 
D. Undefined Test Requests Procedure:  
If not orderable in Epic Beaker, an invalid test code mapping or a new test code will 
generate an interface error message when the test requests are interfaced from 
LabCorp. Interface error messages will default into a work queue which will be 
resolved with the assistance of LabCorp personnel when needed. Specimens received 
into the laboratory without orders will be handled using the Downtime Procedure 
below. 
E. LabCorp Interface Downtime Procedure: 
If the interface between LabCorp and Epic Beaker are not communicating (interface 
downtime), the specimens on the LabCorp manifest will not be listed in Epic Beaker. 
Follow the outlined process below if the interface is not functioning. 
1. Notify LabCorp and FMOLHS Information Systems. 
2. Specimens that have limited stability are to be registered to the LabCorp 
Clinical Account and testing performed immediately.  
3. Downtime Specimen numbers will be created for any tests that need to be 
performed.  This number must be entered in order for the report to cross back. 
4. Specimens that do NOT have limited stability can be prepared for storage (i.e., 
centrifuged, aliquoted, etc.) and then stored appropriately for future testing. 
5. When test requests are downloaded, testing is to be performed; therefore, the 
interface must be monitored regularly for updates. 
6. Any test requests placed during downtime are to be sequestered into an 
assigned location. 
7. For extended downtime procedures, requested tests on the manifest will be 
registered to the LabCorp Clinical Account and testing performed. 
8. Print patient reports for all patients included on the manifest. 
NOTE: Please refer to Lab Policy LBA016 – Computer Downtime for detailed 
instructions on managing all lab downtimes both expected and unexpected. 
 
IV. REVISIONS: 
6/11/2020 (created) 