OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA  70808 
Page 1 of 4 
LBA407 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA407 
OUTREACH REGISTRATION PROCEDURE 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By A Dufrechou 08/10/17 4/9/2018 4/9/2018 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 3/7/2018 Origination Date 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 3/2/2018 7/2010 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 3/1/2018  
Medical Director Review A Harton 3/18/2018  
 
 
PURPOSE 
The Lake Lab Services (LLS) Outreach Registration procedure is vital to ensuring correct 
and efficient lab orders for all patients.  All team members must fully understand all steps 
of Patient Registration and follow accordingly.  There may be slight differences per 
clinic.  Contact supervisory staff if there are any discrepancies.   
 
PROCEDURE 
All specimens received into LLS Outreach Department at OLOL Laboratory are 
accompanied by a doctor’s order, either on paper or through an EMR, with the following 
information listed but not limited to:  Name, DOB, SSN, ordering doctor, facility, 
diagnosis code, insurance information, and tests to be ordered.  Outreach registration is 
performed in Requisition Entry.   
 
I. Specimen and Requisition Check 
A. Write specimen count on bottom right hand corner of requisition, if applicable 
B. Write bag number on top of requisition, if applicable 
C. Check name on requisition and specimen to ensure that they match 
D. Initial requisition 
E. For specimens that are ordered through EMR without a paper order; receive 
into the lab and add collector’s initials if applicable. 
 
II. Registration Procedure 
A. In Requisition Entry, enter the Client number with LALK in front or name 
located at the top right hand corner of the requisition into the “Submitter” box.  
If submitter is available, move on to step E. 
B. If order sent on a non-OLOL requisition, enter client name.  If client is 
available move on to step E. 
C. If client name is not valid, try using the physician’s name as the client.  If 
available, move to step E. 
D. If neither B nor C are available, enter under 1407 (LLS general account) OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA  70808 
Page 2 of 4 
LBA407 
1. SMT name, Fax and phone will need to be entered. 
2. This will trigger a follow-up task to be created and the reports will 
automatically fax to the number provided.     
E. If there is more than one Location for the submitter, select proper location. 
F. Place cursor on Patient box.  Select the magnifying glass to access the patient 
search box. 
G. STOP. Place all patient information in the search box.  A 2ID must be 
performed at this point.  At least 2 demographics (Name, DOB, SSN) must 
match in order to select the patient.   
1. If 2-3 demographics match, select patient and move on to step I. 
2. If 2 demographics match, but 1 is off, select patient and create a 
follow-up task, selecting “Patient demographic discrepancy”. Add all 
information to communicate the discrepancy. 
3. If only 1 matches completely but looks suspicious, call client or 
provider’s office to confirm patient identification. 
4. If no match can be determined, select “New” and create New Patient.  
a.  Enter all information that is required on search screen 
b. Add all other information given including the address if 
available in the Req Entry screen. 
H. Authorizing/Ordering Provider 
1. See requisition for ordering provider.  Search in ordering provider 
field and select.  Move to step I. 
a. If none given, check to see if the provider is listed as the client 
on the requisition.   
b. If not given, call client or if after hours enter “Lab Unidentified 
Provider”.  This will create a follow-up task for call center to 
identify. 
2. If provider name is given but is not in the system, Select “Lab 
Unidentified Provider”.  This will create a follow-up task for call 
center to identify. 
a. Add “CC Result” to ensure that the provider receives a copy of 
the report. 
I. Bill type  
1. For Lake requisitions 
a. Bill account: Yes = Client bill 
b. Bill account: No = Patient bill 
2. If neither is checked or sent on requisition other than Lake requisition 
a. If  insurance information and dx code is supplied = patient bill 
i. call for dx code if not given or invalid 
b. If no other information is given = client bill 
J. Diagnosis Code 
1. Enter dx code.  System will determine if code is valid. 
a. If invalid and patient bill account, call client and obtain valid 
code.  If afterhours, leave blank.  This will create a follow-up 
task for call center to complete.    
2. If Client bill, leave blank if a dx code is not provided. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA  70808 
Page 3 of 4 
LBA407 
III. Procedure/lab orders 
A. Procedure 
1. Enter all tests listed on requisition or doctor’s order.  Use test catalog 
if having trouble finding test or test code.     
2.  Ask department or charge tech if clarification of test is needed.   
3. Call client if clarification is still needed.  Do not guess as to what the 
order may or may not be. 
4. Complete any missing required information (site, source, etc.) 
5. Comment:  Add any comments to lab req comments to be seen by lab 
staff only.  Any comments to be added to the report need to be on reg 
comments.  
6. Once all procedures are entered, select “create specimen”.   
7. Enter CORRECT date and time given on the provider orders.  If none 
is given, call client to confirm.  If unable to reach client, add (T) &(N) 
and create a follow-up task for call center to confirm. 
8. After Hours – Between the hours of 4:30pm and 7:00am Monday-
Friday, after 10:30am on Saturday, and all day Sunday create a Call-
back after-hours follow-up task per department for each technical 
section requiring a call or fax back.  Call center personnel will not be 
available at this time. 
 
IV. Complete 
A. Scanning – all paper orders must be scanned into the patient’s chart.  Place 
orders face down in desktop and hit scan.  Select “ADF” if there are multiple 
pages to be scanned.  Add a short description (new, restick, refusal) and Save 
doc.  Orders can then be placed in the storage box to be stored. 
B. Saving order 
1. When all tests and comments have been accounted for, click the 
Accept&New.  
2. Labels will print when you create specimen.  
3. STOP  
a. Check to make sure all tests are accounted for 
b. Label specimens according to specimen requirement listed on 
bottom left hand corner of label. 
c. BEFORE labeling, AGAIN make sure that the name matches 
what is on the specimen. 
4. Once specimen is labeled and before sending to CP for processing, 
receive specimens in receiving.   Notify CP employee of any Stats.  
 
V. Atlas specimens 
A. Atlas specimens received into the laboratory should be checked thoroughly by 
registration staff and in the same manner as routine specimens. 
1. Check to make sure the Atlas requisition demographics matches the 
Specimen Demographics 
2. Mark specimen type and count on Atlas requisition 
3. Receive specimen into lab OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA  70808 
Page 4 of 4 
LBA407 
4. Cancel any orders per request 
5. Scan all orders into Req Entry as stated in (IV A).  
 
Revisions 
7/2010 (created), 3/2015, 8/10/17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 