OLOLRMC AND AFFILIATE LABORATORIES 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
 
Page 1 of 4 
LBA500 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA500 
LABORATORY QUALITY SYSTEM MANAGEMENT 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 7/31/2023 9/1/2023 9/1/2023 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 9/27/2023 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 8/26/2023 2/1989 
 
PURPOSE 
To ensure compliance with federal regulatory standards, the Laboratory will adhere to the 
policies of the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act (CLIA). 
POLICY 
The Laboratory shall comply with the regulatory standards of CLIA to include a Model 
Compliance Plan.  The Laboratory Model Compliance Plan , or OLOL Quality 
Management Plan (QMP), shall support the FMOLHS Quality Plan.  This policy outlines 
the proc ess for overall management of the Lab’s Quality System.  Quality System 
Essentials are defined in the OLOL Quality Management Plan (QMP). 
A. Laboratory Committees 
The Laboratory Quality Management Plan will be administered by the Lab Quality 
Committee.  The committee is charged with review of operational policy and 
procedure, audits, plan revisions, staff education, and assurance of ethical business 
practice within the department. 
Each OLOL Laborat ory maintains a Quality Committee which consists of the  
Laboratory Medical Director , Compliance Officer(s), Lab Manager, Lab 
Supervisor (where applicable), and Lab Senior Technologist (where applicable and 
as needed).  Lab Committees are chaired by the OLOLRMC Main and Affiliate 
Lab Compliance Officer.  Meetings are scheduled at least quarterly and typically 
coincide with Lab Medical Director site visits.  Meetings may also include the 
Respiratory department and other administration as needed.   Meetings are 
documented using LBA003 -B – Laboratory Director On -Site Assessment 
Checklist. 
B. Annual Quality System Review 
Annually, the applicable Lab Quality Committee will review the effectiveness of 
the previous year’s quality plan for each laboratory.  The review may be 
documented through meeting minutes or formally on a Quality Management 
System Review prepared and distributed by the Lab Compliance Officer.   
Successes, failures, and recommendations for changes to the Quality Plan will be 
discussed and documented. 
 OLOLRMC AND AFFILIATE LABORATORIES 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
 
Page 2 of 4 
LBA500 
C. Lab Marketing Practices 
The laboratory will abide by the standards set forth by the FMOLHS Corporate 
Compliance Plan. Laboratory marketing practices shall be performed so that no 
conflicts of interest occur and all state, local and federal laws are upheld. 
Marketing practices will be subject to review and must be in compliance with all 
Anti-Kickback Laws, local, state, and federal, as well as Stark Laws. No 
laboratory department may engage in business with any vendor that may be 
viewed as a conflict of interest or otherwise illegal by statutes set forth by state, 
local, or federal governing bodies. Deviations from the laboratory compliance 
plan relating to laboratory marketing will be investigated and corrective actions 
will be performed. 
D. Laboratory Compliance Education and Training 
Compliance Education and Training for OLOL employees is an ongoing process.  
All new employees attend hospital orientation in which the standards of Conduct 
and the Compliance Plan are presented and reviewed.  Employees sign an 
attestation to abide by the Standards of Conduct.  New lab employees receive 
additional initial training through New Employee Orientation and Training 
modules which include lab-specific HIPAA and Safety training. 
Ongoing education is provided to all employees on an annual and as-needed basis.  
Information regarding the intent and scope of Quality, Compliance, and Safety 
essentials are re-established. 
FMOLHS Corporate Compliance, OLOL Lab Compliance Officers, and all OLOL 
Laboratory Adminis tration are a resource to OLOL employees regarding the 
elements of the Compliance Program. 
E. Compliance Monitoring 
Individuals convicted of a criminal offense related to health care will not be hired.  
If already in employment, individuals charged with crimi nal offenses related to 
health care will be removed from direct responsibility until the resolution of the 
criminal charge.   
FMOLHS Corporate Compliance monitors adherence to standards of conduct in 
real time using monitoring software.  Additionally Corporate Compliance monitors 
OIG exclusion database for employees and physicians that are excluded in 
participating in government funded programs.  Employee Performance reviews 
include evaluation of adherence to the elements of the compliance program.   
F. Compliance Audits 
Lab Leadership will actively participate in periodic audits of lab operations.  Major 
areas of concern include ordering, specimen collection and labeling, employee 
training and competency, and reporting and record keeping.  Each lab performs a 
monthly Tracer Audit which inclu des the items listed above. Additional 
mechanisms for audit may include on-site visits, interviews with personnel, reviews 
of written materials and documentation, review of any potential breaches of PHI, 
and tracking/trending analysis studies. An action pl an that defines the steps to be 
taken to correct any identified deficiencies and prevent recurrence will be prepared OLOLRMC AND AFFILIATE LABORATORIES 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
 
Page 3 of 4 
LBA500 
and submitted by Laboratory Administration.  All compliance audits and corrective 
action plans will be submitted to the Lab Compliance Offi cer for review and 
approval. 
G. Quality Compliance Reporting 
Issues to report may include (but are not limited to): 
1. Billing and coding irregularities 
2. Breach of confidentiality 
3. Conflicts of interest 
4. Company policy violations 
5. Criminal activity 
6. Discrimination or harassment 
7. Fraud 
8. Kickbacks and bribes 
9. Patient rights/safety issues 
10. Quality of care concerns 
11. Code of conduct violations 
12. Workplace Safety issues 
Quality concern reporting avenues are available to employees and are presented 
through initial and ongoing training.  Employee will remain anonymous during the 
process and will not be subject to retaliation for reporting concerns in good faith.  
Resolution may be reported back to the reporting employee but will not include 
details regarding individual employee re-education or counseling where applicable.   
Employees are encouraged to report any quality concerns to direct Supervisor 
or Compliance Officer for immediate investigation and needed  resolution. 
Additional avenues for reporting are as follows: 
1. RLDatix – found at TeamLink > RLDatix  
RLDatix is a safety reporting software that captures patient, employee, and 
visitor events and provides for investigation and follow-up by leadership of 
the involved areas. 
2. FMOLHS Corporate Compliance – found at TeamLink > Compliance 
Hotline 
3. College of American Pathologists (CAP) – sign posted in laboratory 
Phone: US toll-free 866-236-7212 
Web: www.CAP.org/contact-and-support 
4. COLA – sign posted in laboratory 
Phone: 800-981-9883 
Email: hotline@cola.org 
H. Corrective Action 
The Lab Quality Committee will investigate, report, and correct all problems 
discovered as a result of internal and external reviews and audits.   
Reporting will be made to FMOLHS Corporate Compliance  as needed.  The 
FMOLHS Corporate Compliance Officer will report to the Office of Inspector OLOLRMC AND AFFILIATE LABORATORIES 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
 
Page 4 of 4 
LBA500 
General (OIG) in accordance with facility policy and regulatory standards.  Prompt 
restitution to Medicare will be made if an audit indicates overpayment or improper 
payment for services. 
 
REFERENCE 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
OIG Model Compliance Plan for Clinical Laboratories 
CAP Regulation GEN.20330 
ASSOCIATED POLICIES 
QMP – Quality Management Plan 
LBA006 - Accreditation 
REVISIONS 
2/1989 (created), 3/20/2015, 7/31/2023. 
 