OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 4 
LBA502 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA502 
LABORATORY ORDER AND BILLING COMPLIANCE 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 7/31/2023 9/1/2023 9/1/2023 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 9/27/2023 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 8/26/2023 2/1989 
 
 
PURPOSE 
To ensure compliance with federal regulatory standards, the Laboratory will adhere to the 
policies of the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act (CLIA) , Center for 
Medicare/Medicaid (CMS) , a nd the Office of Inspector Ge neral (OIG) , and other 
federally funded payor guidelines. 
POLICY 
A. Medicare And Medical Necessity 
Licensed health care professionals must be able to order any services that are 
considered appropriate for the diagnosis and treatment of their patients.  However, 
physicians should order only those tests and/or services that meet medical 
necessity standards.  A specific diagnosis and/or ICD-10-CM code must be 
provided for each test and/or service ordered.  
All providers ordering services must review the patient’s diagnosis or ICD-10-
CM code for medical necessity according to Local Medical Review Policies 
(LMRPs) and/or National Coverage Limitations (NCL) to facilitate appropriate 
billing of tests and services.   
If the test and/or service order does not include a specific diagnosis and/or ICD-
10-CM code or meet the criteria as defined in the LMRP and/or NCL, an Advance 
Beneficiary Notice must be obtained from the patient. 
B. Advance Beneficiary Notice (ABN) 
Medicare reimbursement is limited to services which are determined to be 
reasonable and necessary.  An Advance Beneficiary Notice (ABN) must be 
obtained when ordered tests or services do not meet medical necessity 
requirements according to Local Medical Review Policy (LMRP) or National 
Coverage Limitations (NCL). 
An Advance Beneficiary Notice (ABN) must be obtained when one or more of 
the following circumstances exist: Medicare will not pay for the test(s) based 
upon the patient condition or Medicare does not pay for the test(s) due to the 
frequency of order (limited number of payments within a specified time period). 
Medicare does not pay for test(s) which are experimental or for research use. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 4 
LBA502 
The patient may choose to either receive the service(s) and agree to be responsible 
for payment or refuse to be responsible for payment and not receive the service(s). 
If Outreach specimens are received for diagnostic laboratory tests requiring an 
ABN but the ABN is not received the procedure cannot be billed.  These charges 
should be written off as non-covered/non-allowable services and may not be 
included as Medicare Bad Debt Expenses. 
FMOLHS Outpatient services are provided by LabCorp.  Outpatients will not be 
registered or collected directly by OLOL Lab employees.  Outpatient specimens 
received by OLOL laboratories are received through a reverse testing agreement 
with LabCorp.  Specimens should not be submitted to OLOL Laboratories 
without an ABN.  Specimens received without an ABN will not be tested. 
C. Orders for Tests and Services  
Orders for tests and services must be documented and include specific data 
elements as defined in this policy.  All inpatient and outpatient orders are to be 
entered into the computer system either directly or through an electronic interface.   
1. Inpatient orders must be entered electronically by a nurse or physician.  
Verbal orders are not allowed for laboratory personnel to receive for 
inpatient purposes.  Add-on requests must also be entered electronically 
by appropriate healthcare personnel. 
2. Outpatient orders are managed by LabCorp.  Standardized laboratory 
requisition forms have been developed and should be used for outpatient 
laboratory services. Registration personnel must review outpatient orders 
to ensure required data elements exist. Every effort should be made to 
obtain said information prior to the test being performed or services being 
rendered.  If patient care or the integrity of a specimen is at risk, continue 
processing the test(s) or performing the service(s) and ensure required 
elements are subsequently obtained by designated personnel. 
3. The following outlines the required documentation to support complete 
test or service orders, coding services, and billing of outpatient services.  
Each category is mutually exclusive. 
a. Test or Service Orders - The following elements are needed to 
support the performance and charging of a test or service.  The 
italicized items can be retrieved after lab tests are performed: 
i. Reason for ordering test or service (i.e. ICD-10 diagnosis code) 
ii. Test or service requested 
iii. Written order 
iv. Name, address, and phone number of ordering physician 
v. Patient name 
vi. Date of order 
b. Coding - The following list represents the minimum elements required 
to code tests or services: 
i. Reason for ordering test or service 
ii. Test or service requested OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 4 
LBA502 
iii. Written order 
iv. Name of ordering physician 
v. Patient name 
c. Billing - The following list represents the minimum elements required 
to submit a patient bill for payment of a test or service: 
i. ICD-10 code diagnosis code 
ii. Tests or services charged or performed 
iii. Name of ordering physician 
iv. UPIN, State License, or Payor Specific Number 
v. Patient Name 
vi. Patient date of birth 
vii. Patient sex 
viii. Patient demographics/insurance information 
ix. Client number 
D. Billing Referred Laboratory Testing 
Medicare requires direct billing of outpatient laboratory services by the laboratory 
performing the tests. In exception to this requirement, a hospital clinical 
laboratory may enter into a contractual agreement with a reference laboratory.  In 
case of the above exception, the hospital must bill the federally funded payor, pay 
the reference laboratory for the tests performed, and be responsible for billing and 
collection activities.  FMOLHS and therefore OLOLRMC Main and Affiliate 
Labs have entered into contractual agreement with LabCorp reference 
laboratories. 
E. Billing of Calculated Lab Tests 
Laboratory calculation tests are not billed when the calculation is derived from a 
primary test. Laboratory Administration has the responsibility of “building” 
procedures for calculated tests, including applying applicable CDM’s and billing 
procedures in the LIS which then in turn create the billing information to be 
forwarded to the payor.  Calculated tests are not billed. 
F. Credit Requests 
After patient testing is completed and charged, credits can be issued based on the 
provider and manager’s discretion.  Credits are issued by deleting the charge in 
the LIS.  Documentation and a reason must be noted in the patient’s chart at the 
time of the credit.  Credits may be made directly by the technical department 
involved when wrong patient or other testing errors are detected.  Additionally, a 
credit request can be made by the provider or provider’s representative.  The 
requestor must be documented with the credit along with the reason for credit. 
Once the request is received, a credit can be issued through the LIS in the 
patient’s chart.  Any credits amounting to $2000.00 or greater will need to be 
approved by the Director. 
G. Standing Orders 
Standing ordered are permitted as long as they are valid, documented in EPIC, 
medically necessary, and monitored for appropriateness. A standing order is 
defined as a request provided, by a physician or other authorized designee, to OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 4 
LBA502 
order tests reimbursable by Medicare and other federal health programs which 
either requests the laboratory to perform a particular test or tests at a  
defined frequency, for a limited duration or is limited to patients undergoing 
continuing treatment, eliminating the need for a new order for each testing 
occasion. Standing orders must be renewed annually.  Standing orders can be 
acceptable only if it is submitted in writing or electronically.  A verbal standing 
order is unacceptable.  There shall be no exceptions.  A standing order must: 
1. Specify an effective date and have an appropriate fixed term of validity. 
2. Identify the patient by name. 
3. Be specific to that patient and no one else. 
4. List the exact name of the test(s) to be performed. 
5. Specify how frequently the test(s) is/are to be performed. 
6. Include a diagnosis either in narrative form or by ICD-10 Code. 
7. Be signed by a physician or other authorized person. 
REFERENCES 
OIG Model Compliance Program Guidance for Clinical Laboratories 
Medicare Conditions of Participation 
 
REVISIONS 
10/2009 (created), 3/2015, 8/10/17, 7/31/2023. 