ECLS-012 (7200) 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: (Livingston Administration) Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for 
 (Livingston Administration) 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 (7200) 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 1-9-18 Review Date: 2-4-18 
Revision Date: 2-5-18 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exit signs are located on 2nd floor back hall and above exit doorways.  
• Adjacent Smoke Compartment(s) are located down 2nd floor back hall and labeled with red tags: 
o Storage room before 2nd floor pharmacy 
o Community room on 2nd floor 
o Stairwells. 
 ECLS-012 (7200) 
Page 2 of 2 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Normal operating hours for Administration are Monday through Friday, 8am to 5pm. 
• Facility site coordinator or designee will instruct visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Facility site coordinator or designee will close doors and windows as necessary 
• Plant services rep, Facility site coordinator, Security or designee will prevent people from using 
elevator 
• Facility site coordinator or designee will ensure all Admin employees and/or guests are 
accounted for 
• Facility site coordinator or designee will ensure each office/room is empty.   
(This position will mark the door/door frame with chalk to indicate the room is empty.) 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• Not applicable  
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Not applicable  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Pull stations are located at each stairwell exit (east and west) 
• Fire extinguishers are located near restrooms and along back hall (3) 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• If back hall route is necessary for evacuation, Facility site coordinator or designee would provide 
badge access or key. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The 2nd floor lobby would be primary horizontal evacuation route and destination  
• The back hall to Community room would be the secondary horizontal evacuation route and 
destination 
•  The 2nd floor lobby stairwell to front door exit would be the primary vertical evacuation route 
and destination  
• The back hall to east stairwell (past Community room) and side exit would be the secondary 
vertical evacuation route and destination 
 