ECLS-012 4844 LSU Surgery Center 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: LSU Health Baton Rouge Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for LSU Health Perkins 
Surgical Center: Surgery Clinic 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 4844 LSU 
Surgery Clinic 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/13/17 Review Date: 6/3/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(Locations/Directions based on looking at the facility from Front Entrance inward) 
• Location of Exits 
o Surgery Clinic 
• Through the Discharge Waiting Room Next to Nurses’ Station 
• Front Triage Area through Entrance from Front Lobby and Out the Main 
Entrance Sliding Doors ECLS-012 4844 LSU Surgery Center 
Page 2 of 4 
• Down the Back Hall, Away from the Nurses’ Station and Out of the SDS Side 
Entrance 
• Location of Illuminated Signs 
o Before Triage/Front Lobby Door 
o Before Window in Triage Area Pointing Right 
o Between Endo Double Doors and Front Desk Pointing Right to Front Entrance  
o Before Smoke Compartment Doors Between Front Hall and Nurses’ Station 
o Before Nurses’ Station Pointing Left 
o Before Discharge Lobby Entrance Beside Nurses’ Station 
o Before Discharge Lobby Exit 
o Before Same Day Surgery (SDS) Badge Access Entrance Pointing Left  
o Before SDS Side Entrance 
• Location of Adjacent Smoke Compartments 
o Compartment Doors from Hallway Between SDS and Central Supply 
• Fire Doors: AB .1.1.1A/ AB .1.1.1B 
• Badge Access Required When Shut 
• Smoke Barrier Doors with 20 min Opening Protection 
o Compartment Doors from Front Hall (Rooms 1-10) to the Nurses’ Station 
• Fire Doors: BC .1.1.1A/ BC .1.1.1B 
• Smoke Barrier Doors with 20 min Opening Protection 
o Compartment Door at Employee Locker Room 
• Fire Door: B .1.1.25 
• 1 hour Fire Barrier with 45 min Opening Protection 
o Compartment Door at Radiology Back Hallway near Endoscopy Double Door Entrance 
• Fire Doors: CD.1.1.1A/ CD .1.1.1B 
• Smoke Barrier Doors with 20 min Opening Protection 
 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Normal Operating Hours are Monday through Friday 7am to 5pm. In the case of the assigned staff 
member being unavailable, a designee will be assigned to perform the tasks of the original staff 
member. 
 
• The nurse (RN/LPN), CNA, MA, CSR or designee is responsible for clearing the hallway of any 
carts or equipment by moving them to the nearest empty room.  
• The nurse (RN/LPN), CNA, MA, CSR or designee will close all doors  
• The Unit Manager(s) and supervisor(s) or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed. 
• The nurse (RN/LPN), CNA, MA, CSR or designee will move patients and visitors to safety 
explaining, “The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• All available staff or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Unit Manager(s) or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• Unit Supervisor(s) or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for 
• Unit Leadership or designee will ensure each room is empty.  (This position will mark the ECLS-012 4844 LSU Surgery Center 
Page 3 of 4 
door/door frame with chalk, or for the clinic all indicator flags extended, to indicate the room is 
empty.) 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• Unit Manager, Supervisor, Charge Nurse, Respiratory or designee are the only staff members 
with authority to shut off the gas valves in all units 
• Location of Gas Shut Off Valve 
o Back Hall Between Cast Room and Supply Room 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments  
• Wheelchairs and stretchers are available for use of transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments when necessary.  
• Clinic wheelchairs are stored in the front triage area when not in use and stretchers are 
available in rooms 14-21. 
• All departments with available staff are required to evacuate the fully, partially and non-
ambulatory patients.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Alarm Pull 
o Nurses’ Station Behind Front Desk 
o Discharge Waiting Room Beside Exit 
o Main Lobby Beside Main Door 
o Inside Front Desk Station 
• Fire Extinguisher 
o Back Hall Between Triage Room and Room 21 
o Front Hall Between Room 8 and Room 9 
o Front Hall/Triage Area, Between Front Hall/Endo Hallway and Triage Station 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Identify any types of equipment that would need to be turned off – O2 and gas 
• Identify any used/stored combustible products – O2 tanks 
• Identify any types of special patient populations, especially those non-ambulatory – Patients 
with Mobility Impairments, Patients Under Effects of Light Anesthesia 
• Identify any secured area that would require a special badge access or door key.  Explain how 
the Code RED Response Team would have access. – SDS and Fire Doors leading to 
SDS/Central Supply Hallway have badge access that all employees have access to. 
 
The location of the horizontal evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Evacuation Route: 
o Front Hall Rooms 1-10 and Triage Area 
▪ Through Triage/Front Lobby Entrance and Exit Through Main Entrance 
o Nurses’ Station, Case Management Hallway, Cast Room and Discharge Waiting Room 
and Back Hall Rooms 20-22 
▪ Exit Through Discharge Waiting Room Exit Beside Nurses’ Station 
o Back Hall Rooms 14-19 ECLS-012 4844 LSU Surgery Center 
Page 4 of 4 
▪ Exit Down the Hall, Toward SDS to Side Entrance Beside SDS Entrance 
• Gathering Destination: 
o Staff and patients will gather at eye clinic building when exiting from side entrance 
between SDS and Surgery Clinic 
o Staff and patients will gather in front patient parking lot when exiting from discharge 
waiting room and main lobby/main entrance. 
 
 
 