ECLS-012 4845 LSU OMFS 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: LSU Health Baton Rouge Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for LSU Health Perkins 
Surgical Center: Oral Maxillofacial 
Surgery (OMFS) 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 4845 OMFS 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/13/17 Review Date: 6/3/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(Locations/Directions based on looking at the facility from Front Entrance inward) 
• Location of Exits 
o Exit Door Beside MRI 
o Exit Door Beside Oral Maxillofacial Surgery (OMFS) Office 
• Location of Illuminated Signs: ECLS-012 4845 LSU OMFS 
Page 2 of 3 
o Outside of OMFS Office 
o Before Employee Break Room Across from PARC Registration Desk 
o Before CT/MRI Rooms Pointing Left Toward MRI Exit 
o Before MRI Exit Door 
o Before Radiology Front Hall Exit Leading to the Main Lobby 
• Location of Adjacent Smoke Compartments 
o Compartment Door at Radiology Back Hallway near Endoscopy Double Door Entrance 
• Fire Doors: CD.1.1.1A/ CD .1.1.1B 
• Smoke Barrier Doors with 20 min Opening Protection 
o Compartment Door Back Hall Leading from Radiology to Front Desk/OR 
• Fire Door: CE .1.1.1A/ CE .1.1.1B 
• Badge Access Required when going from Front Lobby to Radiology Hallway 
• Smoke Barrier Doors with 20 min Opening Protection 
o Red Tag Fire Door Leading to OMFS Room 1 
o Fire Door: E.1.1.23 
o One Hour Fire Barrier with 45 min Opening Protection 
o Red Tag Fire Door Leading to OMFS Storage/Work Room 
o Fire Door: E.1.1.24 
o One Hour Fire Barrier with 45 min Opening Protection 
o Red Tag Fire Door Leading to OMFS Room 2 
o Fire Door: E.1.1.26 
o One Hour Fire Barrier with 45 min Opening Protection 
o Red Tag Fire Door Leading to OMFS Office 
o Fire Door: E.1.1.29 
o Keypad Access Door 
o One Hour Fire Barrier with 45 min Opening Protection 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Normal Operating Hours are Monday through Friday 8am to 5pm. In the case of the assigned staff 
member being unavailable, a designee will be assigned to perform the tasks of the original staff 
member. 
 
• The nurse, resident/physician or designee is responsible for clearing the hallway of any carts or 
equipment by moving them to the nearest empty room.  
• The nurse, resident/physician or designee will close all doors and windows 
• The Unit Manager(s) and supervisor(s) or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed. 
• The nurse, resident/physician or designee will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, 
“The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• All available staff or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Unit Manager(s) or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• Unit Supervisor(s) or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for 
• Unit Leadership or designee will ensure each room is empty.  (This position will mark the 
door/door frame with chalk, or for the clinic all indicator flags extended, to indicate the room is ECLS-012 4845 LSU OMFS 
Page 3 of 3 
empty.) 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• Unit Manager, Supervisor, Charge Nurse, Respiratory or designee are the only staff members 
with authority to shut off the gas valves in all units 
• Location of Gas Shut Off Valves 
o Front Hall between Radiology Examination Room Entrance 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments  
• Wheelchairs and stretchers may be available for use of transporting patients between 
Fire/Smoke Compartments when necessary 
• All departments with available staff are required to evacuate the fully, partially and non-
ambulatory patients.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Alarm Pull 
o Outside MRI 
o Beside OMFS Office 
• Fire Extinguisher 
o Between OMFS Rooms 1 and 2 
o Beside MRI (MRI Approved Extinguisher) 
o Front Hall Beside Ultrasound 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Identify any types of equipment that would need to be turned off – O2 and gas 
• Identify any used/stored combustible products – Large oxygen cylinder located in OMFS room 
2 , welding torch kept in fire approved lockbox in OMFS Storage/Work Room 
• There is a full and partial oxygen cylinder located in OMFS room 1  
• Identify any types of special patient populations, especially those non-ambulatory – patients 
under local sedation, patients with mobility difficulties 
• Identify any secured area that would require a special badge access or door key.  Explain how 
the Code RED Response Team would have access. – Keypad access is required to enter OMFS 
office. This is a staff only area and all OMFS staff have access code 
 
The location of the horizontal evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Evacuation Route: 
o Exit at end of Radiology Hallway, Door by MRI 
o Exit at end of OMFS/PARC Hallway, Door By OMFS Office 
• Gathering Destination: 
o Staff and patients will gather in front patient parking lot when exiting from MRI exit 
door. 
o Staff and patients will gather by bench on top of hill behind surgical center when 
exiting from OMFS exit. 
 
 