MS/ PHY/ 015 – Allied Health Staff Policy  - 1 - 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Medical Staff 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:   
Subject:  Allied Health Professional Staff Policy Section:  Physician 
Date of Origination:  September 19, 2005 Supersedes:  
Date Last 
Revised: 
Reviewed: 
 
 October 24, 2023 
October 24, 2023 
Serial Code:  MS/PHY/015 
 
PURPOSE/ SCOPE OF POLICY: 
 
The purpose of this policy is to define the duties and responsibilities of all Allied Health 
Professionals at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center who are permitted to provide 
services at the Hospital. It sets forth the credentialing process and the general practice parameters 
for these individuals as well as guidelines for determining the need for additional classes of 
Allied Health Professionals at the Hospital. 
 
Only those specific classes of Allied Health Professionals that have been approved by the Board 
of Directors shall be permitted to practice at the Hospital.  The specific categories of Allied 
Health Professionals currently practicing at the Hospital are described in Appendix A to this 
Policy. 
 
DEFINITION: 
 
The following definitions apply to terms used in this Policy: 
 
Advanced Practice Credentials Council: 
At a minimum, the Council will be comprised of the following members: 
• Vice President, Patient Care Services – Chairperson 
• Chief Medical Officer or Associate Chief Medical Officer (ex-officio) 
• Director, Medical Staff Services 
• OLOLPG representative 
• Members of the Advanced Practice Professional Staff 
The Council is responsible for the following activities: 
1. Review the credentials of Allied Health Professional applicants for appointment and 
reappointment on behalf of the Credentials Committee;  
2. Monitors compliance with all policies and procedures related to Allied Health 
Professional. 
3. Assures that there is complete and thorough documentation for the recommendation(s) 
that have been made to the Credentials Committee; 
4. Responsible to be aware of regulatory requirements related to credentialing activities and 
to make the Credentials Committee and Medical Executive Committee aware when 
changes in policies and procedures related to Allied Health Professionals need to be made 
in order to meet requirements;  
5. Establishes ad hoc task forces as necessary for development of privilege forms/standards 
for new technology, etc.; MS/ PHY/ 015 – Allied Health Staff Policy  - 2 - 
6. Commissions and receives reports on the operations of the Allied Health Professionals 
practicing at the Hospital, as applicable.  
 
Allied Health Professional: Allied Health Professionals are members of a class of licensed 
and/or certified professionals authorized by the Board of Directors to perform clinical functions 
at the request or direction and under the supervision of a Medical Staff member with hospital 
clinical privileges, referred to as the supervising or sponsoring practitioner. Allied Health 
Professionals cannot practice independently and are not members of the Medical Staff.  Allied 
Health Professionals shall not be entitled to the rights, privileges and responsibilities of 
appointment to the Medical Staff and may only engage in acts within the scope of clinical 
functions specifically granted by the Board of Directors. 
 
Clinical Assistants (CA): A group of Allied Health Professionals that are qualified by academic 
education and clinical experience or other training to provide patient care services in a clinical or 
supportive role under the direct supervision of a physician member of the Medical Staff granted 
hospital clinical privileges. CA’s provide only those clinical services that are consistent with a 
written scope of practice approved by the Medical Staff and Senior Management. CA’s are not 
eligible for Medical Staff membership, nor are they granted privileges. Clinical Assistants are 
managed through a Human Resources process for credentialing and granted approval by the 
Allied Health Credentials Committee.  
 
Advanced Practice Professionals (APP): A group of Allied Health Professionals that provides 
direct patient care services in the Medical Center under a defined degree of supervision by a 
physician Medical Staff member who has been granted hospital clinical privileges. APPs 
exercise judgment within the areas of documented professional competence and in areas 
consistent with the applicable state practice act. APPs are not eligible for medical staff 
membership but are granted privileges. Advanced Practice Professional are credentialed and 
privileged through the process outlined in this policy.  
 
Supervising/Sponsoring Practitioner: The supervising practitioner bears the ultimate 
responsibility for patient care and will direct, supervise, and take responsibility for the applicant. 
The supervising Medical Staff Member shall be a member in good standing with hospital clinical 
privileges.  
 
POLICY: 
 
Guidelines for determining the need for new classes of Allied Health Professionals 
 
1. Determination of Need: Whenever an Allied Health Professional in a clinical field that 
has not been approved by the Board requests permission to practice at the Hospital, the 
Allied Health Committee will evaluate the need for that particular class of Allied Health 
Professional and to make a recommendation to the Credentials Committee, Medical 
Executive Committee and Hospital Board of Directors.  As part of the process, the Allied 
Health Professional shall be invited to submit information about the nature of the 
proposed practice, why Hospital access is sought, and the potential benefits to the 
community by having such services available at the Hospital.  The Allied Health MS/ PHY/ 015 – Allied Health Staff Policy  - 3 - 
Credentials Committee may consider the following factors when making a 
recommendation to the Credentials Committee, Medical Executive Committee and 
Hospital Board of Directors as to the need for the services of this category of Allied 
Health Professionals: 
a. The nature of the services that could be offered; 
b. Any state license or regulation which outlines the scope of practice for the Allied 
Health Professional; 
c. Any state "non-discrimination" or "any willing provider" laws that would apply to 
the Allied Health Professional; 
d. The patient care objectives of the Hospital, including patient convenience; 
e. How well the community's needs are currently being met and whether they could 
be better met if the services offered by the Allied Health Professional were 
provided by the Hospital or as part of its facilities; 
f. The type of training that is necessary to perform the services that could be offered 
and whether there are individuals with more training currently providing those 
services; 
g. The availability of supplies, equipment, and other necessary Hospital resources; 
h. The need for and availability of trained staff to support the services that would be 
offered; and 
i. The ability to appropriately supervise performance 
j. Any exclusive contract arrangements established by the Hospital  
 
2. Development of Policy: 
a. If the AHPPEC recommends that there is a need for the particular category of 
Allied Health Professional at the Hospital, the committee shall recommend: 
i. Any specific qualifications and/or training that they must possess beyond 
those set forth in this Allied Health Professional Staff Policy; 
ii. A detailed description of their authorized scope of practice, provision of 
care or clinical privileges; 
iii. Any specific conditions that apply to their functioning within the Hospital; 
and 
iv. Supervision requirements 
b. In developing such policies, the Allied Health Credentials Committee shall 
consult the appropriate Department Chairs and applicable state law and may 
contact applicable professional societies or associations.  The Allied Health 
Credentials Committee may also recommend to the Credentials Committee, 
Medical Executive Committee and Hospital Board of Directors the number of 
Allied Health Professionals that are needed in a particular category. 
 
Qualifications, Conditions and Responsibilities 
 
Minimum Qualification Requirements 
No Allied Health Professional shall be automatically entitled to perform clinical functions 
merely because he or she meets the qualifications described herein.  The minimum qualification 
requirements to be eligible to apply for initial and continued permission to practice at the 
Hospital are detailed in the FMOLHS System Verification Office’s Operations Manual. MS/ PHY/ 015 – Allied Health Staff Policy  - 4 - 
  
Waiver of Criteria: 
1. Any individual who does not satisfy a criterion may request that it be waived.  The 
individual requesting the waiver bears the burden of demonstrating that his or her 
qualifications are equivalent to, or exceed, the criterion in question. 
2. The Hospital Board of Directors may grant waivers in exceptional cases after considering 
the findings of the Allied Health Credentials Committee, Credentials Committee and the 
Executive Committee, the specific qualifications of the individual in question, and the 
best interests of the Hospital and the community it serves.  The granting of a waiver in a 
particular case is not intended to set a precedent for any other individual or group of 
individuals. 
3. No individual is entitled to a waiver or to a hearing if the Hospital Board of Directors 
determinates not to grant a waiver. 
 
Non-Discrimination Policy: 
No individual shall be denied permission to practice at the Hospital on the basis of gender, race, 
creed, or national origin. 
 
Responsibilities/Duties: 
 
Each Allied Health Professional shall: 
1. Provide continuous and timely care to all patients at the generally recognized professional 
level of quality and efficiency applicable to their profession in providing such services;  
2. Provide continuous and timely care to patients within their scope of functions authorized 
by the Hospital Board of Directors;  
3. Abide by this Allied Health Staff Policy, Ethics Manual, and Ethical and Religious 
Directives for Catholic Healthcare and all other lawful standards and bylaws, rules and 
regulations and policies of the hospital;  
4. Abide by the ethical principles of his or her profession;  
5. Cooperate with the service to which he or she is assigned, the Medical Executive 
Committee, Administration, and the Hospital Board of Directors on matters relating to 
patient care and the orderly operation of the business of the hospital;  
6. Notify the Medical Staff Office within 30 days of the initiation of any malpractice or 
liability action against him or her and any settlement or conclusion of such action;  
7. Notify the Medical Staff Office within 30 days of any “professional review action” taken 
by any healthcare entity that would affect the performance of clinical functions;  
8. Act in accordance with the job description, collaborative practice agreement and/or 
supervising physician agreement filed by the supervising physician with the appropriate 
certifying or licensing agency, if applicable. 
9. To accept committee assignments, participation in quality improvement and peer review 
activities, and such other reasonable duties and responsibilities as assigned;  
10. To constructively participate in the development, review, and revision of clinical 
protocols and pathways pertinent to his or her medical specialty, including those related 
to national patient safety initiatives and core measures; 
11. To comply with adopted protocols and pathways or document reasons for variance; MS/ PHY/ 015 – Allied Health Staff Policy  - 5 - 
12. To provide, with or without request, new or updated information to the Professional 
Practice Evaluation Committee, as it occurs, pertinent to any question on the application 
form; 
13. To acknowledge that the individual has had an opportunity to read a copy of this Policy 
and any other applicable bylaws, policies, rules and regulations and agrees to be bound 
by them; 
14. To appear for personal interviews in regard to an application for permission to practice as 
may be requested;  
15. To refrain from illegal fee splitting or other illegal inducements relating to patient 
referral; 
16. To refrain from assuming responsibility for diagnosis or care of hospitalized patients for 
which he or she is not qualified or without adequate supervision; 
17. To refrain from deceiving patients as to the individual's status as an Allied Health 
Professional; 
18. To seek consultation whenever required or as needed; 
19. To complete, in a timely manner, the medical and other required records, containing all 
information required by the Hospital; 
20. To pay any applicable dues and assessments; and 
21. That, if there is any misstatement in, or omission from, the application, the Hospital may 
stop processing the application (or, if permission to practice has been granted prior to the 
discovery of a misstatement or omission, the permission may be deemed to be 
automatically relinquished).  In either situation, there shall be no entitlement to the 
procedural rights provided in this Policy. 
 
The following requirements must be adhered to by Allied Health Professional and the sponsoring 
practitioner:  
1. All Clinical Assistant entries in the patient chart must be countersigned by the sponsoring 
practitioner within twenty-four (24) hours. A signature stamp is not acceptable for 
countersigning.  
2. See Appendix B for sponsoring physician countersignature requirements for Advanced 
Practice Professional entries in the patient chart. Advanced Practice Professionals are 
able to answer clinical queries without counter signature.  
3. Allied Health Staff must wear a clearly visible identifying name badge that includes the 
Allied Health Staff title.   
4. The sponsoring practitioner must furnish evidence in writing of his/her                                                                                       
sponsorship and that his/her assistant is adequately covered by professional liability 
insurance.  
5. The sponsoring practitioner is required to immediately notify the Medical Staff Office 
when an Allied Health Professional changes his/her sponsoring practitioner or leaves 
his/her employ.  The Allied Health Professional may request a change in his/her 
sponsoring practitioner as outlined in policy and procedure.  
 
Nature of Clinical Functions (see also Appendix B): 
Authorization given to an Allied Health Professional to exercise clinical functions shall only 
entitle them to perform those functions specifically authorized by the Board of Directors through 
a delineation of privileges. Authorization shall only be extended if the Board of Directors, after MS/ PHY/ 015 – Allied Health Staff Policy  - 6 - 
formal consultation with the Medical Executive Committee, deems such authorization necessary 
for the proper care and treatment of patients.   
 
Allied Health Staff may make rounds with their sponsoring physician and visit patients 
independently, but such rounds and visitation shall not substitute for required visitation by the 
attending physician.  
 
Nurse Practitioners who possess prescriptive authority by the LSBN and Physician Assistants 
who have been approved for prescriptive authority by LSBME may prescribe diagnostic/ 
therapeutic treatments within the scope of their licensure after they’ve been granted such 
privileges by the Hospital Board of Directors. A CRNA is not required to have prescriptive 
authority to provide anesthesia care, including the administration of drugs or medicine necessary 
for anesthesia care. Employees of the hospital who are to carry out a prescribed medication or 
treatment order communicated by Allied Health Staff may, at their own discretion or at the 
dictate of their supervisor, require order confirmation from the sponsoring practitioner prior to 
administering the medication or treatment in question. 
 
Clinical Assistants may NOT prescribe medications or treatments. 
A member of the Allied Health Professionals may NOT: 
1. Communicate medication prescriptions based on standing orders issued by the sponsoring 
practitioner.  Employees of the hospital who are to carry out a prescribed medication 
order communicated by Allied Health Staff may, at their own discretion or at the dictate 
of their supervisor, require order confirmation from the sponsoring practitioner prior to 
administering the medication in question.  
2. Vote or hold office but may participate in department activities as defined by the assigned 
department.  
 
Clinical Service Assignment: 
Each Allied Health Professional shall be assigned to the appropriate section by the Advanced 
Practice Professionals Council, according to the section that their supervising physician belongs.  
Each service will work in collaboration with the Advanced Practice Credentials Council to: (1) 
monitor the performance of the Allied Health Professional; (2) ensure the Allied Health 
Professional is acting within the scope of the clinical functions granted to them; (3) develop the 
criteria and guidelines to be used in credentialing and monitoring Allied Health Professionals in 
the service. 
 
Application for Clinical Functions 
 
Submitting an application:  
The application forms for both initial and renewed permission to practice as an Allied Health 
Professional are approved by the Advanced Practice Professionals Council, Credentials 
Committee, Medical Executive Committee and Hospital Board of Directors and shall require 
detailed information concerning the applicant’s professional qualification.  
 MS/ PHY/ 015 – Allied Health Staff Policy  - 7 - 
The application shall not be considered complete until the Medical Staff Office , with full 
cooperation of the applicant, has received necessary references and materials and applicable 
application fees required to be submitted. 
 
Burden of Providing Information: 
1. Allied Health Professionals seeking permission to practice shall have the burden of 
producing information deemed adequate by the Hospital for a proper evaluation of 
current competence, character, ethics, and other qualifications, and for resolving any 
doubts about such qualifications. 
2. Allied Health Professionals seeking appointment have the burden of providing evidence 
that all the statements made, and information given on the application are accurate and 
complete. 
3. An application shall be complete when all questions on the application form have been 
answered, all supporting documentation has been supplied, and all information verified 
from primary sources.  An application shall become incomplete if the need arises for 
new, additional, or clarifying information at any time.  Any application that continues to 
be incomplete 30 days after the individual has been notified of the additional information 
required shall be deemed to be withdrawn. 
4. It is the responsibility of the individual seeking permission to practice to provide a 
complete application, including adequate responses from references.  An incomplete 
application will not be processed. 
 
Procedural Rights  
The Allied Health Professional agrees that the procedural rights set forth in this Policy 
shall be the sole and exclusive remedy with respect to any professional review action 
taken by the Hospital. 
Legal Actions:  
If, notwithstanding the provisions in this Section, an Allied Health Professional institutes 
legal action and does not prevail, he or she shall reimburse the Hospital and any of its 
authorized representatives named in the action for all costs incurred in defending such 
legal action, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
 
Credentialing Procedure: Processing the Application: 
 
Upon verification that the application is complete, it will be forwarded to the Advanced Practice 
Professionals Council for review and recom mendation.  The committee will meet monthly to 
recommend n ew applicants and reappoint ments. Upon approval by the council, Clinical 
Assistants are granted permission to perform clinical functions and appointment to the Allied 
Health Staff. Further review and approval of Clinical Assistants’ applications by other committees 
are not required. Upon recom mendation by the council, Advanced Practice Professionals’ 
applications w ill be forwarded to the Credentials Committee via its report. The Credentials 
Committee will meet monthly to ratify, modify, or deny the recommendations of the Advanced 
Practice Professionals Council .  Upon recommendation from  the Credentials Com mittee, a 
recommendation will be forwarded to the Medical Executive Committee. The Medical Executive 
Committee shall in turn review the information and make a recommendation. 
 MS/ PHY/ 015 – Allied Health Staff Policy  - 8 - 
If the MEC recommends approval, and the application is current, complete, and without 
problems or issues, the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief of Staff, acting as a subcommittee 
of the Hospital Board of Directors, may grant permission to perform clinical functions and 
appointment to the Allied Health Professional Staff, per the Expedited Credentialing Policy. All 
Category II applicants must be reviewed by the regular Hospital Board of Directors process. The 
Hospital Board of Directors shall review such information and shall give written notification of 
its decision to the applicant within 14 days. 
 
Renewal of Clinical Functions:  Review and reappointment of the Advanced Practice 
Professional shall be conducted at least every two years according to the application processes 
set forth above. Failure to complete and return the reappointment application and required 
documents will be deemed voluntary relinquishment of the clinical functions held by such 
individual. 
  
Corrective Action:  Allied Health Professionals may be subject to any of the corrective actions 
described herein with respect to such clinical functions upon the occurrence of any activities or 
professional conduct that is detrimental to patient safety or to the delivery of quality patient care, 
lower than the accepted standards of care, disruptive to the hospital operation, or in violation of 
the Allied Health Staff Policy. 
 
The events surrounding a request for corrective action will be investigated by the Chief Medical 
Officer or Associate Chief Medical Officer and forwarded, as applicable, to the Professional 
Practice Evaluation Committee (PPEC).  
 
Upon review of the request for corrective action and the findings of the investigation, PPEC may 
make any of the following recommendations:  dismissal of charges; a warning letter; letter of 
reprimand; imposition of terms of probation or requirement for consultation or continuing 
medical education; recommendation for reduction, suspension or revocation of clinical functions; 
recommendation for alteration of already imposed restrictions; or any alternative to the above-
named deemed appropriate by PPEC. 
  
The Medical Executive Committee will review the recommendation of PPEC and notify the 
practitioner, and his/her sponsoring physician, of the final decision made by MEC. 
 
Grievance Procedure: Allied Health Professionals shall be limited to the grievance procedure 
described herein.  The grievance procedure may be invoked in the following circumstances: 
adverse recommendation involving reduction or suspension of clinical functions; summary 
suspension; or placement on probation. 
 
An Allied Health Professional with respect to whom a circumstance listed above arises shall 
have 14 calendar days from the date of the written notice of action to file a written notice of 
appeal to the Medical Executive Committee.  Failure to file a timely written notice of appeal 
shall 
constitute a waiver and acceptance of the action.  An appeal may be taken only by the Allied 
Health Professional and may not be taken by his or her sponsoring physician.  
 MS/ PHY/ 015 – Allied Health Staff Policy  - 9 - 
When a timely appeal is filed, the Allied Health Professional and/or his sponsoring physician 
shall have the opportunity for an interview with the Medical Executive Committee.  At the 
interview, the Allied Health Professional shall be invited to discuss, explain or refute the charges 
made.  If, after conclusion of the grievance process an Allied Health Professional’s clinical 
functions are restricted, terminated or suspended, the appropriate licensing board will be notified 
by the hospital pursuant to the licensing and/or certifying board requirements.  The action taken 
by the Medical Executive Committee is final and the Allied Health Professional does not have 
the right to appeal the action to the Board of Directors. 
 
Automatic Voluntary Relinquishment of Scope of Practice or Clinical Privileges: 
An Allied Health Professional’s clinical privileges or scope of practice shall be automatically 
voluntarily relinquished, without entitlement to the procedural rights outlined in this Policy, 
when his or her sponsoring physician changes staff category from Hospital Privileges to 
Ambulatory Status. 
Automatic Suspension of Scope of Practice or Clinical Privileges: 
An Allied Health Professional's clinical privileges or scope of practice shall be automatically 
suspended, without entitlement to the procedural rights outlined in this Policy, in the following 
circumstances: 
1. The Allied Health Professional’s sponsoring physician resigns his or her status as the 
sponsoring physician of the Allied Health Professional, or resigns from the medical staff, 
unless and except to the extent that, prior to such loss or resignation, a qualified 
sponsoring physician for such Allied Health Professional replaces the sponsoring 
physician who is the subject of the loss or resignation;   
2. If an Allied Health Professional is terminated or resigns from the sponsoring physician’s 
employment 
3. The Allied Health Professional’s license expires, is revoked or is suspended or restricted; 
4. If and while there does not exist professional liability insurance for an Allied Health 
Professional at the level required by the Hospital Board of Directors; 
5. If an Allied Health Professional’s certification expires; 
6. The Allied Health Professional is indicted, convicted, or enters a plea of guilty or no 
contest to, any felony; or to any misdemeanor related to (i) the practice of his or her 
profession or other healthcare related matters; (ii) controlled substances or illegal drugs; 
(iii) third-party reimbursement; or (iv) violence; 
7. The Allied Health Professional fails to provide information pertaining to his or her 
qualifications for the scope of practice or clinical privileges in response to a written 
request from the Credentials Committee, the Medical Executive Committee, the CEO, or 
any other committee authorized to request such information within 30 days of the 
request; or 
8. A determination is made that there is no longer a need for the services that are being 
provided by the Allied Health Professional. 
 
Automatic suspension will take effect immediately upon notice to Hospital operations 
personnel and continue until the matter is resolved, if applicable. Failure to resolve the 
underlying matter leading to an individual's clinical privileges automatic suspension within 90 
days of the date of suspension shall result in automatic voluntary resignation from the Allied 
Health Professional Staff.  MS/ PHY/ 015 – Allied Health Staff Policy  - 10 - 
 
Notice of the suspension shall be given to the Allied Health Professional. However, such notice 
shall not be required for suspension to become effective. Automatic suspension does not entitle 
the Allied Health Professional to hearing procedures since the matter has been determined by 
another body 
and/or there has been a violation of the conditions for membership/clinical privileges. 
Automatic suspension may be grounds for further corrective action. Imposition of automatic 
suspension shall not preclude any other corrective action. 
 
Conditions of Practice Applicable to Allied Health Professionals: 
 
Supervision by Supervising Practitioner 
1. Any activities permitted by the Hospital Board of Director to be done at the Hospital by 
an Allied Health Professional shall be done only under the supervision of the Supervising 
Practitioner. 
2. Allied Health Professionals may function in the Hospital only so long as (i) they are 
supervised by a Supervising Practitioner, and (ii) they have a current, written supervision 
agreement with that individual.  In addition, should the Medical Staff appointment or 
clinical privileges of the Supervising Practitioner be revoked or terminated, the 
individual's permission to practice at the Hospital and clinical privileges or scope of 
practice shall be automatically suspended as outlined in this Policy. 
3. As a condition for permission to practice at the Hospital, each Allied Health Professional 
and his/her Supervising Practitioner must submit a copy of their written supervision 
agreement to the Hospital.  This agreement must meet the requirements of all applicable 
Louisiana statutes and regulations, as well as any additional requirements of the Hospital.  
It is also the responsibility of the Allied Health Professional and his/her Supervising 
Practitioner to provide the Hospital, in a timely manner, with any revisions or 
modifications that are made to the agreement.  
4. In accordance with LSBN rules and regulations, Nurse Practitioners must provide 
Medical Staff Office with a list of alternative collaborating physicians who are not listed 
on their collaborative practice agreement. 
 
Questions Regarding Authority of an Allied Health Professional: 
1. Should any Medical Staff member or Hospital employee who is licensed or certified by 
the state have any question regarding the clinical competence or authority of an Allied 
Health Professional, either to act or to issue instructions outside the physical presence of 
the Supervising Practitioner in a particular instance, the Medical Staff member or 
Hospital employee shall have the right to require that the Allied Health Professional's 
Supervising Practitioner validate, either at the time or later, the instructions of the Allied 
Health Professional.  Any act or instruction of the Allied Health Professional shall be 
delayed until such time as the Medical Staff member or Hospital employee can be certain 
that the act is clearly within the scope of the Allied Health Professional's activities as 
permitted by the Hospital Board of Directors. 
2. Any question regarding the clinical practice or professional conduct of an Allied Health 
Professional shall be immediately reported to the Chief of Staff, the Chief Medical 
Officer, the Associate Chief Medical Officer, the Chair of the Credentials Committee, the MS/ PHY/ 015 – Allied Health Staff Policy  - 11 - 
relevant Department Chair, or the Chief Executive Officer, who shall undertake such 
action as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
 
Responsibilities of Supervising Practitioner: 
1. The Supervising Practitioner shall be responsible for the actions of the Allied Health 
Professional in the Hospital.  The number of Allied Health Professionals acting under the 
supervision of a Supervising Practitioner, as well as the acts they may undertake, shall be 
consistent with applicable Louisiana statutes and regulations, the rules and regulations of 
the Medical Staff, and the policies of the Hospital Board of Directors. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________ ______________ 
Catherine O’Neal, MD           
Chief Medical Officer 
 
 
 
 MS/ PHY/ 015 – Allied Health Staff Policy  - 12 - 
Appendix A 
 
Clinical Assistants: 
The classes of Clinical Assistants currently practicing are: 
1. Non-First Assist Surgical Assistant 
2. Physician Employed Nurse (RN) 
3. Electro Neurodiagnostic Technologists (ENDT) 
4. Dental Assistant (DA) 
5. Ultra-Sonographer 
6. Ophthalmology Technician/ Technologist 
7. Case Technician 
8. Medical Physicists 
9. Ortho Technician 
10. Paramedic 
 
 
Advanced Practice Professionals 
The classes of Advanced Practice Professionals currently practicing are: 
1. Nurse Practitioner (NP) 
2. Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist (CRNA) 
3. Physician Assistant (PA) 
4. Surgical First Assistant (STFA) 
5. Registered Nurse First Assist (RNFA) 
6. Audiologist (AuD) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MS/ PHY/ 015 – Allied Health Staff Policy  - 13 - 
 
Appendix B 
 
 
Advanced Practice Professionals’ Scope of Practice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prescriptive Authority 
CRNAs are not required to have prescriptive authority to provide anesthesia care, including administration of drugs 
or medicine necessary for anesthesia care. 
 
 
 
Countersignature Requirements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prescriptive Authority 
 Controlled  
Drugs 
Legend  
Drugs 
PA With LSBME approval, state narcotics license, DEA 
registration, and applicable privilege With LSBME approval 
NP With LSBN approval, state narcotics license, DEA 
registration, and applicable privilege With LSBN approval 
CRNA Yes Yes 
 Ambulatory, Provider-Based Areas All Other Areas 
PA Countersignature of entries is NOT required 
Admission status orders countersigned within 24 
hours (countersignature of all other orders is NOT 
required); non-order entries countersigned by the 
date/time of discharge 
NP Countersignature of entries is NOT required 
Admission status orders countersigned within 24 
hours (countersignature of all other orders is NOT 
required); non-order entries countersigned by the 
date/time of discharge  
CRNA n/a Entries countersigned by the date/time of discharge 