Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 1 of 1 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Cancer Institute 
Policy Manual: Policies and 
Procedures/Organizational  Section: Oncology 
Title: Carcinoembryonic Antigen Level 
Policy 
Reference #: 
NAPRC03 CEA 
Standard 5.4 
Supersedes #: Standard 2.4 
Date of Origination: November 22, 2017 Review Date: March 25, 2024 
Revision Date: December 28, 2021 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) testing is recommended before initiation of treatment in patients with 
rectal cancer as the result can be used as a baseline for surveillance after treatment. This policy addresses 
National Accreditation Program for Rectal Cancer (NAPRC) Standard 5.4.  
 
POLICY: 
 
A CEA level is obtained before definitive treatment is recorded in the patient’s medical record for a 
minimum of 75% of previously untreated rectal cancer patients.  
 
PROCEDURES: 
A. The managing physician for each rectal cancer patient will obtain a CEA level prior to the patient 
starting treatment and the results will be included in the patient’s medical record. 
B. If a rectal cancer patient had a CEA level obtained at an outside facility, the managing physician 
will request a copy of the lab results, or dictate the results on a progress note, to be included in the 
patient’s medical record prior to the patient starting treatment at  Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) 
Cancer Institute. 
C. Tracking of pretreatment CEA level for all previously untreated rectal cancer patients is recorded 
on the NAPRC Patient Tracking Spreadsheet by the Rectal Cancer Program (RCP) Coordinator. 
 
CHART REVIEW: 
 
At a minimum, the RCP Director reviews a random sample of 20 percent of eligible patient medical 
records or a maximum of 100 cases each calendar year to evaluate compliance. The RCP Director may 
delegate this review to an appropriately credentialed physician member of the Rectal Cancer 
Multidisciplinary Team (RC-MDT). For any result that does not meet the required percentages as listed in 
the rating criteria section, an action plan must be developed and implemented. 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS 
Commission on Cancer, National Accreditation Program for Rectal Cancer 2020, Standard 5.4.  