Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 1 of 3 
                                                                                     
Our Lady of the Lake Cancer Institute 
Policy Manual: Policies and 
Procedures/Organizational  Section: Oncology 
Title: 
Rectal Cancer Multidisciplinary Team 
Treatment Outcome Discussion and 
Summary 
Policy 
Reference #: 
NAPRC06 Post Surgical 
Discussion 
Standards 5.11 & 5.12 
Supersedes #: Standards 2.11 & 2.12 
Date of Origination: November 22, 2017 Review Date: March 25, 2024 
Revision Date: March 25, 2024 
 
 
PURPOSE:  
  
To provide guidelines for individualized post-surgical treatment outcome discussion for all rectal cancer 
patients surgically treated at Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Cancer Institute and develop a standardized 
Post-Surgical Treatment Outcome Discussion Summary. This policy addresses National Accreditation 
Program for Rectal Cancer (NAPRC) Standard 5.11 and 5.12. 
 
POLICY: 
 
A. After completion of definitive surgical treatment, rectal cancer patients treated at OLOL Cancer 
Institute must have an individualized post-surgical treatment outcome discussion conducted at a 
Rectal Cancer Multidisciplinary Team (RC-MDT) meeting within four weeks of the patient’s 
definitive surgical treatment completion. The discussion is documented in the patient’s medical 
record. 
• If a patient receives a portion of their treatment at OLOL Cancer Institute but elects to 
have surgery performed at an outside facility, the patient must be presented to the RC-
MDT for a post-surgical treatment outcome discussion and a post-surgical treatment 
outcome discussion summary must be completed in the event the Cancer Institute is still 
managing the patient’s rectal cancer. 
• If a patient does not have a definitive surgical resection (i.e. patient with stage IV disease 
receiving palliative treatment), it is not required to present the patient to the Rectal MDT 
for a Post-Surgical Treatment Outcome Discussion, but highly encouraged. If the patient 
presented did not have surgery, the required surgical elements listed in the procedure for 
the discussion and the summary are not applicable. 
• If a patient undergoes total neoadjuvant therapy and is subsequently followed according 
to the established watch and wait protocol, the patient will be presented post-treatment in 
order for the RC-MDT to review all applicable follow-up imaging, scopes, and 
pathology. 
 
B. In the event the Rectal Cancer Program (RCP) at OLOL Cancer Institute accessions 100 or more 
cases within a year, the RCP Director may develop criteria to determine which patients must be 
presented at the RC-MDT for a treatment outcome discussion. At least 100 cases must be 
presented for treatment outcome discussion each year. 
 Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 2 of 3 
C. The post-surgical treatment outcome discussion summary must be provided to the patient’s 
treating physicians within four weeks of the RC-MDT treatment outcome discussion and recorded 
in the patient’s medical record for at least 50% of patients. 
 
 
 
PROCEDURE:  
 
A. The RCP Coordinator monitors and records the date of the patient’s surgery on the NAPRC 
Patient Tracking Spreadsheet to ensure the patient is presented to the RC-MDT for a Post-
Surgical Treatment Outcome Discussion within four weeks of definitive surgical treatment. 
 
B. The RC-MDT Post-Surgical Treatment Outcome Discussion must include, but is not limited 
to:  
1. Pre-surgical Evaluation and Treatment 
• Clinical stage according to American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) 
• Neoadjuvant therapy 
2.  Review of the outcome of the surgery 
• Proctectomy or local excision 
• Approach (open, laparoscopic, robotic) 
• Presence or absence of stoma and type of stoma 
• Postoperative complications that may impact further treatment 
• Unexpected findings (for example, metastatic disease, adjacent organ involvement, 
grossly involved margins after resection) 
• Specimen photographs  
3.  Review of the final pathology report and stage 
• CRM and distal margin status 
• Tumor regression grade 
• Mesorectal grade 
• Pathological stage according to the AJCC 
4. Recommendation for adjuvant treatment 
• Adjuvant therapy regimen, when indicated 
• Referral to medical oncology, when indicated 
• Referral to radiation oncology, when indicated 
• Palliative care, when indicated 
 
C. The moderating physician and the RCP Coordinator complete Post-Surgical Treatment 
Outcome Discussion Forms for each case presented to ensure all required elements listed 
above are discussed. 
D. The RCP Coordinator documents the date the patient is presented to the RC-MDT for a Post-
Surgical Treatment Outcome Discussion, and which physician presented the case, in the Post-
Surgical Treatment Outcome Discussion Summary recorded in the patient’s medical record. 
 
E. The RCP Coordinator completes the Post-Surgical Treatment Outcome Discussion Summary 
in the patient’s electronic health record (EHR), EPIC, then routes the completed summary to 
the physician who presented the case to review and cosign. Once the presenting physician co-
signs the document, the RCP Coordinator sends the summary to the primary care and/or 
referring physician, other physicians involved in the patient’s care, and patient navigation, via 
inbox, mail, or fax through the EPIC EHR. Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 3 of 3 
 
F. The Post-Surgical Treatment Outcome Discussion Summary must include, but is not limited 
to, the following information: 
• Clinical (pretreatment) stage according to American Joint Committee on Cancer 
(AJCC) 
• Pretreatment CEA level 
• Neoadjuvant therapy before surgery 
• Type of neoadjuvant therapy 
• Neoadjuvant therapy date of completion 
• Surgical procedure 
• Date of surgery 
• Final pathological stage or posttherapy y-pathological stage according to AJCC 
• Tumor Regression Grade 
• Microsatellite instability status 
• Circumferential Resection Margin 
• Distal Resection Margin 
• Mesorectal Grade 
• Recommendation for adjuvant therapy and, if applicable, adjuvant therapy regimen  
 
G. The RCP Coordinator tracks the date of the Post-Surgical Treatment Outcome Discussion, as 
well as, the date the Post-Surgical Treatment Outcome Discussion Summary is completed, 
and the date it is provided to the patient’s treating physician on the NAPRC Patient Tracking 
spreadsheet. 
 
 
CHART REVIEW:  
 
• At a minimum, the RCP Director reviews a random sample of 20 percent of eligible patient 
medical records or a maximum of 100 cases each calendar year to evaluate compliance. The RCP 
Director may delegate this review to an appropriately credentialed physician member of the RC-
MDT. For any result that does not meet the required percentages as listed in the rating criteria 
section, an action plan must be developed and implemented. 
 
  
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS: 
Commission on Cancer, National Accreditation Program for Rectal Cancer 2020, Standard 5.11 and 5.12.  
 
 