Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 1 of 4 
   
 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Cancer Institute 
Policy Manual: Policies and 
Procedures/Organizational  Section: Oncology 
Title: Rectal Cancer Multidisciplinary Care  
Policy 
Reference #: 
NAPRC01 RCMDT 
Standards 2.1 – 2.5 
Supersedes #: Standards 1.2 – 1.6 
Date of Origination: November 22, 2017 Review Date: March 25, 2024 
Revision Date: July 14, 2023 
 
 
PURPOSE:  
 
To provide guidelines for the Rectal Cancer Program Multidisciplinary Care Team (RC-MDT) including 
appointees, attendance, and meeting requirements. This policy addresses the National Accreditation 
Program for Rectal Cancer (NAPRC) standards 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, and 2.5. 
 
POLICY: 
  
The RC-MDT at Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Cancer Institute is a team of experts from each specialty 
involved in the care of rectal cancer patients to provide a comprehensive, collaborative treatment plan 
personalized to the specific needs of each patient. A Rectal Cancer Program (RCP) Director and an RCP 
Coordinator are appointed each year, along with a defined RC-MDT. 
 
PROCEDURE:  
 
A. Rectal Cancer Multidisciplinary Care (Standard 2.1) 
 
1. The RC-MDT includes at least one appointed physician member from each of the 
following specialties: surgery, pathology, radiology, medical oncology, and 
radiation oncology. A lead physician is selected for each of the specialists noted 
above. More than one required member from each specialty may be appointed.  
2. All surgeons, excluding fellows and residents, who perform rectal cancer surgery 
at OLOL are required to be members of the RC-MDT.  
3. Additional required members of the RC-MDT are the RCP Director and the RCP 
Coordinator.  
4. A defined RC-MDT roster is established that includes all RC-MDT members and 
documented in the minutes at the first meeting of each calendar year. 
5. Any changes in RC-MDT membership must be documented in the RC-MDT 
minutes. 
 
 
B. Rectal Cancer Multidisciplinary Care Team Meetings (Standard 2.4) 
 
1.  Each calendar year, the RC-MDT meets at least twice each calendar month, on the 2nd 
Wednesday and 4th Thursday. The RC-MDT may choose to convene more frequently to 
ensure all patients are discussed in a timely manner and to allow for timely management 
decisions. Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 2 of 4 
   
 
2. Attendance requirement: At least one RC-MDT member from surgery, pathology, 
radiology, radiation oncology, and medical oncology is present at each RC-MDT 
meeting. 
3. RC-MDT meetings primarily consist of case presentations as required in NAPRC 
Standards 5.5 and 5.11. Quarterly, the bi-monthly meetings will also include, but are not 
limited to, Chapter 5 audit results, NCDB data, and other administrative and 
performance report requirements as outlined in various NAPRC standards.  
 
             
C. Rectal Cancer Multidisciplinary Team Attendance (Standard 2.5) 
 
1. Each calendar year, members of the RC-MDT must meet the minimum RC-MDT 
meeting attendance requirements as noted Table A.  
2. Attendance at RC-MDT meetings may include participation through teleconference 
as long as the tele-attendee can participate in discussions and has access to necessary 
meeting materials, including, but not limited to, radiographic images, specimen 
photographs, and pathologic reports and/or slides. 
3. The Rectal Cancer Program (RCP) Director monitors attendance each year and 
addresses attendance outliers. Membership attendance for RC-MDT meetings is 
recorded in the minutes for each meeting. 
 
Table A 
 
 
 
D. Rectal Cancer Program (RCP) Director (Standard 2.2) 
 
1. Each calendar year, the facility appoints an RCP Director who chairs the RC-MDT. 
2. The RCP Director must be an active physician member of OLOL’s medical staff who 
provides care and treatment to rectal cancer patients. A co-director may be appointed at 
the discretion of the RCP.  
3. Internal Audit Responsibility: The RCP Director is responsible for overseeing internal 
audits of the RCP’s performance and the development of any necessary action plans. The 
RCP Director may delegate responsibility for specific audits and any necessary action 
plans to appropriately credentialed physician members of the RC-MDT. Results of the 
Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 3 of 4 
   
 
Chapter 5 audits and any action plans are reported to the RC-MDT and documented in 
the meeting minutes. 
4. CoC Committee Liaison Responsibility: Each calendar year, the RCP Director attends 
one of the facility’s CoC committee meetings and presents a report on the RCP’s 
activities. At a minimum, the RCP Director’s report must include the results of the 
required audits. The presentation is documented in the meeting minutes. 
5. Data Interpretation Responsibility: The RCP Director accesses facility-specific 
information that is maintained in the NAPRC web portal and the NCDB. The RCP 
Director evaluates the quality of rectal cancer care by monitoring, interpreting, and 
providing updated reports of the program’s data from the NCDB. The RCP Director 
reports and discusses the RCP’s performance and response to the rectal cancer quality 
measure data. Reports are documented in the meeting minutes. The RCP Director 
oversees any actions developed and implemented after assessing this data. 
 
 
E. Rectal Cancer Program Coordinator (Standard 2.3) 
 
1. An RCP Coordinator is appointed each calendar year to coordinate activities of the RC-
MDT. 
 
2. The RCP Coordinator provides comprehensive administrative support to RC-MDT 
meetings, including the management of accurate and timely information to enable clinical 
decision making at the RC-MDT.  
• Sends meeting notice (Outlook calendar invite) out via email approximately 2 
weeks prior to each RC-MDT meeting. 
• Confirms that a physician member of each required specialty will be in 
attendance at each RC-MDT 
• Sends meeting reminder via email approximately 2 days prior to each RC-MDT 
meeting, which includes a de-identified list of patients, scheduled to be 
presented. 
• The RCP Coordinator identifies rectal cancer patients, or the managing physician 
notifies the RCP Coordinator of the rectal cancer patient. The RCP Coordinator 
then schedules the patient for presentation at the next RC-MDT meeting.  
• Identifies all pertinent information, including but not limited to, pathology and 
radiology, needed for case presentation at the RC-MDT meetings. 
• Completes RC-MDT Presentation request form for each patient and 
communicates with internal departments including radiology and pathology, 
external providers and facilities to ensure all pertinent information is available 
for presentation at RC-MDT meetings.   
• Notifies all physicians and support staff involved in the care of each patient being 
presented at the RC-MDT of the date of the meeting where the case is being 
presented.  Clinical Research is also notified to screen patients for eligibility in 
clinical trials. 
• Prepares discussion forms for each patient scheduled to be presented at RC-MDT 
meetings to ensure physicians discuss all required elements outlined in Standards 
5.5 and 5.11 
• Monitors patients on the Patient Tracking spreadsheet throughout treatment to 
ensure timely presentation at the RC-MDT meeting for an outcome discussion as 
outlined in standard 5.11 
 Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 4 of 4 
   
 
3. The RCP Coordinator identifies and monitors patients with suspected and confirmed 
rectal cancer throughout their diagnostic and treatment pathways. 
• Reviews all new patients diagnosed at, or referred to, OLOL Cancer Institute, 
including Lake Physician Group (LPG) surgical groups, medical oncology, and 
LSU clinics, to promptly identify rectal cancer patients. 
• Tracks dates of all workup, treatment, case presentations, and discussion 
summaries on the NAPRC Patient Tracking Spreadsheet to ensure all time targets 
are met according to the NAPRC Chapter 5 Standards. 
 
4. Following the RC-MDT meeting, the RCP Coordinator completes the Treatment 
Evaluation and Recommendation Summary and/or the Post-Surgical Treatment Outcome 
Discussion Summary in Epic for each patient presented as outlined in NAPRC Standards 
5.6 and 5.12 and ensures delivery of the summaries to the patient’s treating physician. 
 
5. The RCP Coordinator proactively coordinates patient pathways by communicating with 
physicians and staff in surgery clinics, medical oncology, radiation oncology, and the 
colorectal nurse navigator, ensuring that all appointments, diagnostic tests, and treatments 
are booked within the time targets defined by the NAPRC standards.  
 
6. The RCP Coordinator abstracts all rectal cancer cases in the Tumor Registry database. 
 
7. Prepares packets for each rectal cancer patient with all applicable information needed for 
RCP Director to perform required Chapter 5 chart audits. 
 
8. Assists RCP Director in compiling Chapter 5 audits results to report at RC-MDT 
meetings 
 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS: 
Commission on Cancer, National Accreditation Program for Rectal Cancer 2020, Standard 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 
2.4, and 2.5. 