Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 1 of 3 
 
 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Cancer Institute 
Policy Manual: Policies and 
Procedures/Organizational Section: Oncology 
Title: Pathology:  
Rectal Cancer Multidisciplinary Care 
Policy 
Reference #: 
NAPRC05 Pathology 
Standards 5.1, 5.9, & 5.10 
Supersedes #: Standards 2.1, 2.9, & 2.10 
Date of Origination: November 22, 2017 Review Date: March 25, 2024 
Revision Date: July 14, 2023 
 
 
PURPOSE:   
 
To provide guidelines for the review of pathology specimens, slides, and/or reports of rectal cancer patients. This 
policy addresses National Accreditation Program for Rectal Cancer (NAPRC) standards 5.1, 5.9, and 5.10. 
 
POLICY:   
 
 
A. Rectal cancer patients who are diagnosed elsewhere, and have received no previous treatment, have 
biopsy slides and/or reports reviewed by an appropriate, pathology appointed member of the Rectal 
Cancer Multidisciplinary Team (RC-MDT) prior to initiating treatment at Our Lady of the Lake 
(OLOL) Cancer Institute.  
 
B. Patients diagnosed elsewhere who received previous treatment elsewhere have documentation of a 
rectal cancer diagnosis in their medical record before initiation of treatment at OLOL Cancer 
Institute.  
 
C. A minimum of 95% of previously undiagnosed and previously untreated rectal cancer patients receive 
a biopsy at OLOL Cancer Institute, to confirm rectal cancer diagnosis prior to initiation of definitive 
treatment at OLOL Cancer Institute.  
 
D. A minimum of 90% of definitive rectal cancer surgical resection specimens of the primary tumor 
performed at OLOL Cancer Institute are read and the pathology report completed by a RC-MDT 
pathologist who is an appointed member of the RC-MDT.  
 
E. A minimum of 95% of pathology reports for rectal cancer patients undergoing a definitive surgical 
resection of the primary tumor at OLOL Cancer Institute are completed within two weeks of the 
definitive surgical resection, contain all required College of American Pathologists (CAP) data 
elements, and use a standardized synoptic format.  
 
F. A minimum of 65% of all eligible rectal cancer surgical specimens are photographed to include 
anterior, posterior, and lateral views.  Photographs are presented to and discussed by the RC-MDT 
and electronically stored with a patient identifier. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 2 of 3 
 
 Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 3 
 
PROCEDURE 
 
A. Patients who present to OLOL Cancer Institute with undiagnosed, untreated rectal cancer, undergo a 
biopsy prior to treatment at the Cancer Institute. Once the biopsy is collected, it is assigned to a pathology 
member of the RC-MDT to examine the specimen and confirm diagnosis. The pathology report is 
incorporated into the patient’s medical record.  
 
B. Patients who present to OLOL Cancer Institute who were diagnosed elsewhere with no previous treatment 
or diagnosed and previously treated elsewhere: 
 
• Before initiation of definitive treatment at OLOL Cancer Institute, the managing physician sends 
a physician order to the outside lab requesting biopsy slides be sent to Pathology Group of 
Louisiana (PGL). An appointed pathology member of the RC-MDT reviews the slides and issues 
a second opinion to confirm the diagnosis of rectal cancer. The Rectal Cancer Program 
Coordinator tracks the number of slides obtained and reviewed by the RC-MDT pathologist on 
the NAPRC Patient Tracking Spreadsheet. 
• Once the biopsy slides have been examined by a pathology member of the RC-MDT, the 
pathologist issues a report of the second opinion results and incorporates the report into the 
patient’s medical record. 
• If the biopsy was performed at an outside facility and the biopsy slides cannot be obtained for 
review, a copy of the report is obtained and reviewed by a pathology member of the RC-MDT 
during the RC-MDT Planning Discussion and documented on the Treatment Planning Discussion 
Form. A copy of the outside report is scanned into the patient’s medical record. 
• If neither pathology slides, nor reports for a biopsy performed elsewhere can be obtained for a 
previously diagnosed but untreated rectal cancer patient, the patient undergoes a re-biopsy at 
OLOL Cancer Institute. The biopsy is assigned to an appointed pathology member of the RC-
MDT to review and confirm diagnosis. The pathology report is incorporated into the patient’s 
medical record. 
• In cases where the rectal cancer patient is diagnosed elsewhere and has received previous 
treatment, and neither pathology slides, nor reports for a biopsy performed elsewhere can be 
obtained, a confirmed rectal cancer diagnosis is documented by the managing physician in the 
patient’s medical record prior to initiating treatment at OLOL Cancer Institute. 
 
C. When a rectal cancer patient undergoes surgical resection of their primary tumor at OLOL Cancer 
Institute, the case is assigned to an appointed pathology member of the RC-MDT for evaluation and 
completion of the pathology report 
• The pathologist issues a pathology report, which includes all required data elements outlined in 
the College of American Pathologists (CAP) rectal cancer protocol using a standard synoptic 
format. The report is completed within two weeks of the definitive surgical resection and is 
incorporated into the patient’s medical record. 
 
D. Rectal cancer surgical specimens are photographed to include anterior, posterior, and lateral views of the 
mesorectal envelope by a pathologist’s assistant. Photographs of the fresh or formalin fixed ex-vivo 
specimen may be obtained using a standard digital camera in either the operating room or in the 
pathology laboratory.  
• The pathologist includes the photographs in the surgical pathology report that is incorporated into 
the patient’s medical record. 
• The pathologist presents the photographs, along with the surgical pathology findings, to the RC-
MDT for discussion. 
 
 Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 3 of 3 
 
 Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
 
 
CHART REVIEW:  
• At a minimum, a random sample of 20 percent of eligible patient medical records or a maximum of 100 
cases are reviewed by the Rectal Cancer Program Director (RCP Director) each calendar year to evaluate 
compliance. The RCP Director may delegate this review to an appropriately credentialed physician 
member of the RC-MDT. For any result that does not meet the required percentages as listed in the rating 
criteria section, an action plan must be developed and implemented. 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS 
Commission on Cancer, National Accreditation Program for Rectal Cancer 2020, Standard 5.1, 5.9, 5.10 