ECLS-012 (2114) 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for NCCU (2114) 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 (2114) 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: September 30, 2020 Review Date: June 17, 2024 
Revision Date: June 17, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit director, manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exits are located:  Adjacent to rooms 9000, 9003, 9005, 9011, 9019, by the electric room, the 
CT room, the back hallway stairs, the front stairway door, the waiting room and by the middle 
hallway fire door. 
• Enter location of Adjacent Smoke Compartment(s)  
o One is through the double doors past the electrical room and towards the public stairway ECLS-012 (2114) 
Page 2 of 3 
and the second is through the double doors past the equipment storage room and 
towards the radiology/procedural area. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• The CNA or designee will ensure that the hallway is clear of any carts or equipment by moving 
them to the equipment room and that all doors and windows are closed. 
• The CSR or designee will confirm that all fire doors that are usually held open by magnetic locks 
are release and closed on activation of the fire alarm and will prevent any people from using the 
elevators. 
• The nurses will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an 
emergency exercise to ensure your safety”. The nurse will also assist those with Limited English 
Proficiency (LEP) and those with sensory or mobility disabilities. 
• The charge nurse will ensure all employees and patients are accounted for and that all rooms are 
empty. (They will mark the door/door frame with chalk to indicate the room is empty.) 
.   
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
The Director, manager, charge nurse, or respiratory therapist have the authority to turn off medical 
gases because respiratory and plant services are not usually always on the unit. 
 The medical gas shutoff valve is located on the wall outside of rooms 9008 and 9015 and between 
the procedure and equipment rooms. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations)-, For NCCU patients, horizontal evacuations would be 
accomplished using equipment such as wheelchairs and stretchers.  Vertical evacuations would 
be used accomplished using equipment such as sheets and mattresses depending on the 
individual patient. The wheelchairs will be in the equipment storage room and the stretchers will 
be on the back hall. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• FIRE EXTINGUISHERS are located by the pharmacy office, near 9002, by the medication room 
on the B side, and near the megavator. 
• Manual pull stations are located by the public stairs, by the staff doors to the public stairway, by 
the consultation room, and by the equipment room. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Equipment that would need to be turned off would include ventilators, Bipaps and vapotherm. 
• Most NCCU patients are on oxygen. 
• All NCCU patients are non-ambulatory. 
•  The Code RED Response Team would have to badge access into front door or back hall by the 
radiology area. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
 
• The primary horizontal evacuation routes will be through the double doors past the electrical room 
and towards the public stairway –the alternate horizontal evacuation route is down the back hall past ECLS-012 (2114) 
Page 3 of 3 
the equipment supply room door through the double doors and towards radiology/procedure area and 
to the megavator. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route and destination will be the back hallway to the public stairs to 
the second floor where the parking garage access is located--parking garage is directly across from 
HVI 
• The secondary vertical evacuation route and destination-to Essen Lane is by the back stairway near 
the CT room to the first floor and the door that opens to ESSEN Lane 
• NCCU should only have horizontal evacuation. 
 
See egress map by main public elevator. 
 
 
 