POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Cardiovascular Lab 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  CVL 
Subject:  Scheduling of Cardiology Services Procedures Section:  Administration 
Date of Origination:  August 11, 1988 Supersedes: 92,93,94,96,97 
Date of Last Revision: 
Date of Review: 
5/31/18 
7/31/23 
Serial Code:  NCD 008 
                          
Distribution:     Cardiovascular Lab 
 
Formulated by:        Cardiovascular Service Line 
 
Purpose:              To facilitate effective and efficient scheduling of daily 
                       elective and emergent Cardiovascular procedures. 
 
Applies to:           Cardiovascular Lab personnel, Nursing Service, Nursing 
                       Supervisors, and physicians. 
 
Policy:               Hours of operation for elective procedures are scheduled 
                       Monday through Friday 6:00 am – 4:30 pm in the Cardiovascular  
    Lab.  
 
Responsibility:       Cardiovascular Lab Staff, Nursing Supervisors, Physicians 
                       
 
Procedure: 
 
I.   Cardiovascular Laboratory 
1. Procedures are scheduled by a Cardiologist who has OLOL Cardiovascular 
privileges. 
2. Procedures may be scheduled by the Cardiologists through his/her office staff or 
through Epic. 
3. Routine procedures may be scheduled on the hour or ½ hour from 6:30 a.m. -3:30 
p.m. 
4. Surgical standby is denoted by the following: 
a. Active standby–Surgeon, staff & OR on standby 
b. NO STANDBY requested.  
c. The Cardiologist or designee is responsible for obtaining active standby for 
procedures. 
5. Cases may be posted by calling the Cardiovascular Laboratory during normal 
working hours or placing a “request for case” in Epic.  After hours, a physician 
“request for case” should be placed in Epic.  The Cath Lab will review all requests 
in the que the following business day at 6am. 
6. Information needed to schedule: 
a. Date and Time 
b. Cardiologist 
c. Name of patient 
d. Procedure to be performed 
e. Diagnosis code 
f. Special information concerning the procedure. g. Outpatient or inpatient and room number if the patient is already hospitalized. 
h. Date of birth or Medical Record number. 
i. Patient phone number 
 
7. After scheduling a procedure, repeat the date and time requested to confirm these 
points with the person scheduling.   
 
8. Cases after hours: 
 
a. HEART ALERTS - In the event of an ST elevated Myocardial Infarction 
(STEMI), the on-call team is paged simultaneously to all pagers. The on-call 
team immediately proceeds to OLOL. The CVL team leader calls the ER in 
route.   
 
b. A call schedule with the names, phone numbers, and pager numbers of the 
call team is faxed to ER Communications Tech, HVI OR desk, HVCU, and 
PBX operator on Mondays and Fridays, and as needed for holidays. 
 
c. Cardiologists needing to perform a procedure when the Cardiovascular Lab is 
on-call must contact the PBX operator to call the team out. The PBX operator 
is responsible for assuring that the on-call team has been activated. 
 
d. Emergency procedures will take priority over routine cases. If a routine 
procedure is already in progress at the time the procedure is declared an 
emergency, the routine case will be completed as soon as possible. Team 
members from HVCU and HVAU will assist with procedure as needed. 
 
 
II. If a physician has an emergency case, he will immediately follow a case in progress as soon 
as possible. All other cases scheduled in that room will follow. The physician with the 
emergency should call the next physician to explain the situation and/or designate 
someone from the CVL to call for him.   
 
III. If the physician with the emergency case bumps himself on the schedule, the scheduled case 
should move to the end of the day or next available slot. 
 
IV. The physician with an emergency should bump a colleague from their group prior to 
bumping another group if possible. 
 
V. If there are any discrepancies in the above, it should be worked out between the physicians 
involved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Our Lady of the Lake Ascension:  (OLOLA) 
1. Procedures will be scheduled by the physician or their surrogate by calling Surgery 
scheduling during normal business hours or by leaving a voicemail after hours.  
Procedures can be scheduled by entering a case request in Epic as well. 
2. Information necessary to schedule a case include: 
a. Patient name / date of birth 
b. Date and time of case 
c. Physician performing case 
d. Procedure to be performed 
e. Outpatient vs Inpatient (give room number) 
f. Person scheduling the case 
g. Any pertinent information about the case 
3.  These cases will be scheduled Monday through Friday during the hours 6:30 or 7am 
(except major holidays) up to 1:30pm.  After that time requires the supervisors’ 
approval. 
 
 
  