POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Cardiovascular 
Lab 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  CVL 
Subject:  Philosophy and Objectives of Cardiovascular Lab Section:  Administration 
Date of Origination:  September 8,1988 Supersedes: 1996 
Date of Last Revision: 
Date of Review: 
7/31/17 
7/31/24 
Serial Code:  NCD001 
 
 
Distribution:  Cardiovascular Laboratory  
 
Formulated By: Cardiovascular Service Line 
  
Purpose: To provide “Best Practice” patient care with technological advances. 
Applies To:  Cardiovascular Lab personnel 
    
 
Policy:  
 
The philosophy of the Cardiovascular Lab is based on the concept that every patient is a unique 
individual with the right to respect, dignity and quality patient care regardless of race, creed, sex, 
color, nationality or status.   
 
Objective: 
 
The Cardiovascular Lab strives to promote “Best Practice” in patient care and new technology for 
all Cardiovascular patients.  The on-going needs of the patient and department are continuously 
assessed by: 
 
1. Determining, establishing, maintaining and updating standards, policies and procedures in 
collaboration with the medical staff through directed research and problem solving within 
the scope of the service. 
2. Providing and maintaining a safe and aseptic environment for patients, physicians, visitors 
and staff. 
3. Continuous assessment to the patient and family’s physical, spiritual, educational and 
emotional needs in an effort to promote an optimal patient recovery.  
4. Collaborating and coordinating with physician and other health care services to provide 
continuity of care. 
5. Continuous education of new developments and changes in procedures and technology. 
6. Assessing, planning, implementing and evaluating staff orientation and staff development. 
7. Encouraging staff to seek opportunities and share in the responsibility of his/her personal 
and professional growth and development. 
8. Providing educational/training opportunities for students. 
9. Maintaining a management system in which all levels of staff have the opportunity to 
participate in decisions and activities which affect the health care work environment. 10. Assessing, planning, implementing and evaluating patient care, and continuous performance 
improvement to ensure optimal patient care, in a safe and effective manner. 
11. Utilizing resource information to make informed decisions for providing care and by 
continuous evaluation of outcome information. 
12. Develop a cost effective and time efficient staffing plan.  To ensure safe and effective 
nursing care of patients. To accommodate daily scheduling of cases including emergency 
call backs. 
13. Monitoring the cost of supplies, equipment and services, and controlling inventory in a 
prudent manner and efficient use of resources.  
14. Focus on community awareness and education of potential health risk factors and lifestyle 
modifications. 