POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Cardiovascular 
Lab 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Cardiovascular 
Lab 
Subject:  Procedure Count Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  April 12, 2012 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: 
Date of Review: 
7/31/24 
 
4/12/12 Serial Code:  NCR 008 
  
 
Formulated By:  Cardiovascular Laboratory (CVL) 
 
Purpose:   
To provide a policy on count procedures to protect the patient from retained    
foreign objects. 
 
Policy:  
An initial sponge and sharp count will be done on all surgical procedures prior to the start of the 
procedure.  An initial instrument count will be done on all surgical procedures that involve cut 
down and / or pocket formation.  The final count will be done when the fascia is being closed.  The 
count will be verbally and visually done by the scrub person and another staff member involved in 
the case. The final count will be verbally reported to the physician. A written tally will be recorded 
on the white board in the room where the procedure takes place.  CVL documentation will reflect 
who counted pre-operatively, who performed the final count, and if the count was correct.  Anytime 
the Circulator and / or scrub is permanently relieved, a complete count is done and recorded in 
CVL documentation. 
 
Procedure: 
A.  SPONGE COUNT          
 1.  Items in this category that will be counted before a case begins and anytime more 
      are added to the sterile field includes, but is not limited to the following: 
  a. Radiopaque sponges       
  b. Lap Pads 
 
2.  Prior to the start of the case initial sponge count will be done concurrently by the  
     scrub person and another staff member involved in the case.  Counts will be  
     visualized and done audibly. 
 
3.  Final counts will be done by the scrub person and another staff member involved 
     with the case. 
 
4.  A complete count will be done by the scrub person and another staff member: 
 a. Prior to the beginning of the case. 
 b. When the physician begins to close fascia.    c. When the scrub and / or circulator is relieved permanently from the  
case and they anticipate the case may end before they return. 
 
 d. When multiple procedures are performed on one patient, counts are 
  performed for each procedure separately, immediately before  
  completion of the surgical procedure. 
 
5.  Laps and sponges are counted immediately after tapes are broken and are to be  
     visualized individually by the personnel counting. 
a.  Any additional pack will be opened individually to ensure there are 
 only 10 sponges to a package and each sponge has a radiopaque  
 string.         
  
b.       If an opened package contains an incorrect number or is 
 contaminated, all items from the package are removed  
 immediately from the sterile field, discarded and not added to the  
 count.         
  
6.  Items are counted in groups as they are prepackaged (sponges in groups of 10,  
     Laps in groups of 5, etc.)        
  
7.  Used sponges and laps will be contained or confined.  Soiled sponges / laps will  
     be handled with instruments or gloved hands, never with unprotected hands.    
     Soiled sponges and laps will be collected during procedure in plastic bag   
     provided in sterile pack. At final count, sponges and laps will be laid out  
     individually at foot of patient table.  Once final count is verified correct, it will be  
     documented and verbally communicated to team members and MD. 
 
8.  All counts will be in numerical order ie.. 1,2,3,4 etc…Not, “There are 2 on field  
     and I have 8, so that makes 10.” 
 
9.  Non radiopaque dressing sponges are to be placed on the field after final count is     
     completed and verified correct.       
 
  10.  Incorrect counts or discrepancies: 
   a. report to physician immediately 
   b. Room and sterile field will be searched.  If not found, initiate x-ray 
    upon physicians order.  Results are documented in CVL record. 
   c. Unresolved count discrepancies will be reported to physician, 
    immediate supervisor, and documented in RLDatix. 
 
11.  In the event a count was impossible due to the urgency of the patient’s  
       condition, it will be treated as # 10.  
 
 B. NEEDLE AND SHARPS COUNT:        
  1.  Items in this category that will be counted before a case begins and anytime more 
       items are added to the sterile field includes, but is not limited to the  
       following:          
   a. Suture needles        
   b. Hypodermic needles       
   c. Knife blades        
   
  2.  Prior to the start of the case, initial needle and sharp count will be done  
       concurrently by the scrub person and another staff member involved in the case.
       Count will be visualized and audible. 
  3.  Final count will be done by the scrub person and another staff member involved  
       in the case.  Internal suture packaging will be retained on the field to assist in  
       reconciling needle counts. 
 
  4.  A complete needle and sharp count will be done by the scrub and another staff  
       member involved in the case: 
   a. Prior to the beginning of the case. 
   b. When the fascia is being closed. 
   c. When the scrub and/or circulator are relieved permanently from the  
    case and they anticipate the case may end before they return. 
d.       When multiple procedures are performed on one patient, counts are 
 performed for each procedure separately, immediately before  
 completion of the surgical procedure.      
 
  5.  When a multi-needle suture pack is opened, each needle will be counted before 
        using any needle from the pack. 
 
  6.  If an opened multi-needle suture pack contains an incorrect number or is  
       contaminated upon delivery, all items are removed from the sterile field and  
       discarded in sharps container, and not added to the count.  
 
  7.  All items will be counted in numerical order ie..1,2,3,4 etc…Not, “there are 2 on  
       the field and I have added 8 so that makes 10.” 
 
  8.  The status of the needle / sharp count will be recorded in CVL documentation  
       and include the names of the personnel involved in the count.  The actual  
       numeric count will be on the tally board in the procedure room. 
 
  9.  The status of the needle / sharp count will be documented and verbally 
                 communicated to team members and MD. 
 
          10.  Incorrect counts or discrepancies: 
   a. report to physician immediately 
   b. Room and sterile field will be searched.  If not found, initiate x-ray 
    upon physicians order.  Results are documented in CVL record.    c. Unresolved count discrepancies will be reported to physician, 
    immediate supervisor and documented in RLDatix. 
 
 
          11.  In the event a count was impossible due to the urgency of the patient’s condition,
       it will be treated as # 10.        
  
C. INSTRUMENT COUNT:         
  1.  Instrument counts will be done on all surgical procedures that involve a cut  
       a cut down or pocket formation. 
   
  2.  Items in this category that will be counted before a case begins and anytime more
       are added to the field includes, but is not limited to the following:   instruments 
 
  3.  Instrument trays once opened to the field will be counted in their entirety by 
       individual items and not total number of pieces. 
 
  4.  The following activities are necessary for instrument counts:  sterile processing 
       department shall identify, assemble, count, and document the standard instrument 
       trays before sterilization and place the documented tally sheet in the set to be  
       sterilized. 
 
  5.  Prior to the start of a case, initial instrument counts will be done concurrently by 
       the scrub person and another staff member involved in the case.  Counts will be  
       simultaneously visualized and done audibly. 
 
  6.  Final counts will be done by the scrub person and another person involved in the 
       case. 
 
  7.  A complete instrument count will be done by the scrub and another staff member
       involved in the case: 
  a. Prior to the beginning of the case. 
  b. When the fascia is being closed. 
  c. When the scrub and/or circulator are relieved permanently from the
   case and they anticipate the case may end before they return. 
  d. When multiple procedures are performed on one patient, counts are 
   performed for each procedure separately, immediately before  
   completion of the surgical procedure. 
 
            8. Any instrument added will be counted and added to the tally board in the room. 
 
            9. Instrument broken during a procedure will be accounted for in their entirety. 
 
         10.  Status of the instrument count will be documented in CVL documentation  
  including the names of staff members performing the count. 
          11. Status of the instrument count will be will be documented and verbally 
                communicated to team members and MD. 
 
         12.  Incorrect counts or discrepancies:       
   a. Report to the physician immediately. 
    b. The room and operating field will be searched.  If not found, then  
     upon physician’s order initiate x-ray and record results in CVL  
    documentation. 
c. Unresolved count discrepancies will be reported to physician, 
immediate supervisor and documented in RLDatix. 
                
         13.  In the event the count was impossible due to the urgency of the patient’s  
        condition, it will be treated as #12. 
 
D. SPECIMEN COUNT 
 
The circulator will confirm all specimen totals, tests, and disposition with the MD at 
the conclusion of the final count procedure or prior to the MD exiting the room. 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
      
                             
 
 
 