NICA-003 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Neonatal Intensive Care 
Subject:  Admission Criteria Guidelines for Neonatal 
Intensive Care/Infant Care Center 
Section:  Neonatal Intensive Care 
Date of Origination:  July 12, 2022 Supersedes: NICP-015 
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
October 6, 2023 
Serial Code:  NICA-003 
  
PURPOSE: 
To clarify admitting guidelines for infants to Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital. 
 
POLICY:  
Infants admitted to the NICU/Infant Care Center should meet the guidelines below and should be admitted to 
the neonatology attending on call.   (Please also see below for guidelines for pediatric surgery admissions to 
NICU). 
Admission criteria: 
• Infants less than or equal to 28 days chronological age who require intensive care 
• All infants less than or equal to 7 days of age admitted for any reason 
• All NICU-to-NICU transfers and other infants with chronic neonatal conditions (for example, short gut, 
chronic lung disease) up to 1 year of age including readmissions to the hospital within 2 weeks of NICU 
discharge 
• Diagnosis specific consideration for admission, especially for infants less than 14 days age: 
hyperbilirubinemia, neonatal opiate withdrawal syndrome, apnea of prematurity, necrotizing 
enterocolitis, neonatal seizures  
• Consult neonatology for any questions regarding exceptions to these criteria  
 
 
Admitting to pediatric surgery: 
Infants without contributing chronic conditions may be admitted to pediatric surgery service instead of 
neonatology if they are being admitted for a primary surgical reason with expected length of hospital stay 48-72 
hours or less.  Pediatric surgery may choose to consult neonatology for these admissions if needed. The 
neonatology attending or neonatal nurse practitioner should be notified of all admissions to the infant 
care center, regardless of admit service. 
 
 
 
 NICA-003 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
Special considerations for trauma patients: 
With few exceptions, all trauma patients of any age requiring critical care, should be admitted to the 
PICU to Pediatric Surgery. If the admitting pediatric surgeon believes the NICU would be the 
appropriate unit for admission, then consult both neonatology and PICU attending for discussion and 
final disposition. Examples are very recently discharged neonate from NICU with multiple complex neonatal 
conditions. 
 
Please note: If NICU/PICU are at capacity, please consider a joint discussion with both the PICU and NICU 
attending on call regarding admission to determine appropriate location for admission for patients who may fall 
under both PICU/NICU admission criteria.   
 