NICP-008 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Neonatal Intensive Care 
Subject:  Pulse Oximetry Screening for Critical 
Congenital Heart Disease (CCHD) 
Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  October 23, 2020 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
January 2, 2025 
August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  NICP-008 
  
PURPOSE: 
This policy is to provide a standard method of screening for critical congenital Heart Defects (CCHD).  
 
POLICY: 
Newborns will be screened for Critical Congenital Heart Disease (CCHD) as indicated by the clinical situation 
prior to discharge. 
 
Screening Criteria: 
1. Screening for CCHD will require an order. 
2. Screening should be based on the recommended screening algorithm (Attachment A) and performed by 
Registered Nurses who have been educated and trained in pulse oximetry monitoring of newborns. 
3. Screening should be done prior to discharge in infants who are maintained in room air and for whom 
discharge in the first week of life is anticipated.  Screening for those infants > 1 week age at the time of 
their discharge is at the discretion of the physician.  Screening is not required for those infants who have 
had an echocardiogram.  Ideally, screening should occur at or near 24 hours age or may be done sooner 
if discharge prior to 24 hours age is anticipated. 
4. It is the responsibility of the assigned nurse caring for the newborn to ensure the screening is completed 
prior to discharge. 
 
 
PROCUDURE: 
 
1. Screening will be documented in electronic medical record. 
2. Oxygen saturations will be obtained from in the right hands (RH) and one foot. 
3. A newborn passes when: 
a. Any oxygen saturation measures greater than or equal to 95% in both the right hand and one foot 
with less than 3% absolute difference between the upper and lower extremity.  The screen would end 
if determined negative and the infant will be considered cleared for discharge to home without any 
need for further referral. 
4. A newborn fails when: 
a.  Any oxygen saturation measures of 89% or less in either RH or foot. 
b. Do not repeat pulse oximetry screening, notify neonatologist, and consider immediate Cardiology 
consult. 
5. A newborn needs to be retested when: 
a. Any oxygen saturation between 90-94% in either the RH or foot OR there is a difference of 4% or 
more between the RH and foot. NICP-008 
Page 2 of 2 
 
b. Repeat pulse oximetry measurements in one hour 
1. A newborn passes the retest when: pulse oximetry of 95% or more in RH and foot and, a 
difference of 3% or less between the 2 
2. A newborn fails the retest when pulse oximetry of 94% or less in either the RH or foot OR a 
difference of 4% or more between the RH and foot OR a difference of 4% or more between the 
RH or foot 
3. Do not repeat pulse oximetry screening, notify neonatologist, and consider immediate 
Cardiology consult. 
 
          
   
REFERENCE: 
Matthew, E.O, Pinto, N.M., Pramanik, A.K., Markowsky, A., Schwartz, B.N., Kemper, A.R., Hom, L.A., 
Martin, G.R., & the Section on Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery; Section on Hospital Medicine; Committee on 
Fetus and Newborns (2025).  Pediatrics, 155(1): e2024069667   
 
Screening algorithm for CCHD - Attachment A 
 
 