NICP-014 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Neonatal Intensive Care 
Subject:  Manual Peritoneal Dialysis Section:  Neonatal Intensive Care 
Date of Origination:  June 16, 2022 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
 August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  NICP-014 
  
PURPOSE: 
To outline the NICU nurse’s role in caring for a patient that is placed on manual peritoneal dialysis (PD) and 
continuous care throughout their stay. 
POLICY:  
Patients admitted to the NICU with a diagnosis requiring manual peritoneal dialysis will work in conjunction 
with the Neonatologist, Nephrologist, and dialysis nurses to include:  
1. Preparing the baby for surgery to have peritoneal dialysis catheter inserted. 
2. Following the manual peritoneal dialysis orders written by the Nephrologist and following orders of the 
Neonatologist for overall care of the baby.  
3. Work in conjunction with the dialysis nurses in initiating manual peritoneal dialysis and running cycles. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
When a baby is admitted for manual peritoneal dialysis, the Neonatologist and Nephrologist will contact the 
surgeon to have a dialysis catheter placed. The Nephrologist will ensure that the dialysis nurses are aware of the 
patient pending manual peritoneal dialysis. 
The dialysis nurse will: 
1. Ensure that the proper dialysate is available and ready. 
2. Bring the tubing and other supplies needed to prepare for manual peritoneal dialysis 
3. Set up the manual peritoneal dialysis in the patient’s room per order. 
4. Review with the beside RN the process for manual PD, per order. 
5. Ensure that the system is working correctly 
6. Remain on call 24/7 for any questions/concerns from bedside RN. 
7. Will round on baby every day to ensure cycles are running smoothly. 
 
Bedside NICU RN will: 
1. Gather equipment needed for manual PD: 
a. IV pole 
b. K-pad warmer and pad (warmer in equipment room of NICU, pads are stored in Materials) 
2. Document on PD flowsheet, to include the following: 
a. Cycle number 
b. Fill volume NICP-014 
Page 2 of 2 
c. Fill time 
d. Dwell time 
e. Drian volume 
f. Drian time 
g. Ultrafilrate 
3. Contact the PD RN for any concerns regarding the process of manual PD. (example: baby not filling or 
draining) If it is noted to NOT be a process issue, but rather, a patient issue, the nurse will contact the 
Neonatal Nurse Practitioner or Neonatologist. 
4. If there are any changes in patient status (vital signs, change in color of PD output, or leaking around PD 
catheter) the nurse will contact the Neonatal Nurse Practitioner or Neonatologist immediately. 
5. Other indications that NNP/Neonatologist should be alerted for include: 
a. Baby not draining the instilled volume of dialysate 
b. Cloudy dialysate or fibrin present in the drained fluid 
 
PROCESS: 
1. Baby will be placed on a radiant heat warmer 
2. Dialysate must be higher than the baby and drainage bag placed below the baby 
3. When manual exchanges are initiated: 
a. Fill buretrol with prescribed dialysate volume (plus a few extra milliliters) and then clamp the 
bag off to the buretrol. (When filling the buretrol, the stopcock must be turned off to the baby.) 
b. Once the proper volume is in the buretrol, turn the stopcock to allow the volume to infuse into 
the baby. (Ensure that the clamp going to the drainage bag is clamped.) 
c. Once the correct amount is infused, clamp the tubing and turn the stopcock off to the buretrol 
(always leave a few extra ml’s in the buretrol so that air does not infuse into the baby). 
d. Allow fluid to “dwell” in the patient as ordered by the Nephrologist. 
e. At appropriate time, unclamp the tubing going to the drainage bag and allow the baby to drain 
for the ordered amount of time. 
f. Document all aspects of the cycle on the flowsheet. 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS: 
1. Bedside RN does NOT break the sterility of the system, this is done by the dialysis RN ONLY. 
2. Bedside RN does NOT change the sterile catheter dressing, this is done by the dialysis RN ONLY 
3. Weighing the baby is done when the baby is drained. DO NOT weigh while fluid is dwelling. 
 
REFERENCES: 
Beauman, S., Bowles, S. (2019) Policies, Procedures, and Competencies for Neonatal Nursing are. National 
Association of Neonatal Nurses 6th Edition, 163-165.  
 