NICP-011 
Page 1 of 4 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Neonatal Intensive Care 
Subject:  Car Seat Tolerance Screening in the NICU Section:  Patient Care  
Date of Origination:  October 23, 2020 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  NICP-011 
  
PURPOSE: 
To establish guidelines for the evaluation of infants at risk for apnea, bradycardia, and oxygen desaturations 
while in a semi-upright car seat in order to promote safe transport in a motor vehicle. 
 
POLICY: 
It is the policy of OLOL Children’s Hospital to provide a car seat tolerance screen prior to discharge to any 
infant who has not previously been discharged home who meets the following criteria. 
 
A.  Criteria for administering: 
1. Infants born <37 weeks gestational age. 
2. Infants with Birth Weight <2500 grams (5lbs 8oz). 
3. Infants with medical conditions that place them at risk, including but not limited to: 
a. Hypotonia (i.e. neuromuscular disorders, Down Syndrome, HIE) 
b. Airway anomalies (i.e. Pierre Robin Sequence, micrognathia) 
c. Cyanotic congenital heart disease 
 
B.  Equipment/supplies needed 
1.  Car Seat – recommended guidelines for parent’s choice of car seat include: 
a.  Infant meets minimum weight limit for car seat. 
b.  Car seat should have 5-point restraint (without tray shield). 
c.  Car seat should have all necessary parts (restraint, retainer clip, buckle, etc.) 
d.  Car seat should not be expired. 
2.  Cardio-respiratory monitor with pulse oximetry. 
3.  Blanket and washcloth rolls – ONLY if needed and permitted in manufacturer’s car seat instructions 
 
C.  Car seat tolerance screen guidelines: 
1.  Assess fit in car seat: 
a.  Shoulder harness straps through slots even with or below the infant’s shoulders. 
b.  Harness clip at armpit level, midpoint of infant’s chest, not on abdomen or in front of the neck. 
c.  Harness straps snug and flat, should not be able to pinch any webbing at collarbone.  
d.  Infant should not slouch, and buttocks should be flat against the back of the car seat. 
e.  Nothing may be added beneath the infant or beneath the harness straps unless provided or 
approved by the car seat manufacturer. 
f.  The infant should not be swaddled when placed in the car seat.  The infant’s legs should be 
extended on either side of the crotch buckle strap. 
g.  Head & Body Support Systems should only be used if it came from the manufacturer with the car 
seat.  After-market Head & Body Support Systems not supplied by the car seat manufacturer NICP-011 
Page 2 of 4 
 
should not be used. 
h.  Blanket rolls and washcloth rolls should not be used as positioning devices unless permitted in 
the manufacturer’s car seat instructions. 
i.  Recline angle:  rear facing car seats should be reclined as directed by the manufacturer in the car 
seat instructions.  The car seat base, blankets under the car seat foot area, or the carrying handle 
positioned behind the seat to prop may be used to help achieve the manufacturer’s recommended 
angle.  The car seat MUST be at the correct recline during the testing period. 
 
2.  Parent/Guardian Education: 
a.  Parent should be informed to bring car seat in as soon as possible to allow adequate time to assess 
appropriateness of the seat for the infant. 
b.  Parents should be counseled to minimize the duration of time the infant spends in the semi-
upright position.  This includes car seat, swings, bouncy chairs, infant carriers.  Parents should be 
advised that car seats should be used only for travel. 
c.  If the car seat does not meet the above standards, parents should be informed, and 
recommendations given to obtain a car seat that does meet these standards.   
d. Recommended maximum continuous travel time in a car seat is 2 hours. 
e.  Advise parents that, if possible, it should be arranged for an adult to be seated in the rear seat 
adjacent to the infant for close observation of the infant during travel. 
 
3.  Car Seat Tolerance Screen (CSTS): 
a.  Observation period is at least 90 minutes or estimated travel time to home, whichever is longer 
with a maximum screening time of 2 hours. 
b.  Due to extended time of test, observation period in car seat should ideally be performed 30 
minutes to one hour after feeding (unless on continuous feeds). 
b.  Car seat tolerance screen should be performed within 24-48 hours of anticipated discharge. 
c.  Place infant properly into car seat.  Remove head support system if it was purchased after-market 
or if it is not appropriate size or if does not contribute to stabilizing the infant (as permitted by 
the manufacturer). 
d.  Place pulse oximetry probe onto the infant and monitor for good wave form. 
e.  Place on cardio-respiratory monitor using at least 3 leads. 
f.  Set alarm limits for heart rate 80-200, for saturation 90-100%, and for apnea of 20 seconds. 
g.  Document starting time of the test. 
.   
i.  Infant should be monitored for the entire duration of the testing period.  
j.  After the 90 minutes, remove the infant from the car seat and resume routine care. 
k.  If a baby has a change in clinical status after initial car seat tolerance screen was completed, then 
car seat tolerance screen should be repeated prior to discharge. 
 
4. Failure criteria: 
a.  Apnea – pause in breathing for >20 seconds. 
b. Bradycardia – Heart rate <80 beats per minute lasting >10 seconds. 
c. Desaturation –  
i. For infants without cyanotic heart disease:  Saturation (SPO2) <90% lasting > 10 
seconds. 
ii. For infants with cyanotic heart disease:  A drop in saturation (SPO2) >=10% from the 
infant’s baseline SPO2 for >10 seconds.  (For example, if the baseline saturation is 80%, 
a drop to 70% for >10 seconds would constitute a failed test). NICP-011 
Page 3 of 4 
 
d. Any alterations in vital signs that are considered concerning to the RN in consultation with the 
physician or mid-level provider. 
e. If none of the above occur, the infant passed the car seat tolerance screen and may go home in 
the car seat. 
 
5. Failed Car Seat Tolerance Screen: 
a. If the infant meets failure criteria, perform appropriate interventions, i.e. repositioning, 
stimulation, removal from car seat, oxygen administration.  Communicate failed car seat 
tolerance screen result and reason for failure with ordering physician and/or practitioner as soon 
as possible. 
b. If infant was found to be malpositioned and improperly restrained in the car seat, reposition 
appropriately, and restart the test with provider approval. 
c. If infant was properly positioned and fails: 
i. Inform provider of result. 
ii. Provider/Practitioner to inform family of result. 
iii. Thorough medical evaluation in order to screen for causes of illness, consider further 
medical work up as indicated. 
iv. May repeat car seat tolerance screen 12-24 hours after failed test. 
v. If infant passes subsequent test while properly positioned, may be discharged home in car 
seat. 
d. If infant fails multiple car seat tolerance screens: 
i. Inform medical provider and family. 
ii. Consider further medical evaluation as indicated. 
iii. If an infant has failed two or more car seat tolerance screens in his/her car seat, but is 
otherwise healthy and approved for discharge, retest for at least 90 minutes, or duration 
of the car ride home, in a supine car bed.  Consult the Injury Prevention Coordinator to 
obtain a car bed. 
iv. If passes car bed testing, may discharge in car bed. Car bed must be installed by a 
certified child passenger safety technician who has training in special needs.  
Recommend travel in car bed until passes repeat car seat tolerance screening. 
v. If the infant needs a repeat car seat tolerance screening, a referral will be made to the 
Sleep Medicine Center. 
vi. Repeat car seat tolerance screening should be performed at 44 weeks corrected or one 
month of age, whichever is later. 
D.  Documentation: 
1.  Car Seat Tolerance Screening should be documented in the patient’s Electronic Medical Record (EMR).  
Documentation should include the following: 
a.  Car seat manufacturer, model, and date of manufacture 
b.  Any items utilized to obtain appropriate recline angle. 
c.  Any supports that were used to ensure proper positioning. 
d.  Duration of study (start and end times) 
e.  Vital signs (heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation) before placing the infant in the car 
safety seat or car bed 
f.  Vital signs every 30 minutes throughout the observation.  
g.  Any supplemental oxygen required   
h.  Failure criteria and description of the event 
i.  Pass vs Failed car seat tolerance screen 
j.  RN performing test and provider notified 
 NICP-011 
Page 4 of 4 
 
References: 
 
Bull MJ, Engle WA, Committee on Injury, Violence, and Poison Prevention and Committee on Fetus and 
Newborn, American Academy of Pediatrics.  Safe transportation of preterm and low birth weight infants 
at hospital discharge.  Pediatrics.  2009;123(5):1424-1429.10.1542/peds.2009-0559; 
10.1542/peds.2009-0559. 
 
Davis NL, Condon F, Rhen LM. Epidemiology and predictors of failure of the infant car seat challenge. 
Pediatrics. 2013;131(5):951-957. 10.1542/peds.2012-2775; 10.1542/peds.2012-2775. 
 
Davis, N., & Shah, N. (2018). Use of car beds for infant travel: a review of the literature. Journal of 
Perinatology, 38(10), 1287-1294. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41372-018-0195-7 
 
Simsic JM, Masterson K, Kogon BE, Kirshbom PM, Kanter KR. Pre-hospital discharge car safety seat testing in 
infants following congenital heart surgery. Pediatr Cardiol. 2008;29(2):313-316. 10.1007/s00246-007-
9021-2. 
 