NICP-007 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Neonatal Intensive Care 
Subject:  Umbilical Arterial Catheter Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  October 23, 2020 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
October 6, 2023 
August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  NICP-007 
  
PURPOSE: 
The UAC is utilized for arterial blood sampling and direct arterial blood pressure monitoring in the neonate.  Its 
purpose is not for infusing glucose preparations, although it may be utilized in this manner per order of 
physician/NNP.  All arterial lines must be attached to a pressure transducer system.  
 
POLICY: 
Full aseptic precautions should be taken in preparing equipment to be used for umbilical arterial catheter (UAC) 
placement.  Infusion and blood sampling also require care and aseptic technique to prevent infection and air 
embolism which are significant risks. 
 
EQUIPMENT 
Central line cart at bedside; UAC kit  
Heparinized normal sterile saline (HNS), prepared by pharmacy 
Masks (2), Sterile Gowns (2), Sterile glove sets (2) 
Pressure Transducer System 
T-Connector 
 
A. PREPARATION OF INFANT   
1. Obtain informed consent from parent/legal guardian. 
2. Identify patient with 2 identifiers (3rd identifier if parent present) and perform time out prior to 
procedure. 
3. Place infant supine with EKG leads positioned for monitor accuracy; temp probe securely attached, 
pulse oximeter in place and functioning. 
4. Using developmental principles and ensuring the neonates safety, properly immobilize extremities at the 
initiation of the procedure.   
5. Document any bruising of lower extremities and/feet and toes. 
6. Assess vital signs, glucose, and other physiologic functioning prior to beginning the procedure. 
7. Avoid positioning in prone positioning.  
 
B.  CARE OF ARTERIAL LINE 
1. Prior to securing in place, follow insertion of UAC with chest-abdominal x-ray for placement. 
2. Do not enter line for sampling or infusion until position verified by physician/NNP. 
3. After verifying catheter position, secure line(s) with an occlusive dressing to secure the line(s) to the 
infant’s abdomen. 
4. End of catheter should be capped with a Microclave. 
5. Zero UAC transducer once every 12 hours. 
 NICP-007 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
C.  SAMPLING  
1. Turn proximal stopcock off to IV fluids 
2. Clean port closest to the baby with alcohol. 
3. Aspirate into 3 cc syringe via proximal port, 1.5-2 ml of blood to clear UAC of infusing fluid 
4. Remove that syringe. Place back in packing/not touching any surfaces to keep sterile. 
5. Obtain required amount of blood for labs with a new syringe. 
6. Return blood that was aspirated into 3 ml syringe.  Do not allow any air bubbles into the UAC catheter 
7. Turn distal stopcock off to IV fluids 
8. Flush with 1-1.5 ml of heparinized saline from 5 ml syringe. 
9. Turn distal stopcock off to IV fluids and flush 0.5 ml heparinized saline to clear UAC 
10. Document the time the samples were obtained, how much blood was used, and the results if available 
 
 See Ebsco Health Online Resource for Umbilical Catheter Blood Sampling 
 
D. TO INFUSE KEEP OPEN SOLUTION 
1. Prepare appropriate solution ordered per physician/NNP, label, flush through tubing and transducer 
ridding line of all air bubbles. 
2. Volume of syringe should be adequate to last 24 hours after tubing has been flushed. 
3. Place syringe on pump and program rate as ordered (rate usually 0.5 -1 mL/hr.). Using sterile gloves, 
attach UAC fluids to UAC. 
4. Open stopcock from infusion syringe to infant, watch line closely for air bubbles and/or backup of blood 
from line into tubing.  If occurs utilize stopcock systems, clear bubbles from line. 
5. Record volume infused hourly on flow sheet. 
6. Change tubing every 96 hours per protocol. 
 
E. DOCUMENTATION 
1.  Documentation should include: 
• Prior to insertion procedure, vital signs, blood pressure, and condition of lower extremities 
(including feet and toes). 
• Infant’s tolerance to procedure, utilizing monitor/oximeter readings. 
• After insertion, check site at least hourly for signs of bleeding.  Observe catheter position, watch for 
infection, and document appearance of umbilicus. 
• Infusion rate for heparinized fluids. 
• Functioning of UAC, ability, and ease of aspirating or flushing line. 
• Color/temperature/perfusion/pulses of lower extremities.  If changes, notify physician/NNP 
immediately. 
• If an extremity turns dusky and or cold, apply a heel warmer(s) to opposite leg and notify 
physician/NNP. 
• Blood pressure with cuff each shift to correlate with transducer and record on flowsheet.  
  
F. REMOVAL OF UMBILICAL ARTERY CATHETERS 
1. Verify that the order to remove the UAC has been written by the physician/NNP. 
2. Open sterile 4 x 4 gauze package/suture removal set.  Wear clean gloves. 
3. Look for catheter centimeter markings, written numerals or black dots depending on the brand. 
4. Turn stopcock on to fluids and off to infant.  Turn monitor pressure alarm off, if utilized.  Verify 
centimeter placement of catheter before removing. 
5. If sutures are present, remove sutures. 
6. Grasp catheter firmly with one hand – use other hand to stabilize cord – gently pull until 5 cm mark is NICP-007 
Page 3 of 3 
 
reached (only 5 cm remain in artery).  Resistance maybe encountered.  The artery may spasm. Have 
hemostat and gauze ready. 
7. Tighten umbilical tape around stump, and gently withdraw remaining catheter.  If resistance and/or 
pulsations continue notify physician/NNP. 
8. If bleeding occurs, apply pressure from the inferior portion of the abdomen to occlude the arteries 
(between the ilac and femoral insertion). If bleeding continues, notify NNP/physician.   
9. Document estimated blood loss on nursing flow sheet.  Inspect the catheter to verify all catheter is out. 
10. Some oozing may occur; however, document any blood loss on the flowsheet. 
11. Do not cover artery or place baby on abdomen for one hour after pulling catheter. 
12. Document the evaluation of extremities and umbilicus after the procedure. 
 
See Ebsco Health Online Resource for Umbilical Catheter Removal 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
Infusion Nurses Society. Umbilical catheters. Journal of Infusion Nursing. 2016;39(1): S60-S62 
 
NHS Royal Cornwell Hospitals. Insertion of umbilical lines (UAC, UVC) neonatal clinical guideline V3.0. 
https://doclibrary-
rcht.cornwall.nhs.uk/DocumentsLibrary/RoyalCornwallHospitalsTrust/Clinical/Neonatal/UmbilicalLine
InsertionUACUVCNeonatalGuideline.pdf [pdf]. Updated April 2018. 
 
Beauman, S.S & Bowles, S. (2019).  Policies, Procedures, and Competencies for Neonatal Nursing Care (6th 
Ed).  National Association of Neonatal Nurses. 
 