NICP-006 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Neonatal Intensive Care  
Subject:  Umbilical Venous Catheter  Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  October 23, 2020 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  NICP-006 
  
PURPOSE: 
Umbilical venous catheters (UVCs) can be inserted to infuse IV fluids centrally, administer medications, or 
perform transfusions in the neonate.  The catheter tip should be located at the junction of the IVC and the right 
atrium (just above the diaphragm). 
 
POLICY: 
Full aseptic precautions should be taken in preparing equipment to be used for umbilical venous catheter (UVC) 
placement.   
 
EQUIPMENT: 
Central line cart at bedside; UVC kit 
Spotlight or exam light 
Umbilical catheterization tray and extra sterile towels or drapes 
Mayo Stand (cleaned) 
Flush with solution as identified by physician/NNP order 
Sterile gloves, gowns and surgical caps and masks for physicians/NNP 
Umbilical catheters (sizes as requested by physician) 
3-way stopcock 
(2) 5 mL syringes 
Prime tubing and prepare for infusion 
 
A. PREPARATION 
1. Obtain informed consent from parent/legal guardian. 
2. Identify patient with 2 identifiers (3rd identifier if parent present) and perform time out prior to    
procedure. 
3. Place infant supine with EKG leads positioned for monitor accuracy; temp probe securely attached, 
pulse oximeter in place and functioning. 
4. Using developmental principles and ensuring the neonates safety, properly immobilize extremities at the 
initiation of the procedure.   
5. Document any bruising of lower extremities and/feet and toes. 
6. Assess vital signs, glucose, and other physiologic functioning prior to beginning the procedure. 
7. Avoid positioning in prone positioning. 
 
B. IMPLEMENTATION 
1. Assist physician/NNP with catheter insertion as needed. 
2. Provide additional assistance for securement and line verification.   
3. For taping a UVC, refer to UAC policy.  Secure line until placement is verified. NICP-006 
Page 2 of 3 
 
4. Obtain stat AP x-ray of abdomen for line placement to determine position prior to infusion of IV  
fluids.  In emergency situations line may be used for infusions with physician/NNP order.  
5. A physician/NNP may reposition UVC by withdrawing the catheter as needed.  If the catheter needs to 
be advanced, a new catheter is recommended. 
6. Infant may be positioned on side or back in order to prevent dislodging UVC and enabling visualization 
of insertion site at all times.  Prone positioning can only be done with physician order for designated 
patients. 
7. Sterility of intravenous tubing and fluids must be maintaining during priming. 
8. Remove all air bubbles from UVC prior to infusing fluids or flushing line.  Check with physician/NNP 
prior to infusing TPN or IV fluids containing calcium. 
9. If there is no blood flow from UVC when syringe suction is applied, do not infuse, or irrigate to remove 
potential clot.  Notify physician/NNP immediately. 
10. If a silicone catheter is used, do not clamp; fold and pinch or use padded hemostat. 
11. Change IV tubing every 96 hours.   Pinch or clamp UVC during change of tubing. 
12. UVC may be used for blood draws.  Follow sampling process in Umbilical Arterial Catheter policy 
NICP-007. 
 
See Ebsco Health Online Resource for Umbilical Catheter Placement and Care & Umbilical Catheter 
Securement 
 
C. DOCUMENTATION 
1.  Documentation should include:   
o Prior to procedure, document vital signs, including BP, glucose, and any bruising  
                        of infant’s lower extremities (including feet and toes). 
o Infant’s tolerance of procedure, utilizing monitor/oximeter readings.  
o Catheter type, size and insertion depth. 
o Check insertion site at least hourly for signs of bleeding.  Observe UVC position by observing 
and recording cm mark at umbilicus.  Watch for signs of infection and document appearance of 
umbilicus.   
o Appearance and condition of lower extremities (including color, temperature, and pulses) every 
hour. 
o   Infusion rate and amount infused every hour. 
o Functioning of UVC, ability and ease of aspirating/flushing line.   
 
D. REMOVAL OF UMBILICAL VENOUS CATHETERS 
1. Verify order to remove the UVC has been documented by the physician/NNP. 
2. Wash hands, open sterile 4 x 4 gauze and suture removal set, place within reach.   
3. Look for centimeter placement of catheter before removing. 
4. Turn stopcock on UVC so it is off to infant.   
5. Grasp catheter firmly with one hand and gently pull out until 5 cm mark is reached.  Use other hand 
to stabilize cord.  When catheter is out and only 5 cm remains in vein, pause then gently remove 
catheter.  If vein bleeds, apply gentle pressure.  
6. Small amount of oozing is common; however, any blood loss should be documented on the flow 
sheet. 
7. Do not cover vein or place baby on abdomen for one hour after pulling catheter. 
8. Documentation evaluation of extremities and umbilicus after procedure. 
 
See Ebsco Health Online Resource for Umbilical Catheter Removal 
 NICP-006 
Page 3 of 3 
 
E. GUIDELINES FOR USE OF DOUBLE LUMEN CATHETER 
1. The physician/NPP may place a double lumen catheter in umbilical vein.  Preparation, implementation, 
documentation, and removal are as previously outlined. 
2. Blood sampling from UVC can only be done with physician/NNP order.   
3. UVC’s will have KVO fluids infusing if line is not being used. 
4. Infuse blood products through larger (clear) lumen. 
5. If there is a need to infuse fluids which may have questionable interaction, consult with physician/NNP 
and or pharmacy.   
6. Needless connectors will be placed on the end of each lumen. 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
Infusion Nurses Society. Umbilical catheters. Journal of Infusion Nursing. 2016;39(1): S60-S62 
 
NHS Royal Cornwell Hospitals. Insertion of umbilical lines (UAC, UVC) neonatal clinical guideline V3.0. 
https://doclibrary-
rcht.cornwall.nhs.uk/DocumentsLibrary/RoyalCornwallHospitalsTrust/Clinical/Neonatal/UmbilicalLine
InsertionUACUVCNeonatalGuideline.pdf [pdf]. Updated April 2018. 
    
Beauman, S.S & Bowles, S. (2019).  Policies, Procedures, and Competencies for Neonatal Nursing Care (6th 
Ed).  National Association of Neonatal Nurses. 
 