NMA-016 
Page 1 of 5 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Medication Admin. 
Title: Patient Controlled Analgesia (PCA) 
Policy 
Reference #: NMA 016 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: November 1988 Last Review 
Date:  October 1, 2024 
Last Revision Date: October 1, 2024 
 
     
Purpose: 
To ensure that Patient Controlled Analgesic Pumps are used in an effective, safe, secure, 
controlled manner and monitored by the nurse. 
 
Policy: 
Medications for the management of pain may be administered via Patient Controlled Analgesia 
(PCA) Pump.  This technique permits self-administration as well as continuous programmed 
dosages of narcotics to help alleviate pain.  PCA orders must be obtained from the physician, and 
must specify drug, concentration and dosing schedule.   
 
Applies To: 
Licensed personnel who have documented knowledge and skills in PCA therapy.  
 
Procedure 
I. General Information 
A. PCA is administered through a peripheral or central line. 
B. An authorized provider must order PCA therapy, the analgesic and the dosage 
parameters.   
C. Sedatives and narcotics active on the electronic medical record at the time the 
PCA is initiated must be clarified prior to being used in conjunction with the 
PCA.  Whenever possible, these medications should be discontinued or held until 
the PCA is discontinued. 
D. PCA by proxy (nurse or patient representative pushing the PCA button) is not 
allowed except as ordered when analgesic infusion therapy is being used in 
Palliative Care (refer to policy NMA-025: Palliative Care Analgesic Infusion 
Therapy).     
E. Registered nurses may initiate, program, change parameters, change cartridges 
and tubings, and administer bolus doses via the PCA pump as ordered by the 
physician.  
F. Two nurses, one being a registered nurse, must verify orders, programming of 
pump, bolus doses, volume remaining, and waste as evidenced by documentation 
of a witness in the electronic medical record (EMR).  NMA-016 
Page 2 of 5 
 
G. If pain is not relieved, two nurses, one being a registered nurse, will assess the 
pump functioning to include proper programming, connections, and kinked 
tubing. 
H. LPNs may verify parameters, verify bolus doses and witness wastes.  A LPN may 
also monitor the patient with PCA therapy to include documentation in the EMR.  
A LPN may change a cartridge if the dosage and original order have been verified 
by a registered nurse. 
I. Patients on PCA therapy will be monitored for respiratory depression using 
Continuous Pulse Oximetry and continuous Capnography (ETCO) except while 
the patient is ambulating. Unless otherwise specified by the physician, the low O2 
saturation (SpO2) alarm limit shall be set at 90% for adults and 92% for pediatric 
patients.  Unless otherwise specified by the physician, the low ETCO2 alarm limit 
shall be set at 30mmHg and the high alarm limit shall be set at 55mmHg for adult 
and pediatric patients.          
J. PCA cartridges must be changed every 72 hours and tubing must be changed 
every 96 hours.                          
                               
II. Obtaining the pump 
A. Order the PCA pump from central supply.   
B. Central supply will deliver the pump.  
C. The PCA cartridges will be located in the automated dispensing machine on the 
nursing unit whenever possible. They will come from main pharmacy when not in 
the automated dispensing machines. 
D. For pump loading, priming and programming, refer to manufacturer’s user 
manual. 
 
III. Patient Education 
A. Prior to the initiation of the PCA pump therapy, educate the patient and the family 
regarding the purpose and use of the device. 
B. Minimal education requirements include: 
1. Medication type 
2. Dosage 
3. Frequency of use 
4. Use of the patient injection device (bolus cord). 
5. Instruction to the family not to push the injection device for the patient 
because they cannot judge the sedation/relief level of the patient. 
6. Information on pump timing between doses. 
7. Instruction to family and/or patient regarding the availability of other 
educational materials such as the Patient Handbook.  NMA-016 
Page 3 of 5 
 
C. The nurse initiating the PCA pump will document patient education in the EMR. 
IV. PCA Initiation and Documentation 
A. Upon initiation of PCA therapy and with every cartridge change, the nurse shall 
document the following components in the patient’s EMR:  
 1. Pain assessment 
 2. PCA Settings (witness must verify settings) 
  a. PCA Medication 
  b. Concentration 
  c. Continuous Basal Rate (if applicable) 
  d. Patient Bolus (PCA dose on pump) (if applicable) 
  e. Lockout Interval 
  f. Hourly Dose limit 
 3. Sedation 
  a. Sedation Scale: Pasero Opioid-induced Sedation Scale (POSS) 
  b. Respiratory pattern  
  c. Oxygen Saturation (SpO2) 
  d. End Tidal CO2 (ETCO2) 
B. Routine patient monitoring, shall be documented at the following intervals: 
a. Every hour for the first four hours of therapy 
b. Then every four hours 
C. Documentation should also include the following from each previous hour in the 
corresponding time column:   
a) Vital signs 
b) pain 
c) sedation scale 
d) respiratory status 
e) ETCO2 
f) SPO2 
g) number of given doses 
f) number of attempted doses 
 
  
D. For a PCA dose change or bolus, two nurses, one being an RN, will review the physician 
order, change the program on the pump, and document the new settings to include the 
witness verification in the EMR. Routine PCA monitoring and documentation are to be 
resumed every hour for 4 hours, then every 4 hours. 
E. At each hand-off, two nurses, one being an RN, must verify and document PCA settings 
and volume remaining, to include electronic documentation of a witness. NMA-016 
Page 4 of 5 
 
F. When the bag/cartridge is changed, two nurses, one being the RN, must verify and 
document the new medication being hung, the pump settings, and volume remaining. 
Verification by the witness is documented in the EMR.  
G. In the event of patient deterioration (adverse change in sedation score), the frequency 
of patient monitoring shall be increased to: 
a) Every 15 minutes for the next hour 
b) Every hour for the next 4 hours 
c) Then every 4 hours if stable 
 
V. Discontinuing Pump 
A. The order to discontinue PCA therapy must be received from a physician. 
B. The nurse will verify that all history has been recorded, including the current 
hour’s therapy. 
C. Remove narcotic from the pump. 
D. Any remaining medication must be removed from the cartridge or bag and wasted 
by the nurse in the controlled substance disposal container in the presence of a 
witnessing nurse.  The nurse will document the volume remaining (waste 
amount), in addition to the witness verification, in the EMR. (see policy PH-09-12 
Waste and Witness of Waste).     
E. If there is a discrepancy of more than 10% between the volumes remaining in the 
patient record and the actual amount wasted, notify the charge nurse and follow 
hospital protocol for narcotic discrepancy. 
F. Place used pump with all cords in the soiled utility room for return to Central 
Supply. 
 
VI. Patient undergoing surgery with current PCA pump therapy 
A. The unit nurse must be sure that all documentation in the EMR is current before sending the 
patient to surgery. 
B. The PCA pump will not be stopped before a patient is received in pre-op. 
C.  The pump will be discontinued by the pre-op nurse, when imminent departure of the patient 
to the OR/ procedure room is established. The ICU nurse will discontinue the pump in a 
similar manner when OR and anesthesia staff are performing a direct transfer to the operating 
room. 
D.  The pre-op nurse/ICU nurse shall discontinue the pump, waste the remaining narcotic in the 
controlled substance disposal container in the presence of a witnessing nurse, and document 
on the PCA flow sheet in the EMR. The procedural nurse may be asked to assist with 
narcotic volume assessment. 
E.  Pre-op/ICU nurse shall return the discontinued pump to Central Supply. 
F. If PCA therapy is restarted, the PACU nurse will restart.  
 NMA-016 
Page 5 of 5 
 
References: 
Policy NMA-025: Palliative Care Analgesic Infusion Therapy  
Policy OC060 Controlled Substance Monitoring 
Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference  
 
 