 
NNA-097 
Page 1 of 3 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To delineate the guidelines for sitter services at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
(OLOLRMC) to promote a safe environment for patients at imminent danger of injury. 
  
POLICY: 
Sitter services are the primary responsibility of the patient’s family.  If the family is unable to 
provide careful observation of the patient or financially provide sitters, OLOLRMC will consider 
an assessment of the patient’s need for sitter services. OLOLRMC only uses sitters from services 
that meet contractual requirements.  Sitters for the purpose of Child Protection do not follow 
this process.  Refer to the Children’s’ Hospital procedure for this process.  
Medical Management, and in their absence the House Manager, will make recommendations 
for sitter services based on the following specific criteria: 
• Nursing assessment determines that the patient is in imminent danger of injury due to  
o recent neurological pathology or 
o significant mental or physical impairment 
• The nursing assessment shall also include the use of all alternatives as appropriate (e.g., 
intermittent use of CNA on duty, etc.) prior to the use of sitters.   
• Patient’s family is unable to provide for careful observation of the patient based on a 
nurse assessment of patient safety needs and assessment of family resources by 
Medical Management*.   
 
 
 
PROCEDURES  
 
 
Family Provided Sitter Services: 
1. If family requests a sitter service to assist them with the observation of the patient 
during an inpatient stay or after discharge to home, Medical Management or nursing 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Nursing Administration 
Title: Use of Hospital Provided Sitter Services 
From Designated Agencies 
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-097 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 12/02/2011 Review Date: October 23, 2023 
Revision Date: November 4, 2024 
*Medical Management will maintain primary responsibility for the request and approval process for use of 
hospital provided sitter services.  The House Manager will support this process after normal business hours. 
Medical Management will follow up on the next business day. 
 staff will provide the family a list which is available via Teamlink, Medical Management, 
or House Manager.   
2. Hospital staff will not influence the family members’ choice in sitter services when 
family is incurring the expense for sitter service. 
 
 
Hospital Provided Sitter Services: 
A. Request and approval process 
 
1. Upon assessment by a registered nurse (RN), the charge nurse will send a referral to 
Medical Management for assessment.  
2. The Social Worker will assess the family’s ability to provide careful observation of 
the patient, and or have resources to provide sitters.  
3. The Social Worker will notify the charge nurse of the recommendations post 
patient/family assessment and document recommendation in medical record.  
4. If the patient/family meets the specified criteria for the use of hospital provided 
sitter services, the Social Worker will notify the charge nurse of recommendation for 
hospital provided sitter services. 
5. The Charge Nurse/Nurse Manager/Nurse Director will notify the House Manager for 
approval of any hospital provided sitter services.  
6.  House Manager will arrange for sitter. 
7. The House Manager will support this process after normal business hours. Medical 
Management will follow up on the next business day. 
 
B. Reporting Process of Hospital Provided Sitters and Delegation of Duties 
 
1. All hospital provided sitters reporting to OLOLRMC from the designated agencies will 
sign-in using the log sheet located in Patient Care Services (PCS). 
2. The sitter must wear a name badge (provided by agency) at all times. 
3. Sitter will promptly report to the charge nurse on the nursing unit. The charge nurse 
or primary RN will delegate duties to the sitter and will provide the sitter with 
information regarding the patient’s current condition as it pertains to the sitter’s 
role. 
4. The sitter will receive a verbal report from the off-going sitter.  
5. The sitter assignment will be reflected in the sitter log located in PCS. 
6. The RN maintains responsibility of the patient’s care and delegates duties to the 
assigned sitter based on the sitter’s job duties. 
 
C. Duties of a hospital provided sitter may include the following: 
1. Provide observation of patients based on the identified patient safety need. 
2. Notify nursing staff of any change in patient condition, safety concerns, or patient 
needs. 
3. Provide companionship and engage patient in diversion activities as appropriate. 
4. May assist patient with the following:  
NNA-097 
Page 3 of 3 
 
a. meals, eating, and oral hydration according to the current order (per report 
from clinical staff) 
b. using telephone, TV, lighting, and bed controls 
c. personal grooming 
d. toileting and movement in room for patients requiring minimal assistance 
(per report from clinical staff) 
e. accompany patient to procedural areas, such as radiology holding area, as 
appropriate 
5. May assist hospital personnel with the following (duties not to be performed 
independently): 
a. positioning of patient in bed 
b. bathing patient 
c. toileting and movement in room for patients with impaired mobility (per 
report from clinical staff)  
 
D. Ongoing Evaluation and Validation of Need of Hospital Provided Sitters 
 
1. Reassessment and documentation of continued need for hospital provided sitters 
will be ongoing by Medical Management and unit charge nurse. 
2. The Multidisciplinary Huddle will serve as continued opportunity to validate patient 
need and safety risk. 
3. Unit staff will notify sitter agency when services are no longer needed and then 
notify PCS office that sitter service has been cancelled. 
 
 
 