 NNA-067 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Nursing Administration 
Title: Outside Sources of Nursing Personnel 
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-067 
Supersedes #: 1994; 2000 
Date of Origination: December 15, 1990 Review Date:   March 1, 2024 
Revision Date:  March 1, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define outside sources of nursing personnel and delineate licensure, orientation, and competency 
documentation. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Clinical Education Center (CEC) is an OLOL unit that provides education for OLOL clinical employees. 
 
POLICY: 
All external agency nursing personnel are required to attend contract nursing orientation as facilitated by 
the Clinical Education Center. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. All external agency nurses will provide the Human Resources Department the following information 
regarding their employees working at OLOL. 
a. Resume  
b. TB skin test or chest x-ray 
c. Proof of current BLS, ACLS, PALS or NRP as required for designated unit. The certification 
must be current for a minimum of 90 days from the date of hire. American Heart Association 
(AHA), American Red Cross, Military Training Network (MTN) and American Association 
of Pediatrics (for NRP) cards are accepted.  
d. Proof of current certification in crisis prevention intervention training 
e. Proof of completed NIH Stroke Scale training for nurses that will be assigned to 4MNT, Med 
6, ED (Main, North BR, EDOU, Livingston, Ascension, and Children’s), ICU, Float Pool, 
Neurology, HV7, HV8, and Specials. 
f. Proof of completed TNCC preferred for the Emergency Department (Main, North BR, 
Livingston & OLOLA). 
g. Drug screen 
h. Flu Vaccine status when appropriate 
i. COVID-19 Vaccine 
j. N-95 Mask Fit Test 
k. References 
l. Criminal Background Check 
m. Primary License verification  
 
2. The Clinical Education Center administers the ECG exam at the start of Contract Nursing 
Orientation. This applies to all external agency nurses, except those going to the Mental Health  NNA-067 
Page 2 of 2 
Division, Infusion Center, Operating Room, or the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit. A minimum score 
of 85% or greater score is required for nurses to continue employment. 
a. If the nurse scores below 85% on their first ECG exam, the nurse is not allowed to continue 
in orientation and may repeat the ECG exam the following day.  
b. If the nurse scores below 85% on the second attempt, the nurse will not be allowed to 
continue in orientation and must wait until the next scheduled nursing orientation to retake 
the ECG exam. 
c. After the third unsuccessful ECG exam, the nurse must wait three months before attempting 
to retest. 
d. The CEC will contact HR of all ECG scores. 
e. HR will notify the agency and hiring manager of those that have not successfully completed 
the ECG exam. 
 
3. The Clinical Education Center conducts Contract Nursing Orientation. Attendance and successful 
completion are mandatory. The orientation includes, but it is not limited to: 
a. Annual Education 
b. Medication Dispensing System/Intravenous Infusion Device Introduction 
c. General Nursing Care Practice Standards 
d. Computer Based Learning (CBL) Modules 
e. Skills Demonstrations 
f. Electronic Health Record documentation 
 
4. Unit specific orientation is overseen by the unit manager, clinical educator, and preceptor including: 
a. Department orientation 
b. Orientation shift(s) with preceptor 
c. Competency validation  
d. Unit specialty training 
e. Unit specific CBLs 
 
 
 