NNA-049 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Nursing Administration 
Title: 
Discharge Home/ Transfer within the 
facility/ Discharge Within the facility/ or 
Discharge to Another facility 
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-049 
Supersedes #: 1985, 1988, 2000 
Date of Origination: August, 1985 Last Review 
Date:    June 26, 2023 
Revision Date: October 9, 2024 
 
PURPOSE  
To describe the process for the safe and efficient discharge of a patient to another department or facility. 
 
DEFINITION:  
SBAR - Situation, Background, Assessment, and Recommendation 
 
POLICY  
A. The patient shall be transported by an appropriate mode/method to assure patient safety. 
 
B. Physician care directions shall be communicated to the receiving department or facility. 
 
C. Patients requiring care in the clinical areas listed below are discharged from hospital and re-admitted 
to the specific clinical area:  
a. OLOLRMC Mental/Behavioral Health 
b. Rehabilitation Unit (Rehab) 
 
 
PROCEDURES: 
A.   Discharge Home 
1. Physician Responsibilities 
a. Complete the patient discharge process by entering the discharge order in the  
    electronic medical record, reconciliation of the problem list and medication  
     reconciliation.  
2. Nursing Responsibilities 
a. Complete the discharge process by verifying and or documenting all required fields in   
the discharge navigator.  
  b. Review the discharge orders with the patient/family and answer any questions. 
c. Place a signed copy of the discharge papers provided in the medical record. 
 
B. Intra-Hospital Transfer (within the hospital) 
1. Physician order is received for transfer to another unit.   
2. Notify the bed coordinator to arrange the transfer. 
3. All medications and patient’s belongings will be transferred with the patient. Check the 
closet, bedside table, the patient bathroom and any other storage place to ensure that all items 
are collected prior to transfer.  
4. The appropriate mode of transportation (wheelchair, bed, stretcher, monitored or NNA-049 
Page 2 of 3 
unmonitored) is selected to safely transfer the patient.  
5. Ascension Campus will utilize ambulance transport for transfer to main OLOLRMC campus. 
6. Personnel transporting the patient will notify the receiving nurse or unit charge nurse of the 
patient’s arrival on the unit.  
7. The nurse transferring the patient will give a complete report, using the SBAR process, to the 
nurse who will be assuming care. 
8. The receiving unit is responsible for entering the new patient room number in the clinical 
information system and notifying the attending physician and active consulting physicians of 
the new room number. 
 
C. Discharge within the Facility or to another Facility: 
1. To OLOLRMC Mental/Behavioral Health (1North, St. Clare, GBC, Adolescent) 
a. The consulted Psychiatrist evaluates the patient and determines if appropriate for 
admission. 
b. The sending unit calls the COPE Team to facilitate the admission process and 
complete the required documents. 
c. The chart is copied in Medical Records. 
d. Original Legal Status Documents up to and including a Physician’s Emergency 
Certificate (PEC), Coroner’s Emergency Certificate (CEC), and Judicial Commitment 
(JC) should accompany the patient to the receiving facility while a copy is maintained 
in the OLOLRMC medical record. 
e. Report is called to the receiving nurse utilizing the SBAR process. 
f. The physician will discharge the patient using the discharge navigator. 
g. The completed medical record is sent to Medical Records. 
h. Print the After Visit Summary-Healthcare Facility (AVS) and send with the patient.  
     
2. To OLOL Rehab, External Rehab, LTAC, Nursing Home or another Acute Care Hospital 
  
a. The physician will discharge the patient using the discharge navigator. 
b. The physician must complete SMS (Statement of Medical Status) for discharge to a 
nursing home. 
c. For discharge to an outside facility, if ambulance transport is required, a specific 
physician order is needed for transport. 
d. For discharge to another acute hospital from an acute unit, the physician must 
complete the “Consent to Transfer” form. 
e. The receiving physician is responsible for admission orders at next level of care. 
f. Medical Management facilitates these discharges by: 
i. The social worker/case manager contacts the patient and/or family to 
discuss the discharge/transfer arrangement.   
ii. The social worker/case manager communicates with the receiving 
facility regarding the referral and sends requested documents.  Once the 
evaluation is completed and the patient is accepted, this is communicated 
to the patient/family and the physician.   
iii. The social worker/case manager documents all pertinent information in 
the medical record. 
g. Staff Nurse Responsibilities NNA-049 
Page 3 of 3 
i. When a physician order is received for discharge to another facility, 
ensure that Medical Management has been notified.   
ii. On the day of discharge, the sending nurse should:  
▪ Complete orders that are no longer applicable. 
▪ Address all problems on the Plan of Care (resolved or unresolved)  
▪ For OLOL Rehab, break down chart and send with patient. 
▪ For LTAC and outside Rehab, send chart to HIM for copying/printing. 
▪ Print the After Visit Summary-Healthcare Facility and send with the 
patient.  
▪ Call Report 
 
 
D. OLOL Livingston  and OLOL North EDs should refer to Patient Transfer Policy (ADM-12) 
 
Reference: 
 
CM.07.001 Mental Health Legal Status 
https://fmolhs.sharepoint.com/sites/TeamLink/Policy/FMOLHS/Operations/Care%20Management/CM.
07.001_Mental%20Health%20Health%20Legal%20Status%20(01.20.2021).pdf 
 