 NNA-061 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Nursing Administration 
Title: 
Assessment and Reassessment of Patient 
Care Needs According to Nursing Job 
Classes 
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-061 
Supersedes #: 1990, 1991 
Date of Origination: October, 1995 Review Date:   August 12, 2024 
Revision Date: July 2, 2015 
 
PURPOSE: 
To delineate the scope of practice for the Registered Nurse (RN), Licensed Practice Nurse (LPN), 
Nursing Assistant, Mental Health Tech, Attendants, and Technicians in performing assessment and 
reassessment of patients. 
 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
A. An assessment – is the systematic process of reviewing and analyzing the collected data and clinical 
findings from the physical exam on each patient.  It is through the assessment process that a patient’s 
plan of care with desired outcomes is determined and continually updated.  (Only the Registered 
Nurse can perform a nursing assessment.) 
 
B. Data – is defined as uninterrupted material, facts, and/or clinical observation. 
 
C. Mobile Virtual Critical Care Rounds – include comprehensive review of patient’s electronic medical 
record, automated alerts, camera visualization of patient, and communication with patient and/or 
bedside care provider to determine patient care needs. 
 
 
POLICY 
A. An admission assessment begins with the Registered Nurse’s first encounter with the patient and 
continues through the formulation of the patient's plan of care.  Registered nurses will perform the 
initial patient assessment and develop a plan of care within at least 24 hours of inpatient admission. 
 
B. Ongoing reassessment is done throughout the course of the patient’s stay with changes to the plan of 
care as appropriate.  Reassessment will be performed in the following situations or as deemed 
appropriate by the Registered Nurse: 
1. Related to patient's course of treatment. 
2. Based on patient's response to treatment. 
3. When a new significant change occurs in patient's condition or diagnosis.  For example, 
breathing effort, circulatory status, and level of consciousness. 
 
 
C. A Registered Nurse will assess the patient every 24 hours in order to review, revise, and discuss the 
patient's plan of care as needed.  This is documented in the electronic medical record. 
  NNA-061 
Page 2 of 2 
D. A Licensed Practical Nurse is responsible for performing a physical examination, collecting data, 
documenting findings, and reporting any significant abnormalities or changes in condition to the 
Registered Nurse.   
 
E. Other ancillary nursing support staff such as nursing assistants, attendants or technicians may 
participate in collection of specific clinical data consistent with their levels of competency and job 
description.  This data is to be reported to the LPN and/or RN and shall be documented. 
 
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. Reassessment of the Review of Systems (ROS) should be performed at least every 12 hours and a 
focused ROS should be performed every 4 hours if new or abnormal findings. 
 
2. Information related to the assessment, problems, or diagnoses is obtained from the patient and/or 
persons significant to the patient. The patient/significant other is integral in the identification of 
patient care needs. 
 
3. The Registered Nurse may delegate non-complex aspects of data collection for assessment that can 
be performed according to exact directions and does not require judgment as follows: 
a. Licensed Practical Nurse: Allergies, home medications, intravenous devices, nutritional status, 
and medical history. 
b. Licensed Practical Nurse, Assistants/Attendants, and Technicians: Vital signs, height, weight,  
use of assistive devices, disposition of valuables, and additional items as identified in job 
description and competencies. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
LSBN Scope of Practice Guidelines @ http://www.lsbn.state.la.us/Documents/scope.asp 
 
LSBN Nurse Practice Act @ http://www.lsbn.state.la.us/Documents/npa.asp 