NNA-098 
Page 1 of 6 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
Manual:  Patient Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
 
Chapter:  Nursing 
Administration 
Subject:  Monitoring Responsibilities for Patients Requiring 
Cardiac Monitoring 
Section:   
Date of Origination:  December 12, 2011 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: 
 
Date of Review:  
May 1, 2024 
   
 May 1, 2024 
Serial Code:   
NNA-098 
  
Purpose:  
To delineate the responsibilities of clinical nursing staff and the centralized monitoring 
technicians when monitoring patient’s cardiac activity and/or other clinical parameters in real-
time using bedside hardwired monitors or telemetry monitoring.  
 
Nursing Roles/Responsibilities for Remote Telemetry Monitoring: 
 
The RN caring for the patient is responsible for notifying the provider of any cardiac rhythm 
changes from baseline and/or changes in a patient’s status.  
I. Admit: 
1. Verify doctor’s order for telemetry monitoring. 
2. Explain telemetry monitoring to the patient. 
3. Contact the Central Cardiac Monitoring Unit (CCMU) at ext. 4-4720 and provide the 
following:   
a. Patient’s last name 
b. Patient’s 13-digit CSN 
c. Room number 
  
4. Once order is confirmed, unit staff retrieves telemetry box from their department’s 
allotted supply.  
5. The nursing unit is responsible for lead wires and batteries. 
6. Prep patient’s skin by cleansing areas where electrodes will be placed with soap and 
water, alcohol, or a dry terry cloth (if patient’s skin is friable). Male patients should 
have hair directly beneath the area under the electrode pad removed.  
7. Connect adult patients to the transmitter utilizing 5 lead wires in the following 
placement pattern and pediatric patients utilizing 3 lead wires (a, b, & c below): 
a. Right Arm (RA)- place below the right clavicle  
b. Left Arm (LA)- place below the left clavicle 
c. Right Leg (RL)- place below the right 6thintracostal space 
d. Left Leg (LL)- place below the left 6thintracostal space 
Chest (C)- place in the center of the chest right or left of the sternum at the 4thintercostal space. 
8. CCMU tech will confirm clear reception signal and rhythm and read back the 
following: 
a. Patient’s last name 
b. Patient’s 13-digit CSN 
c. Room number 
d. Channel number NNA-098 
Page 2 of 6 
 
e. Alarm setting category (See alarm setting section) 
9. Analyze an admit rhythm strip with documentation of rhythm, rate, PR, QRS, and 
QT intervals using the calipers in Clinical Access and save to the electronic medical 
record. Refer to the Recommendations for Use of Clinical Access section of this 
policy for instructions on saving the strip, and for printing if necessary. 
 
II. Interruption in Patient Monitoring: 
1. For units with remote telemetry monitoring, notify the Central Monitoring Station 
immediately when: 
a. A patient leaves the floor for a test/procedure or for showering/hygiene. 
Provider does not need to be notified prior to removal. 
 
b. Telemetry monitoring is resumed after the above activities. Patient 
identification will be repeated every time the patient is reconnected to 
monitoring using patient identification process (2 or 3 ID). 
2. For units with remote telemetry monitoring, respond immediately to calls from the 
Central Monitoring Station regarding an interruption in patient monitoring by: 
a. Verifying any reported dysrhythmias or telemetry problems by visually 
assessing the patient for signs and symptoms. 
b. Checking lead wire placement and connections. 
c. Checking electrode pads for secure adhesion to skin or dryness of conduction 
gel. 
d. Checking battery for proper placement. In the event that the battery needs to 
be replaced, the nurse will accomplish without delay. 
3. If at any time the patient is not found in the assigned room, the nurse will use the 
tracking system to identify patient/monitor location. 
4. Provide care for electrodes and leads by: 
a. Removing old electrodes, cleanse and prep skin, and apply new electrodes 
per manufacturer’s recommendation for adult patients and whenever 
adhesion is compromised.  Electrodes will be changed as needed for infants, 
every 3 days for older children, and as needed.  After applying the new 
electrodes, the nurse will call Centralized Cardiac Monitoring to verify 
waveform visibility. This is best accomplished from the patient room. 
b. Replacing lead wires when broken or there is an indication that they are 
causing interference or lack of conduction in the rhythm display. 
 
III. Monitoring and Documentation Requirements: 
1. Review alarm parameters for appropriateness every shift and as needed for any 
changes in patient condition or therapies. 
2. Use “analyze” and save a rhythm strip to the patient’s medical record once per shift, 
and as needed per patient condition.  Document rhythm, rate, PR, QRS and QT 
intervals measured by using calipers in Clinical Access and noted on strip. (If 
necessary, to print a strip, refer to the Recommendations for Use of Clinical Access 
section of this policy for instructions). 
3. Note and save a strip for dysrhythmias and cardiac events to include measurements 
and interpretation (rhythm, rate, PR, QRS, QT intervals), and provider notification if 
necessary, including new dysrhythmias and cardiac events. NNA-098 
Page 3 of 6 
 
4. In the event of a Code Blue, after resolution of the Code Blue, save an event strip 
including the initiation of the event and documentation of any changes in rhythm 
continuing through termination of efforts.  The strip will be labeled “Code Blue “and 
will include measurements (if appropriate) and the RN’s first initial, last name, and 
credentials. 
 
IV. Discontinuing Monitoring: 
 
1. Nurse driven discontinuation protocol: 
a. Indications for monitoring will mirror the alerts for providers.  Any changes in 
provider notification for the duration of the telemetry and the discontinuation 
process will be mirrored in the nursing alert. 
b. Nursing will receive a passive alert via the electronic health record when the 
indication for a telemetry order has expired.   
c. If the patient has an expired indication that signals cardiac monitor 
reevaluation, and within the prior 8 hours, the patient does not have:  
(1)Systolic blood pressure less than 95 mmHg, (2)heart rate greater than 120 
or less than 45 beats per minute, (3)respiratory rate greater than 28 or less than 
8 or (4) any change in clinical status such as arrythmias or clinical 
deterioration, then cardiac monitoring can be discontinued. 
d. The nurse will utilize the Cardiac Monitor Re-Eval alert to place an order by 
protocol (assigned to the attending physician) to discontinue the cardiac 
monitor. 
e. The nurse is not required to call the attending physician for an order but 
should contact the provider if there is any specific concern about monitor 
discontinuation when criteria are met. 
2. Discontinuation procedure: 
a. Units with remote telemetry monitoring will notify the Central Monitoring 
Station of discontinuation. 
b. Disconnect the monitor from the patient and remove electrode pads. 
c. Remove the battery and lead wires from the transmitter and discard. 
d. Clean the transmitter and lead wires with approved product. 
e. Return the transmitter to the department’s telemetry box storage area. 
 
 
Monitoring Technician Roles/Responsibilities for units with remote telemetry monitoring: 
 
I. Admit: 
1. Admit the patient to the Central Monitoring Station using medical record number in 
the ID field. 
2. Verify telemetry is functioning with the nurse. 
3. Confirm that alarm is audible per the Central Monitoring Station. 
II. Continuous Monitoring: 
1. Verify that each patient’s alarm is audible per the Central Monitoring Station every 
shift and as needed for any changes in patient condition or therapies. 
2. Notify the patient’s nurse of any changes in the patient’s electrocardiogram.  This 
includes any severe changes in heart rate, interval measurements or rhythms.   
3. Monitor in Leads II and VI unless specified otherwise in the provider orders.  NNA-098 
Page 4 of 6 
 
4. Notify the nurse of all alarms and/or an interruption in patient monitoring. 
 
 
III. Interruption in Patient Monitoring (not related to procedure, testing or approved 
temporary removal): 
1. When an interruption in patient monitoring is noted by the monitor technicians 
(leads off, artifact, lack of waveform for any reason), the monitor technician will 
notify the patient’s nurse via phone.   
a. The monitor technician will note the patient’s location, time, reason for 
notification, and nurse’s name on the 24-hour log sheet.   
b. The nurse will reconnect or resume successful patient monitoring.  Once the 
patient is reconnected to the monitor, the nurse will call the Centralized 
Cardiac Monitoring to verify that a clear monitor rhythm has been obtained.  
c. Any communication from the nurse that is received during initial call will be 
noted on the 24-hour log sheet.  
d. Assist nurse if at any time the patient is not found in the assigned room by 
using the tracking system to identify patient/monitor location. 
2. If after five minutes, rhythm monitoring has not been re-established, the monitor 
technician will notify the unit’s charge nurse.   
a. The monitoring technician will document the charge nurse’s name on their log. 
b. The charge nurse will have five minutes to reconnect or resume successful 
patient monitoring by performing the tasks themselves or by delegating the 
task to another registered nurse.  Once the patient is reconnected to the 
monitor, a registered nurse will call Centralized Cardiac Monitoring to verify 
that a clear monitor rhythm has been obtained.   
c. Communication from the charge nurse/registered nurse will be noted on the 24-
hour log sheet.  
3. If after five more minutes (after a total of 10 minutes from initial call), rhythm 
monitoring has not been re-established, the monitor technician will notify the unit’s 
manager during regular hours (7A to 3P). After hours (3P to 7A – Monday through 
Friday and 24 hours a day on weekends and holidays), a call will be placed to the 
House Manager. 
a. The monitoring technician will document the name of the person they speak 
with on their log.   
b. The Nurse Manager/House Manager will have five minutes to reconnect or 
resume successful patient monitoring by performing the tasks themselves or by 
delegating the task to another registered nurse.  Once the patient is reconnected 
to the monitor, a registered nurse will call Centralized Cardiac Monitoring to 
verify that a clear monitor rhythm has been obtained.   
c. Any communication from the Nurse Manager/House Manager will be noted on 
the 24-hour log sheet.  
4. If a patient alarms Asystole, the monitor technician will notify the nursing team by 
calling the unit and stating, “Possible Code Blue, Asystole, Check the patient, and 
patients’ room number.”  
a. The monitor technician will set their timer for a one-minute countdown from 
the time asystole was called to unit. 
b. The nursing team will determine if Code Blue needs to be called or re-establish 
rhythm monitoring before one-minute countdown has expired.  NNA-098 
Page 5 of 6 
 
c. After one minute, if no code called by nursing or rhythm has not been re-
established the monitor technician will activate Code Blue by calling 5-3333 to 
report Code Blue and patient’s room number. 
d. If the monitor technician has to activate code blue for asystole, Centralized 
Cardiac Monitoring will enter an incident event. 
 
Nurse Responsibilities for Critical Care Units and Emergency Department: 
 
1. Initiate bedside monitoring and admit the patient to the monitor utilizing the patient’s last 
name and medical record number. 
2. Save a rhythm strip to the patient’s medical record upon initiation of cardiac monitoring, 
and once per shift. ED documentation will occur every 8 hours from initial 
documentation), and as needed per patient condition.  Documentation will include lead, 
PR interval, QRS interval, QT interval, ventricular rate, alarm in use, and alarm limits set. 
3. All dysrhythmia alarms will be reviewed every 8 hours and any noted dysrhythmias or 
cardiac events will be saved to the patient’s chart with measurements and interpretation. 
4. All tracings will be included in the patient’s medical record. 
5. The provider will be notified of all significant changes related to patient’s 
electrocardiographic tracings. 
6. In the event of a “code blue”/cardiorespiratory arrest, an event strip will be saved upon 
initiation of the event and with any documentation of changes in rhythm.  Upon 
termination of efforts, a rhythm strip documented in two leads will be saved. The strip 
will be labeled “Code Blue “and will include measurements (if appropriate) and the RN’s 
first initial, last name, and credentials. 
7. The patient will be discharged from the bedside monitor in the ICU or the ED prior to 
any transfer out of the unit or discharge home. 
 
 
 
Nurse Responsibilities for Post Anesthesia Care Unit: 
 
1. Admit patient into recovery bay by utilizing transfer function in electronic medical 
record.   
2. Upon admission to PACU bay, a 6 second strip will be analyzed, printed and placed on 
the patient’s chart.   
3. If the patient remains in PACU for an extended period of time, repeat strips will be 
analyzed and printed every 8 hours and as needed per patient condition.   
4. All printed tracings will be included in the patient’s medical record. 
5. Anesthesia provider will be notified of all significant changes related to patient’s 
electrocardiographic tracings. 
6. In the event of a “code blue”/cardiorespiratory arrest, an event strip will be saved and 
printed upon initiation of the event and with any documentation of changes in rhythm.  
Upon termination of efforts, a rhythm strip will be saved, printed, and documented in two 
leads. 
 
 
 
 NNA-098 
Page 6 of 6 
 
Alarm Parameters: 
1. Default parameters are checked by Biomedical Engineering when a telemetry transmitter 
is repaired, new, and when performing preventive maintenance. 
2. Alarm parameter minimum and maximum limits are: 
a. Adult – 50 minimum and 150 maximum 
b. Children ages more than 10 years – 50 minimum and 100 maximum 
c. Children ages 2 years to 10 years – 60 minimum and 140 maximum 
d. Children ages 3 months to 2 years – 75 minimum and 190 maximum 
e. Children ages newborn to 3 months – 80 minimum and 205 maximum 
3. Nurse may use (or request a monitor technician to use) the Learn feature to relearn the 
patient’s baseline when there is a change in the patients rate due to intervention or change in 
the patient’s condition.4. Nurse may change (or request a monitor technician to change) the 
minimum or maximum with a physician’s order. 
 
Standard Use of Clinical Access: 
To Save an Event: 
• Open the patient’s Clinical access window 
• Analyze data 
• Use the measurement Calipers to interpret rate, PR, QRS, and QT measurements 
• “Save” and select the midpoint of the desired strip.  
• Measurements and other narrative information may be typed in the field that appears in 
the window. Label the strip with your time, date, and interpretation.  Example: 
05/09/2016 0000 Sinus Tachycardia R. Nurse. Indicate in comments for an admit strip, 
discharge strip, etc. “admit strip” Click SAVE. 
• You can print while saving by checking the “Print while saving” box on the bottom left 
of the window. This will print an immediate strip to the electronic medical record while 
also saving the strip in the memory. (Ensure “spacelabs” selected under printer 
maintenance) 
 
To Print a Saved Event Report: 
The RN is required to save each of their assigned patient’s interpreted telemetry strips once per 
shift. The RN is also required to save and print an interpreted telemetry strip on admission and/or 
transfer.  
1)            Each interpreted telemetry strip must be clear with no artifacts and saved into the 
patient’s Saved Events folder in Space Labs. 
2)            Go to Saved Events, select the strip to be printed, and click Print.  This will send the 
interpreted strip into the patient’s chart through Epic. 
**During downtime, system failure, or per instructions, interpreted telemetry strips must be 
manually printed at the designated printer on the unit and placed in the patients’ charts. ** 
 
 
References: 
 
American Heart Association: Circulation. (2017). Update to practice standards for 
electrocardiographic monitoring in hospital settings: A scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. 136.19. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000527. Spacelab 