 NNA-027 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Nursing Administration 
Title: Master Staffing Plan  
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-027 
Supersedes #: 1985, 1987, 1994 
Date of Origination: November, 1987 Review Date:  9/01/2024 
Revision Date: June 16, 2016 
 
PURPOSE: 
To prepare adequate staffing plans using matrix based on patient population,  demands, acuity, and 
budgetary constraints.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
A. Staffing effectiveness- is defined as the number, competency, and skill mix of staff in relation to the 
provision of needed care and treatment. 
 
POLICY:  
Staffing plan for patient care d epartments shall  be developed based on the level and scope of care 
provided, frequency of the care and a determination of the level of staff that can most appropriately and 
competently provide the type of care needed.   
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. Staffing needs are reviewed each shift by the Director or Nursing / Nurse Manager or their designee 
and are adjusted as needed to assure appropriate staff coverage and levels which meet the needs of 
the patients. 
 
2. The assessment of patient staffing needs incorporates the following methods: 
a. Review of complexity of patient needs based on multidisciplinary team collaboration.   
b. Documentation from patient care staff that addresses patient needs, complexity, and 
condition. 
c. Assessment of potential for admission and discharge activity. 
d. Assessment of potential activity generated by scheduled procedures. 
e. Identification of potential high risk patients. 
 
3. Based on patient needs, the following is implemented to ensure appropriate staffing: 
a. Utilization of additional staff, including overtime, emergent or call pay as necessary. 
b. Utilization of professional staff from within their nursing divisional zone. (Medicine, 
Medical Specialty, Post-Surgical, ICU, Cardiology). 
c. Utilization of Float Pool nursing personnel and support staff. 
d. Utilization of Director of Nursing / Nurse Manager in staffing role. 
 
4. Provision of staff is validated by the Director of Nursing / Nurse Manager, House Manager / 
Supervisor, Charge Nurse and/or Zone staffing representative assessment before and during the shift.  
This assessment is ongoing and staffing is adjusted as changing activity and patient needs dictate  NNA-027 
Page 2 of 2 
(i.e., call in additional staff if patient complexity and/or needs increase; flex staff as patient needs 
and/or complexity decrease).    
5. Assignment of patient care personnel is done by assessing the patients’ identified needs and the 
competency level of scheduled staff.  
 
 
a. The Director of Nursing / Nurse Manager/Charge Nurse/RN assigns all tasks in addition 
to patient care.  Formulation, reassessment and evaluation of the patient’s plan of care 
will be the responsibility of all RN’s coming in contact with the patient. 
 
b. The Director of Nursing / Nurse Manager/Charge Nurse assigns his/her personnel taking 
into account the acuity, complexity and dynamics of the patient’s condition.  The 
knowledge and competency of the nursing staff member, the type of technology required, 
the degree and availability of supervision required, infection control and safety issues are 
also considered in assignments. 
 
c. If staffing is more or less than required by the unit staffing matrix, the charge nurse will 
notify the designated zone staffing representative and/or House Manager / Supervisor in 
Patient Care Services. 
 
d. Additions and/or changes in patient care responsibilities will be added by the Director of 
Nursing / Nurse Manager/Charge Nurse as need arises.  
 
 
6. The assessment of patient care needs is determined by using the nursing process. The care delivery 
model is modified or adapted according to unit, based on the complexity of the usual needs of the 
patient population on the unit.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
Principles for Nurse Staffing, American Nurses Association 
 
 
 