 NNA-099 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Nursing 
Administration 
Title: Guidelines for Use of Voalte One 
Communication Devices 
Policy Reference #: NNA-099 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: December 4, 2013 Last Date Reviewed:   September 26, 2024  
Last Date Revised: September 26, 2024 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
Use of the Voalte One Communication Device is limited to professional communication in the 
coordination of clinical care and services between staff users, healthcare providers, and 
vendors. 
 
POLICY: 
 
1. It is the user’s responsibility to adhere to all hospital policies and procedures related to 
Privacy and Confidentiality, HIPAA, and Professional Conduct and Behavior. 
 
2. Voalte One Communication Devices operate on Wi-Fi and the Voalte servers.  They have 
no Internet connection and will not function outside of the hospital infrastructure. 
 
3. Voalte One Communication Devices can receive voice calls from other Voalte phones, non-
Voalte extensions in the hospital, and external numbers. They are not intended for personal 
use and users should not make personal calls or text messages using the Voalte phones. 
 
4. Voalte One Communication Devices text messaging will only function between Voalte 
phones. Texts can be chosen from the Quick Messages library or created by the user. 
Texts cannot be sent to or received by non-Voalte numbers.   
• It is not acceptable for physicians or licensed independent practitioners to text orders 
for patients to the hospital or other healthcare setting. This method provides no 
ability to verify the identity of the person sending the text and there is no way to keep 
the original message as validation of what is entered into the medical record. 
 
5. Patient room number should be used discretely if identification of the patient is necessary.  
 
6. The users assigned to the communication device during the shift is the only individual 
allowed to use that communication device and is responsible for the device; no patients, 
patients’ families, or other employees are allowed to use the communication device. 
  NNA-099 
Page 2 of 3 
7. If the communication device is taken from the facility, staff must be return to the facility to 
deliver the device immediately.  
 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
A. Logging In and Out: 
1. All users are required to complete the hospital log in and out process at the beginning 
and end of each shift. 
2. Voalte One Communication Devices are not to be taken outside of the facility at any 
time. 
3. Any Voalte One Communication Devices identified as missing from the docking station 
must be located and returned immediately. 
 
 
B. Cleaning the Equipment: 
1. Users must wipe down Voalte One Communication Device and battery packs at the 
beginning and end of each shift. 
2. Users must only use approved wipes and solutions to clean equipment. The Voalte One 
Communication Devices have a protective military grade screen shield that will be 
damaged by non-approved solutions. Foaming hand sanitizer should be rubbed into the 
skin thoroughly before handling communication devices. 
3. The screen shields protect the communication devices against droplet damage; they do 
not waterproof the communication devices. Soap and water should never be used to 
clean equipment. 
 
C. Paging and Leaving Callback Instructions 
1. Identify yourself and your Voalte communication device number or extension. 
2. State your message. 
3. Repeat your Voalte communication device number and extension. 
 
D. Handoff Process (Checking Out a Device from the Docking Station)  
1. Tap the badge reader on the charging dock to check out a phone.    
2. The phone will have a green background with the user’s name on the home screen.    
3. Press the Home Button and the user will be prompted to create a passcode. Use 6565.  
4. At the end of the shift, return the device to an empty bay on the docking station. 
 
 
 
  NNA-099 
Page 3 of 3 
E. Damage to Communication Device: 
If a communication device is damaged due to normal wear and tear, in the event of a 
device failure or unavoidable damage occurs (i.e., during a code), employees will not be 
expected to pay for repair/replacement. However, disciplinary action will be taken if the 
phone is abused, lost or damaged due to neglect.    
 
F. Routing of Alerts – 
All alerts will be escalated in this order:  
Nurse → Backup Nurse → Charge Nurse 