NOP-021 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Medication 
Title: Multi Dose Vials 
Policy 
Reference #: NOP-021 
Supersedes #: 5/02 
Date of Origination: November 18, 1995 Review Date:  October 14, 2024 
Revision Date:  September 6, 2022 
 
PURPOSE: 
Describe the process for handling multi-dose vials, medication pens, vaccines, and ophthalmic products.  
 
DEFINITION: 
A multi-dose vial is a bottle or pen of liquid medication (injectable) that contains more than one dose of 
Medication and is clearly identified as multidose per product labeling and/or manufacturer supported 
literature. 
 
POLICY: 
 
1. Multi-dose Injection vials or Pens 
a. Once a vial cap has been opened/removed or the vial cap has been punctured, the multi-
dose medication vial or pen must be labeled with an expiration date not to exceed 28 days 
after opening/puncturing, also known as a “beyond use date”. 
b. If the manufacturer’s original expiration date is prior to the “beyond use” expiration date, 
then the shorter date must be used.  
 
c. If sterility is questioned or if the multi-dose medication is compromised it should be 
discarded immediately, regardless of the date. 
 
d. Medication vials should be labeled with the “beyond use” date.   OPENED on date is not 
acceptable.  (i.e. vial opened on 12/2/11 should be labeled as expired using the date of 
12/29/11). 
 
2. Multi-dose Vaccine Vials for Injection: 
Multi-dose vaccine vials for injection may be used until the expiration date labeled by the manufacturer 
on the vial.  However, should the vaccine vial become contaminated or exceed storage requirements, the 
vial shall be discarded at that time.  Vaccines in the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and 
state immunization programs are exempt from this policy.  An example of this would be Vaccines for 
Children Program. The CDC states these vaccines may be used up to and until the expiration date 
printed on the vial.  There are three exemptions to this however where the vial would be discarded prior 
to the expiration date printed on the vial. These are the following:  
a.  Vials that must be reconstituted have limited stability and must be discarded according to 
the Package Insert.   
b. Multi-dose vials that become contaminated or have further specifications noted in the 
package insert once the rubber stopper of the vial has been punctured.   NOP-021 
Page 2 of 2 
c. Manufacturer shortened expiration date: If the vaccine has been exposed to inappropriate 
storage conditions, the manufacturer could make a determination what the expiration date 
should be based on the conditions of the vaccine.   
 
3. Ophthalmology products:  
a. Most eye drops are not clearly labeled as “multi-dose” products nor are indicated as 
multi-dose within package inserts (PI) provided by the manufacturer. It is standard of 
practice the patient is prescribed the medication and uses the medication for the duration 
stated within the literature contained in the PI.  Because the literature for ophthalmic 
drops only addresses the duration of the prescribed therapy and not the stability of the 
medication once the bottle has been opened, eye drops in our organization shall be 
handled in the following manner: 
i. In the acute care setting or inpatient areas only: 
1. Physicians may prescribe ophthalmic drops to a patient and the one bottle 
may be dispensed to the patient from the inpatient pharmacy or released 
from the pharmacy via an automated dispensing device on the patient care 
unit.  This one bottle may be used for the one patient and stored securely 
within the medication cart. The medication will be disposed of once the 
order is discontinued or the medication becomes contaminated.  The bottle 
will only be used for the patient it was ordered.  
2. Ophthalmic drops are not to be dispensed home with the patient upon 
discharge.  
ii. In the non-acute care setting or clinic areas: 
1. It is standard of practice physicians in the clinic setting may use 
ophthalmic products as part of a procedural visit such as dilation of the 
eye.  In this setting, eye drops may be stored securely within the clinic and 
used for multiple patients so long as the following does not occur: 
a. Storage conditions of the product are exceeded 
b. The labeling of the product indicates the bottle is to be disposed of 
immediately after use 
c. Contamination is presented to the bottle 
d. Bottles should not be used between patients if an infection is 
present  
2. All opened ophthalmic products shall be discarded at the end of each 
clinic day.  
3. Eye drops will not be dispensed home with any patient.   
REFERENCES: 
The Joint Commission Standards FAQs (2021 ). Multi-dose vials. Joint Commission website  
 http://www.jointcommission.org 
 
Centers for Disease Control: Vaccine Storage and Handling Toolkit (2022).  www.cdc.gov  