NOP-009 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Medication 
Title: Medications of Transferred / Discharged 
Patients 
Policy 
Reference #: NOP-009 
Supersedes #: 1985; 12/90; 9/94 
Date of Origination: March, 1988 Review Date:    June 10, 2024 
Revision Date: February 13, 2016 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define the procedure for handling of medications for patients who are either transferred to another 
patient care unit or discharged from the medical center. 
 
 
POLICY: 
The medications of transferred patients must be transferred with the patient to the new location. 
A. The medications of discharged patients should be returned to the Pharmacy the day of discharge. 
 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Transfers 
1. If a patient is transferred within the same unit, the medication should be transferred to the proper 
medication storage area. 
2. If the patient is transferred to another inpatient care unit at OLOL (exceptions include Rehab and 
Mental and Behavior Health Units)  the patient's medications should be placed in  a marked bag and 
labeled with a patient sticker and sent with the patient 
3. The receiving nurse must review each medication to ensure appropriateness for the patient’s current 
orders.   
4. If the patient goes to surgery and does not return to original nursing unit, the medications will be 
returned to pharmacy with the patient’s label. Medication orders have a probability to change 
postoperatively. 
5. Patients requiring medication for preop should have medications placed in a marked bag labeled with a 
patient sticker. Medications should be sent with the patient when they are transferred to the peri -
operative area. 
 
Discharge 
1. Upon discharge of the patient, the nurse or designated person will remove any remaining medications 
from the patient's medication storage area. 
2. The nurse or designee will bag and label  any unused  medications stating the patient has been 
discharged.  Partially used medication may be discarded or wasted according to policy NOP-009 
Page 2 of 2 
3. Medications should be sent to the pharmacy to allow credit of any unused medications.  A discharged 
patient’s medications should not be left in the medication room.   Narcotics must be returned to the 
pharmacy or wasted according to applicable policies, they must never be tubed, or left unsecured.  
4. When appropriate, there are certain medications which may be sent home with the patient at discharge. 
It is outside the scope of practice for nursing or physicians to dispense medications for outpatient use 
in the hospital setting.  Refer to the pharmacist to perform this function.   