NPC-079 
Page 1 of 2 
 
PURPOSE:  
To provide guidelines for the pre-operative preparation of the patient and family or significant others. 
 
POLICY:  
To assure the patient and family are safely and adequately prepared for surgery in a timely manner. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. Verify the physician’s order for surgical procedure.  
 
2. Review the patient’s medications, including Home Medication List, for those meds regularly taken.  
The nurse will document the last dose taken.  If indicated, the nurse must obtain a physician order if 
specific oral medications are to be given with a sip of water prior to surgery.  
 
Assure a completed informed consent document for the procedure, is in the chart. See Policy # 
OrgClin/012 for consent details.   
 
3. Ensure a valid History and Physical (H&P) is in the chart.  The signature cannot be a signature stamp.  
When a resident, Physician Assistant or Nurse Practitioner completes the History and Physical a co-
signature by the attending MD must be obtained within 24hrs 
a. Outpatients - The H&P must be dated within 30 days with an update note done the day of 
surgery, the update notes must be signed, dated, and timed. 
b. Inpatients’ - H&Ps are valid for the entire admission regardless of the length of stay. 
 
 
4. Assure that all preoperative orders (lab, diagnostic studies, etc.) are initiated and completed in a timely 
manner to facilitate patient throughput. 
 
5. Teach patient and family about the peri-operative process and expectations.  Document the 
patient/family’s response in the patient’s Electronic Medical Record (EMR).  If the patient or family 
has any questions regarding surgical procedure and /or post-operative care, the physician is notified.  
Document patient/family questions and physician notification. 
 
6. Surgical baths will be completed as ordered. 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Patient Care 
Title: Pre-Operative Care 
Policy 
Reference #: NPC-079 
Supersedes #: 1990, 1196, 1998, 2002 
Date of Origination: February 1988 Review Date:  May 31, 2024 
Revision Date: January 10, 2022 NPC-079 
Page 2 of 2 
7. Assure all jewelry is removed, both pierced and non-pierced. Document in the medical record the 
inability or refusal to remove jewelry.  Notify the surgeon and the Surgical Services Department 
Manager/Director; document in medical record.  
 
8. Personal items (i.e. dentures, eyeglasses, etc.) which remain with the patient will be documented on 
the pre-operative checklist and communicated to the OR circulator.  
 
9. Review orders and complete if appropriate.  Ensure consents and checklist are completed prior to 
sending patient to procedure.  
 
10. If Pre-Op medications are to be given prior to transport, administer and document.  
 
11. After the patient has been transported to surgery, complete the following activities on ‘Inpatient’ 
units: 
a. Prepare post-operative bed. 
b. Order and place any anticipated post-operative care equipment and/or supplies in the room. 