 NPC152 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Patient Care 
Title: Transition to Inpatient Hospice 
 
Policy Reference #: NPC152 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: July 26, 2021 Last Review Date: 12/20/2024  
Last Revision Date: 11/25/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To outline the process for discharging a patient who is imminently dying and simultaneously admitting 
to hospice inpatient status within the hospital.  The transition to hospice inpatient will allow the patient/ 
family to benefit from hospice care (multidisciplinary care coordination, symptom management, 
bereavement support) while remaining at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Main Campus 
(OLOLRMC). 
 
POLICY: 
Hospice care is a philosophy of wholistic care that emphasizes quality of life and life-closure issues 
while minimizing suffering and promoting peace and dignity for individuals with a life limiting 
condition.  In this situation, the patient will be imminently dying, palliative care will be part of the 
treatment team, and the goal of care will be focused solely on the relief of suffering. 
 
Only those independent hospice agencies which have a contractual relationship with the hospital to 
provide inpatient hospice care may participate in the care of such patients. 
 
The medical director of the independent hospice agency will be the attending physician. 
 
The identified independent hospice agency will oversee the plan of care for the patient.  Direct patient 
care will be provided by OLOL staff with the support of hospice support staff. 
 
The expressed goal is to provide care and comfort in situations where cure is not an outcome.  As a 
Catholic healthcare institution, we must provide patients facing death with the necessary information 
needed to assist with understanding their condition and to provide a framework to make morally 
legitimate choices for their care.  In addition, effective management of pain in all forms is critical in the 
appropriate care of the dying.  Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Healthcare Services, Sixth 
Edition, Part 5, Issues in Care for the Seriously Ill and Dying. 
 
The independent hospice agency will be responsible for providing training for OLOL staff on the unique 
care needs of the hospice patient. 
 
The best environment of care for patients transitioning to inpatient hospice care will be determined by 
the physician.  Ideally, patients will be transferred to the oncology unit for management. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. Patient/ family must consent to the hospice admission. 
  NPC152 
Page 2 of 2 
2. The independent hospice agency will evaluate the patient for appropriateness, create a plan of care, 
and initiate admit orders for “Inpatient Hospice”. This process should be coordinated with OLOL 
care team. 
 
3. Patient is formally discharged from OLOL EPIC and readmitted with a new encounter number and a 
new payor source (the hospice agency caring for the patient is the payor source).  
 
4. Care will continue to be provided by OLOL staff, in coordination with the staff of the independent 
hospice agency. The patient will be visited daily by personnel from the hospice agency.  
 
5. The independent hospice agency is to be contacted directly for any patient issues.  
 
6. At the time of death, OLOL staff will notify the independent hospice agency.  The patient will be 
pronounced by a physician or General Inpatient independent hospice agency. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, (2018), Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health 
Care Services (Sixth Edition). 
 
 