POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Patient Care 
Services/ 
Nursing 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  
 
Clinical Alarm Management Section:   
Date of Origination:  June 1, 2015 Supersedes:  
Date Last Revised:             March 7, 2018 Serial Code:  NPC150 
Date Last Reviewed:          August 12, 2024 
 
PURPOSE:   
To identify and provide guidelines for managing clinical alarm systems that may cause alarm fatigue 
and impact patient safety. 
 
Applies To: 
All clinical team members on patient care areas. 
 
POLICY: 
Clinical alarms and medical equipment alarm systems utilized for patient care will be properly 
operational and alarms will be activated when the appropriate settings are in use.   For monitoring 
devices with alarm limit parameters, it is appropriate to set the clinical alarm limits based on an 
individual patient’s baseline.  Alarm systems on clinical patient care equipment will never be turned 
off while in use on a patient or during patient care.  Alarms may be suspended during clinical 
beside reassessments and titrations when the clinical team is at the bedside. 
 
Equipment with alarms covered under this policy includes (but not limited to): 
 
Cardiac/telemetry monitors 
Continuous pulse oximetry monitors/Capnography/Ventilators (Invasive and Non-Invasive) 
Bed/chair alarms 
Infusion Pumps 
Apnea Monitors 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. Patient care staff verify the equipment is functional prior to use.  If alarms are not audible the 
equipment will be taken out of use and BioMed notified according to TriMedx Equipment 
Repairs policy. 
 
2. Alarm systems on clinical patient care equipment should not be turned off while in use on a 
patient.  Staff may suspend alarms that can be suspended or turn off alarms that could cause a 
false alarm when providing care at the bedside.   Prior to leaving the bedside alarms should be 
returned to the original or active alarm state. 
 
3. Clinical team members will be educated on safe alarm management and response in high-risk 
areas, and on the safe use of alarmed medical devices on which they rely.  
 4. At no time should a team member enter the password protected levels of programming within 
the medical device.  Alarm parameters are not to be altered without consent and direction of 
the Clinical Engineering representative or management. 
 
5. Medical Equipment Alarm Signals and Parameters  
a. Default alarm settings for patient care areas are determined by the nursing, ancillary unit 
leaders, and Physician partners. 
b. Equipment, default signal settings, default alarm settings, risk index, and alarm notification 
method(s) covered by this procedure is designated in the Alarm-equipped medical device 
inventory. 
 
6. Clinically appropriate alarm settings 
a. Physicians, Licensed Independent Practitioners (LIP), Registered Nurses (RN), Respiratory 
Therapists and/or monitor technicians are responsible for setting applicable alarm 
parameters. 
b. Bedside RNs are responsible for checking alarm parameters and signals for appropriate 
settings during shift-to-shift hand-off. 
c. A physician or LIP may write an order to change alarm parameters. 
d. A physician or LIP may write an order to suspend or temporarily disable monitoring. 
 
7. A Root Cause Analysis will be conducted by an interdisciplinary team (staff from the specific 
patient care unit, Engineering/Biomedical staff, and Patient Safety representative) upon 
identification of any environmental noise, staffing, or other issues that prevents staff from 
hearing and responding to the alarm if the issue cannot be corrected timely.   
 
REFERENCES: 
 
AACN.org & http://www.aami.org/htsi/alarms/ 
 
The Joint Commission (2023). National patient safety goals: Hospital. (Effective July 2023). 
https://www.jointcommission.org 
    
 
Jacques, S. Williams, E. (2016). Reducing the safety hazards of monitor alert and alarm fatigue. 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality-Patient Safety Network (PSNet). 
https://psnet.ahrq.gov/perspective/reducing-safety-hazards-monitor-alert-and-alarm-fatigue.  
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
 
Related policies: 
Falls Prevention, Adult (NPC-067) 
Monitoring Responsibilities for Patients Requiring Cardiac Monitoring (NNA-098) 
Patient Controlled Analgesia (PCA) (NMA 016)         
TriMedx Equipment Repairs policy  
Mechanical Ventilation (RC8-01) 
Non-Invasive Ventilation (RC8-03) 
 