NPC-141 
Page 1 of 2 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing  Section: Org/Clin 
Title: Urinary Catheter Criteria for Insertion and 
Continuation  
Policy 
Reference #: NPC-141 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: December 14, 2009 Last Review 
Date:  August 12, 2024 
Last Revision Date: August 12, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
• This policy governs the urinary catheter guidelines for the use and care of indwelling urinary 
catheters to prevent the development of catheter-associated urinary tract infections (CAUTIs).  
One of the strongest risk factors for hospital-acquired urinary tract infections is the presence of 
indwelling urinary catheters.  Indwelling urinary catheters should be avoided unless clinically 
necessary. 
• This policy provides a set criterion for the decision of Urinary catheter insertion. 
• This policy is not intended to apply to suprapubic catheters, urostomy or nephrostomy tubes, 
or other urinary drainage systems or catheters inserted only for the duration of specific 
procedures.   
 
POLICY: 
The decision for inserting an indwelling urethral catheter should be based only on one or more of the 
following criteria approved by the Medical Executive Committee at OLOL:  
Epidural catheter in place  
a. Gross hematuria or genitourinary irrigation  
b. Hemodynamic Monitoring  
c. Incontinent with stage 3 or 4 sacral ulcer or wound  
d. Known or suspected urinary obstruction  
e. Neurogenic bladder dysfunction  
f. Palliative care for terminally ill  
g. Pelvic surgery or trauma  
h. Urinary Retention  
i. Urologic surgery or studies  
j. For use in OR/Surgery 
 
If a urinary catheter was placed by an outside facility, and was not placed for a urological procedure, 
the catheter should be changed upon admit to OLOL. 
  
The patient’s physician may order a catheter without these indications when he/she deems 
appropriate but must document the alternative reason for ordering. 
 
The above criteria are also utilized for the nurse’s daily assessment of the continued need for the 
indwelling urinary catheter.  
PROCEDURE 
1. Follow orders for assessment, insertion, and removal. 
2. Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference. NPC-141 
Page 2 of 2 
 
3. Educate patients and their families as needed on CAUTI prevention and the symptoms of a 
urinary tract infection.  
 
STAFF EDUCATION 
Education occurs upon hire or upon granting of initial privileges and when involvement in indwelling 
catheter care is added to an individual’s job responsibilities. Ongoing education and competency 
reassessment occurs as needed based on events and trends. 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference. 
 
Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract Infections (CAUTI) Prevention Guideline | Infection Control | CDC 
Retrieved May 27, 2024 
 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, & U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2015). 
"Toolkit for reducing catheter-associated urinary tract infections in hospital units: 
Implementation guide" [Online]. Accessed October 2018 via the Web at 
http://www.ahrq.gov/professionals/quality-patient-safety/hais/cauti-tools/impl-
guide/index.html  
 
The Joint Commission. (2023). Standard EC.02.02.01. The Joint Commission Comprehensive 
Accreditation, Certification and Verification e-Manual.  Retrieved May 1, 2023.  
The Joint Commission E-dition (jcrinc.com) 
 
CDC. Catheter-associated Urinary Tract Infections (CAUTI).  Retrieved May 1, 2023, from 
https://www.cdc.gov/hai/ca_uti/uti.html 
 
 
 
 
 