 
NPC 147 Guidelines for Providing Comfort Care 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Patient Care Services  
SUBJECT:  
Guidelines for Providing Comfort Care 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
OrgOps/ET/009; OrgOps/ET/011 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
May 1985 
REVISION DATE: 
 March 16, 2022 
REVIEW DATE: 
 12/20/2024  
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
NPC-147 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To state how to clearly uphold a patient’s decision expressed by self or through others, on providing care that 
is in accord with law and the Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services. 
 
POLICY: 
 
A. Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL), as a Catholic health care facility shall be a 
community of respect, love and support to our patients and their families as they face the reality of death. 
B. These patients and their families should be provided with whatever information is necessary to help them 
understand their condition, have the opportunity to discuss their condition with their family and care 
providers and make decisions concerning their care. We must always care even when we cannot cure.  
(Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, Sixth Edition, #55 and #59.) 
C. One of the primary focuses in caring for the dying is the relief of pain and suffering so that they may die 
comfortably and with dignity.  (Ethical and Religious Directive for Catholic Health Care Services, Sixth 
Edition, #61.) 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURES / GUIDELINES: 
 
1. All comfort care orders must be given and signed by a physician or allied health professional. 
2. Documentation in the medical record should include a summary of the patient’s condition and prognosis as 
well as the wishes of the patient or their legal representative corroborating the comfort care orders. 
3. Comfort care orders will be reviewed periodically by the physician or allied health professional actively 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
NPC 147 Guidelines for Providing Comfort Care 
2 
involved in the patient’s care to ensure that they are consistent with the patient’s condition and desires.  
4. If a patient unexpectedly improves or recovers, the competent patient or legal representative will be 
informed of the change in condition and provide the patient with the opportunity to amend their current 
care plan. 
5. The focus of comfort care is to improve quality of life and to minimize suffering.  This includes bodily 
cleanliness, oral hygiene, bodily repositioning, maintenance of bodily warmth, and pain and symptom 
control. 
a. Food and fluids the patient seems to desire in whatever amounts he/she desires should be provided 
orally to the extent possible.  
b. In addition, spiritual and psychological care should be provided for the patient and family as 
warranted. 
 
RELATED POLICIES: 
• OO-ET-003 “Do Not Resuscitate Order (DNR)” 
•  
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
  
1. United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, (2018), Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health 
Care Services (Sixth Edition). 
 
 
 
 