NPCLA-01 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Child Life  
Subject:  Child Life Service and Programs Section:  Administrative 
Date of Origination:  August 26, 1994 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
May 12, 2005 
 
August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPCLA-01 
  
PURPOSE: 
To define the scope of Child Life Services, provide comprehensive psychosocial and developmental support 
services to children, adolescents, and their families before or during hospitalization. 
 
POLICY: 
The Scope of Practice will be as follows: 
I. Implementation of Child Life Programs/Services 
A. Department Objectives 
1. Child Life services are available to patients and family members of those patients. 
2. The Child Life case load is based on daily screening of available patients within the 
Children’s Hospital, referrals from medical staff, or referrals from non-pediatric units 
assigned pediatric patients.  Services will be provided to those patients who rank highest on 
the Child Life ranking system. 
3. The schedule of operation for child life programming is variable but includes coverage of at 
least 7 days a week with an average of eight hours per day. 
4. Child Life services are provided by Certified Child Life Specialists. 
 
 
The Scope of Service will be as follows: 
I. Clinical Functions 
A. Assessment of psychosocial needs of patients and families related to healthcare experiences. 
B. Promotion of normal growth and development during hospitalization or health care experiences. 
C. Psychosocial interventions with parent and/or families regarding medical experiences, i.e., 
preparations for surgeries, procedures, diagnosis education. 
D. Provision of a safe, developmentally appropriate activities to continue positive growth and 
development during hospitalization. 
 
II. Goals 
A. To facilitate emotional support to all pediatric patients. 
B. To help children cope with the stress and anxiety of the hospital experience. 
C. Coordination of development during hospitalization. 
D. To develop a trusting, supporting relationship between the Child Life Specialist and the 
hospitalized child and their family. 
 
III. Objectives 
A. Child Life Program 
1. To provide quality patient care based on the Child Life assessment process with continuous NPCLA-01 
Page 2 of 2 
evaluation and reassessment of intervention and priorities.  
2. Implement educational opportunities for hospital staff on the unique needs of the child and 
their family during hospitalization. 
3. To provide therapeutic and recreational activities within the playroom and at bedside.  To 
promote the use of play as a means to facilitate healing, coping mastery, self-expression, 
creativity, achievement, and learning. 
4. To provide opportunities for coping to retain independence and self-esteem. 
5. To provide supportive, trusting relationships to children and their families. 
6. To decrease anxieties, fears, and misconceptions. 
7. To help children and parents cope with emotional reactions such as guilt, fear of 
abandonment, fear of pain, and mutilation. 
8. To encourage emotional expression of general or specific fears regarding illness 
hospitalization, and treatment. 
9. To substitute knowledge and comprehension for fear of the unknown and misunderstanding. 
10. To provide preparation and emotional support for procedures and treatments. 
 
B. Therapeutic Play/Playroom 
1. To use play as a mechanism/opportunity to recognize and clarify misconceptions and fears 
related to hospitalization and illness. 
2. To give the patient the opportunity to make choices. 
3. To maintain a receptive and non-threatening environment. 
4. To appeal to what is healthy in the child.  
5. To maintain and encourage the development process. 
6. To provide a more usable and structured play environment. 
7. To provide and maintain safe educational play equipment. 
8. To provide activities which can give the child a sense of mastery and control. 
9. To provide a means by which the hospital staff can make meaningful observation of the 
patient in normal play and education situations to better assess his progress and needs. 
10. To provide medical and non-medical play equipment. 
11. To facilitate peer interaction and socialization. 
 
C. Medical Play 
1. To allow the child to: 
a. Express interest and satisfy curiosity. 
b. Gain mastery over an unfamiliar or threatening environment. 
c. Communicate through non-verbal techniques, thereby resolving unspoken fears and 
anxieties. 
d. Learn about and master specific hospital treatments and procedures, thus promoting 
cooperation. 
2. To initiate discussion about hospitalization, surgical procedures, and illness. 
3. To decrease anxiety and fears. 
4. To clarify misconceptions about treatments and procedures. 