NPCL-009 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Child Life  
Subject:  Child Life Off Campus Events Section:  Child Life 
Date of Origination:  December 3, 1999 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPCL-009 
  
PURPOSE: 
To meet the psychosocial needs of the acute and chronically ill patient.  To provide previously hospitalized 
children an opportunity for peer interaction.  To create the opportunity for chronically ill school age and 
adolescent patients the opportunity to gain independence from the family unit, develop peer relationships, and 
peer support. 
 
POLICY: 
1.  Teen Night: Event Planning & Coordinating 
 
A. Chronically ill, pre-adolescent and adolescent patients between the chronological or developmental age 
of 13-17 years old who will benefit from this program will be identified by Children’s Hospital staff, 
and then added to the participant list in the Child Life Department. 
 
B. Event planning will be completed by the Child Life Specialist at least two weeks prior to the event. 
 
 
C. OLOL employees (1 adult to 5 participants, always including one nurse) will provide event supervision.  
Total number of adults present should be kept to a minimum to facilitate optimal interaction among 
participants. 
 
D. This program cannot accommodate individuals who are patients at OLOLCH at the time of the planned 
event. 
 
 
E. Participants will be mailed invitations no later than two weeks before the Teen Night and must RSVP in 
order to attend the function. 
 
F. Arrangements will be made between the Event Coordinator and the participant’s legal guardian for the 
teen to be dropped off and picked up at the planned event location by the participant’s legal guardian.   
 
G. A consent form signed by the participant’s legal guardian must be presented upon arrival in order for the 
individual to attend Teen Night.  This consent form will be mailed with the invitation to attend the 
planned event. 
 
 
 
2.  Special Outing: Event Planning & Coordinating NPCL-009 
Page 2 of 2 
 
H. Those pediatric patients who will benefit from this program will be identified by the Children’s Hospital 
staff, and then added to a participant list in the Child Life Department. 
 
I. Event planning will be completed by a member of the Child Life Department. 
 
 
J. OLOL employees (1 adult to 5 participants, always including one nurse) will provide event supervision.  
Total number of adults present should be kept to a minimum to facilitate optimal interaction among 
participants. 
 
K. This program cannot accommodate individuals who are patients at OLOLCH at the time of the planned 
event. 
 
L. Participants will be mailed invitations no later than two weeks before the event and must RSVP in order 
to attend the function. 
 
M. Arrangements will be made between the Event Coordinator and the participant’s legal guardian for the 
child to be dropped off and picked up at the planned event location by the participant’s legal guardian.   
 
N. A consent form signed by the participant’s legal guardian must be presented upon arrival in order for the 
individual to attend the special event.  This consent form will be mailed with the invitation to attend the 
planned event. 
 
 