NPCL-007 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Child Life 
Subject:  Donated Items Section:  Child Life 
Date of Origination:  December 1, 1999 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
March 8, 2019 
 
 August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPCL-007 
  
PURPOSE: 
To define guidelines for items donated to the Children’s Hospital and identify the scope of collaboration with 
Child Life, Patient Experience and Foundation teams when requesting and accepting donations and cultivating 
donors. 
 
POLICY: 
The following guidelines will be used to determine acceptance of donations from various donors in the 
community. 
 
1. Arrangements for donated goods will be made with the Foundation team.  An email will be sent to 
donations@ololchildres.org for all inquiries. 
 
2. Donated goods should be delivered to the Foundation Office 9:00 AM and 4:00 PM Monday – Thursday 
or by appointment.  This is to ensure proper tracking, inspection and donor cultivation. 
 
3. Deliveries should not be accepted outside of designated times unless otherwise arranged or instructed by 
designated Foundation, Patient Experience or Child Life team member. 
 
4. Donation Guidelines:  
a. Toys must be new. 
b. Stuffed toys must be in the manufacture’s packaging. 
c. Avoid toys with detachable or small parts. 
d. Toys must be sturdy, plastic, and/or those which can be cleaned. 
e. All items must be non-toxic. 
f. Toys that are broken or have sharp edges or missing pieces are not accepted. 
 
5. The Foundation, Child Life or Patient Experience representative reserves the right to refuse any item 
that is not appropriate for distribution.  Any item donated in an unacceptable condition will be 
forwarded to another worthy organization or discarded. List of identified FMOLHS teams to share 
donations should be contacted before outside organizations unless otherwise instructed by the 
departments listed above. 
 
6. A copy of Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital “Wish List” along with donation and drop off 
instructions will be sent to the person requesting information regarding donations.  More information 
regarding donations can be found on Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Health website under Giving. NPCL-007 
Page 2 of 2 
 
7. The donor will complete the Children’s Hospital “Donation Record” form upon delivery of the donation. 
Record will be kept by donor record specialist for necessary correspondence and donor will be entered 
into database. 
 
8. The Foundation team member accepting the donation will be responsible for expressing appreciation in 
person and in writing to the donor. Foundation team will be responsible for donor cultivation and 
message coordination to marketing for recognition. 
 
9. Large group and corporate donation arrangements should be coordinated ahead of time thru 
collaboration of the departments listed above.  Interested partners can access corporate toolkit on Our 
Lady of the Lake Children’s Health website for more information. 
  
 
 
 
 
 