NPD-006 
Page 1 of 4 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Administration 
Subject:  Dress Code Section:  Administration 
Date of Origination:  October 22, 2007 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
October 23, 2020 
November 8, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPD-006 
  
PURPOSE: 
To define the standards for the dress code for the Children’s Hospital employees that are reflective of and 
promote the professionalism of the Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Service Excellence Standards.  Any apparel 
that is monogrammed must have the approved OLOL Children’s Hospital logo. This policy is applicable for 
work and training on all shifts, seven days a week. 
 
POLICY: 
A. All personnel are required to wear identification badges.  The badge must be prominently displayed 
upon the person, clipped no lower than six inches below the shoulders. 
1. Lanyards may not be used to display the identification badge in a Patient Care Location.  
2. If a team member reports to work without an identification badge, a temporary badge shall be issued 
at the employee entrance. 
B. Team members are expected to maintain good personal hygiene and to dress in neat, clean, and wrinkle 
free clothing.  Clothing must fit appropriately, not be a distraction and should not interfere with the work 
being performed.   
C. Team members must wear appropriate undergarments which shall not be visible while working.  No part 
of the midriff shall be exposed while working.  Skirts and dresses should be not shorter than three (3) 
inches above the knee.  Blouses, shirts and dresses should be modest with no plunging neck lines.  
D. Clothing made of denim fabric of any color may not be worn in patient care locations unless the denim 
is part of the FMOLHS or Affiliate Uniform.  Team members attending training, meetings, etc. may not 
wear denim.  Organization approved T-shirts with OLOL or Tau logo, can be worn. 
E. In all job classes wearing scrubs, solid color tee shirts may be worn under the approved polo shirt or 
scrub top. 
 
I. Universal standards: 
A. Footwear standards:  Shoes shall confirm to established safety and infection prevention standards and 
promote a quiet environment.  Flip-flops are not acceptable footwear. 
B. Jewelry:  Jewelry maybe worn provided that it does not distract or interfere with the work being 
performed or create a safety hazard.  Certain clinical areas may have additional standards related to 
jewelry that must be adhered too (i.e., Operating Division and Oncology).  A nose stud no larger than 
1.5mm is allowed, provided that it does not interfere with work being performed or create a safety 
hazard. 
C. Tattoos:  Tattoos may be visible, provided that they are not obscene, offensive, or violative of another NPD-006 
Page 2 of 4 
 
policy, otherwise not supportive of FMOLHS core values. 
D. Makeup: Make-up may be worn provided that the amount is not excessive or a distraction and does not 
interfere with the work being performed.  The use of perfumes, colognes, aftershave, particularly in 
areas where patient care is provided, is discouraged. 
E. Hair: Hair should be clean and well groomed, styled in a manner that is not a distraction and does not 
interfere with the work being performed.  Hair color shall be a color that naturally occurs in humans. 
F. Hats:  Hats may not be worn unless an official part of the FMOLHS or Affiliate uniform or approved by 
the Department Head.  Headscarves may be worn provided that they are not a distraction and do not 
interfere with the work being performed. 
G. Fingernails:  Shall be clean and well-manicured.  The length of fingernails should not interfere with the 
ability to perform the job.  Infection control policy should be followed related to nail length and 
enhancements. 
H. Ear buds, Bluetooth devices or headphones:  May only be worn if needed to perform their work or while 
completing on-line training.  These devices are not allowed for non-work activities while working. 
I. The chewing of gum is unacceptable. 
J. Any team member attending a work-related activity must be appropriately dressed and professional in 
accordance with the policy. 
K. Team members who report to work dressed or groomed in a manner inconsistent with this policy may be 
subject to any of the following: 
1. Instructed to clock out with the understanding that they correct the situation and return to work as 
soon as possible. 
2. Appropriate disciplinary action. 
 
II. Role specific standards: 
1. Registered Nurses: 
a. Solid Galaxy or Cobalt Blue uniforms (pants, skirt, scrub top/golf shirt, jacket). 
b. Pediatric printed uniforms (jacket and top) may be worn with the solid Galaxy Blue or Cobalt Blue 
scrub pants/skirts or solid white scrub pants/skirts. 
c. When printed jackets are worn at the same time, the jacket and scrub top must be of matching 
pattern.  The solid Galaxy Blue scrub top or Cobalt Blue scrub top can be worn with a printed jacket.  
The printed scrub top can be worn with a solid white or Galaxy Blue jacket or Cobalt Blue jacket. 
d. Polo shirt or sweatshirt (long or short sleeve) may be worn in any solid color with an approved logo 
monogrammed on it with Galaxy Blue, Cobalt Blue and/or vest is permitted. 
2. NICU: 
a. All personnel must remove rings, watches and bracelets before washing/scrubbing their hands for 
three-minutes upon arrival for their shift. 
b. Hand and wrist jewelry cannot be worn during the shift. 
c. All lab coats and/shirt sleeves cannot be worn below the elbow when accessing the infants. 
d.  Any team member with an item on below the elbow that they are unable to remove (i.e. permanent 
bracelets) are required to wear disposable gowns (PPE) when caring for patients in the NICU. 
3. Children’s Hospital Nursing Assistants: NPD-006 
Page 3 of 4 
 
Ceil Blue scrub pants with scrub top and jacket.  Nursing assistants may also wear solid Ceil Blue jacket 
and top matching the bottoms, polo with approved monogram or printed jacket or top.  Pre/Post Op 
nursing assistants wear Teal scrub pants/shirt. 
4. Nurse Technicians: 
Navy tops and white pants or skirt, white lab coat, polo with approved monogram or printed shirt or 
jacket. 
5. Emergency Department Tech/Nurse Tech:  
Solid burgundy scrubs, polo with approved monogram or printed shirt or jacket. 
6. Clinical Service Representative (CSR): 
Approved black slacks or skirt, black vest or jacket, blue shirt, and professional black shoes should be 
worn.  CSRs may wear polo with approved monogram or printed shirt, OLOL approved sweater sets 
with approved black slacks or skirt and professional black shoe. 
7. Transport Team: 
See policy CHTP-01- Children’s Hospital Critical Care Transport Team- Section V. Uniform  
8. Child Life Specialist: 
Child Life Staff are required to wear a polo style shirt (2-5 buttons) in short or long sleeve.  Tops must 
be monogramed with the Children’s Hospital logo (left side) and the “Child Life Department” (optional, 
Right side) monogramed with the approved logo from Keys Graphics.  Sweatshirts and sweat jackets 
(non-hooded) are approved to wear and must be monogrammed with the approved logo as well.  These 
are the only approved sweatshirts.  Pants should be scrub bottoms in any bright color with the exception 
of galaxy blue. 
9. Social Worker: 
Any color monogrammed polo shirt with navy scrub pants. 
10. Case Managers:  
Registered nurse dress code as stated above or business casual attire. 
11. HIM:  
Glam Fuchsia scrubs with black coat. 
12. Imaging:  
Gray uniforms (pants, skirt, scrub top/golf shirt, jacket); Pediatric printed uniforms (jacket and top) may 
be worn with gray pants/skirts.  Polo shirt (long or short sleeve) may be worn in any solid color with 
approved logo monogrammed.  White, navy or gray sweatshirts with an approved logo may be worn.  
Gray, blue or white non-hooded zip fleece jacket, pullover and/or vest is permitted. 
13. Pharmacy:  
Pharmacist may wear dress attire with a white lab coat OR navy-blue scrub.  Pharmacy technicians may 
wear navy blue scrubs.  Both pharmacists and technicians may wear a polo shirt in any solid color with 
approved monogrammed Children’s Hospital logo with navy blue scrub bottoms.  Team members 
working in clean room environments must follow all clean room policies and procedures in regard to 
attire. 
14. Retail Pharmacy:  
Pharmacists and pharmacy technicians may wear blue scrubs.  Gray, white or navy-blue jackets 
sweatshirts are permitted. NPD-006 
Page 4 of 4 
 
15. Respiratory Care:  
a. Respiratory therapist may wear solid color black uniform scrub (pants, skirt, scrub top/shirt, jacket) 
or with white or pink trim.  Pediatric printed scrub uniforms tops may be worn with solid black scrub 
pants/skirts. 
b. Polo shirts (long and or short sleeves) may be worn in black, white, gray and pink solid color with 
appropriate Children’s Hospital logo with solid black scrub pants or skirt. 
c. Black, gray, pink or white sweater (no hooded sweater), jacket or fleece in solid color with 
appropriate OLOL children’s hospital logo may be worn with solid black uniform scrub pants or 
skirt. 
16. Physical Medicine:  
Navy blue scrub top and pants.  May wear polo shirt in any solid color with an approved monogrammed 
logo with navy scrub pants or Khakis.  White, navy, or gray non-hooded jackets or monogrammed 
sweatshirts may be worn. 
17. Materials Management:  
See material Management Baton Rouge Market Uniform Standard Operating Procedure. 
18. Phlebotomists: 
Caribbean Blue scrubs closed toe shoes, (See policy CH-VP-001-Dress Code and Behavior) Pediatric 
print scrub tops and Polo shirts with approved OLOLOCH logo are also acceptable. 
19. Medical Technologist and Medical Lab Assistants:  
Navy or Patriot Blue scrubs closed toe shoes.  Pediatric print scrub tops and Polo shirts with approved 
OLOLCH logo are also acceptable. 
20. Patient Access:  
Black pants or skirt. Black blazer, cardigan, or vest with royal blue shirt (ordered through the hospital-
approved uniform store, (See Patient Access Dress Code Policy FIN.04.44). 
21. Guest Services:  
Black pants or skirt.  Marine green polo with black blazer or cardigan (ordered through the hospital 
approved uniform store).  Guest Services and PBX operators may also wear half zip pull over with no 
hood.  All polo shirts and outerwear must be monogrammed with the OLOL Children’s Hospital logo.  
Black shoes. 
22. Volunteers:  
Black, navy blue, gray or khaki colored business casual pant or skirt (no jean or yoga materials).  Select 
volunteer role are permitted to wear black scrub bottoms.  Royal purple shirt ordered by volunteer from 
Pro-Print.  Must wear volunteer badge attached to shirt collar.  Must wear closed toe shoes (athletic 
sneakers or casual shoes preferred).  If outwear is worn, volunteer badge must be visible at all times.  
 
 
Cross Referenced Policies: 
CHTP-01- Children’s Hospital Critical Care Transport Team 
CH-VP-001Dress Code and Behavior 
Patient Access Dress Code Policy FIN.04.44 
IC2005a Artificial Fingernails 