NPD-012 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Administration 
Subject:  Administrative Discharge Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  March 9, 2019 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
April 12, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPD-012 
  
PURPOSE:  
The objective of this policy is to provide direction to the clinical team when a patient/family must be 
administratively discharged. 
 
POLICY:  
Administrative Discharge from the hospital 
 
I. Notification and Documentation 
1. When the patient’s medical condition permits, according to the attending physician or his/her 
designee, and all other efforts to induce compliance have failed and have been documented, the 
patient may be Administratively Discharged.  The following procedure should be followed, and each 
step documented: 
a. The House Supervisor will contact the Children’s Hospital Chief Medical Officer (CMO). 
b. House Supervisor or CMO will contact Risk Management. Risk Management, the medical 
staff provider caring for the patient, nursing and administrative team members all concurs, 
the patient may be discharged. 
c. The team will determine if a family member or caregiver will aid the patient in the 
Administrative Discharge process.  Every effort should be made to respect the confidentiality 
of patient information. 
d. The medical staff provider caring for the patient will write an order for discharge.  The order 
should document the patient’s medical condition is such that referral elsewhere will not 
likely cause substantial harm to the patient. 
2. The CMO, Administrator On Call or designee should explain to the patient the following points, and 
the medical record should reflect that these points were explained to the patient and that the patient 
demonstrated and understanding of the discussion: 
a. That the patient’s repeated unacceptable behavior is evidence of the patient’s intent to 
terminate the hospital/patient relationship. 
b. An explanation of the patient’s current medical condition, the type of care which should be 
sought by the patient, and the timeframe within which such care should be obtained. 
c. A referral, when appropriate, for the patient to seek further medical care. 
d. An explanation that, although the current hospital/patient relationship is terminated, the 
patient will not be denied emergency care in the future. 
 NPD-012 
Page 2 of 3 
3. Discharge instructions should be given to the patient or their representative and documented in the 
patient’s medical record. 
4. Assistance with any discharge planning needed to ensure continuity of care out of the hospital 
should be provided as appropriate. 
5. The patient is then asked to leave the facility.  If family is not available for transportation, Medical 
Management will assist as possible, with arrangements.  Other disciplines will be consulted based on 
specific needs.  It may be necessary to involve the security department to escort the patient out of the 
facility.  This should also be documented. 
 
II. Procedure for Administrative Discharge 
1. The Unit Director and House Supervisor should consult with the Attending physician to discuss and 
document in the patient’s record and complete a safety event report. 
a. The continued unsafe and/or disorderly actions are evidence that the patient, family/legal 
guardian chooses to terminate the hospital/patient relationship and no longer wishes to 
remain in the hospital; and 
b. The patient, family\legal guardian was made aware of the impacts/risks of not receiving 
additional medical care in view of his/her present medical condition; and 
c. Prepare for possible administrative discharge 
2. The Attending physician, Unit Director and House Supervisor will meet with patient, family/legal 
guardian and advise that administrative discharge is being recommended if patient is unable to 
comply with expectations for his/her behavior. 
a. The Children’s Hospital Chief Medical Officer (CMO) should be consulted prior to final 
decision.  
3. Risk Management should be notified. 
4. Assessment of medical conditions: 
a. If, after appropriate counseling and warnings, the patient, the parent/legal guardian continues 
to demonstrate unacceptable behavior, then the patient’s medical condition should be 
assessed. 
b. If it is determined that Administrative Discharge would result in substantial physical harm to 
the patient, Administrative Discharge is not a feasible option, and other options should be 
considered. 
c. If Administrative Discharge is medically feasible, it should be pursued by the CH CMO, and 
by the admitting physician.  The attending or treating physician should make a determination 
based on their clinical judgement and document the patient’s medical condition is such that 
discharge is not likely to result in serious physical harm to patient. 
d. A thorough physical assessment of the patient should be conducted and documented in the 
medical condition prior to discharge. 
e. All appropriate diagnostic tests should be ordered, performed and results communicated to 
the patient, family/legal guardian if feasible, prior to discharge. 
5. When Administrative Discharge is not feasible:  
a. When discharge is not medically feasible and the patient continues to exhibit violent/harmful 
(actual or potential) demonstrating behavior and all least restrictive measures have been NPD-012 
Page 3 of 3 
unsuccessful, behavior restraints should be considered.  This should be done in accordance 
with OLOL’s policy of Restraint and Seclusion (org/Clin/036). 
b. When the disruptive patient must remain in the hospital for medical reasons, care planning 
conference should be initiated to evaluate the most effective way to address the medical 
needs and behavioral issues.  The team should consider including the following as 
appropriate:  Attending physician nursing, Mental and Behavioral Health, Medical 
Management and Risk Management. 
c. In such cases, Children’s Hospital may risk violating the patient’s rights; however, it 
presumes that the patient is being medically treated and properly cared for and this is 
preferable to the risk of injury or death which could occur due to Administrative Discharge 
or by the patient’s continued disruptive behavior. 
d. Each step taken is to be documented in the patient’s medical record. 
 
III. Subsequent treatment of patients who have been Administratively Discharged 
1. When a patient who has been Administratively Discharged subsequently presents himself/herself for 
treatment at an ambulatory setting, the physician may treat the patient or refer the patient to another 
facility for treatment. 
2. If the Administratively Discharged patient seeks care in the Emergency Department, a medical 
screening exam will be performed to determine the appropriate treatment. 
3. If hospitalization appears necessary or desirable, consideration should be given to transferring the 
patient elsewhere whenever the patient’s medical condition permits.  All transfers must be handled 
in accordance with applicable policies and procedures. 
4. The treating physician should document that in his/her opinion the patient’s condition is such that 
referral elsewhere for treatment is feasible. 
5. If a patient who has been Administratively Discharged must be admitted as an inpatient, the 
admitting and discharge department should consult with the House Supervisor regarding the 
patient’s assigned location.   
Policies Referenced: 
OrgClin-036 Restraint and/or Seclusion and Safe Patient Behavior Management 
 
 
 
 