NPD-005 
Page 1 of 5 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Administrative 
Subject:  Team Member Scheduling Section:   
Date of Origination:  August 8, 2006 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
April 12, 2024 Serial Code:  NPD-005 
  
PURPOSE:  
To provide pertinent information regarding team member scheduling. 
 
POLICY: 
In order to promote greater team member engagement, maintain autonomy, flexibility, and provide clinical 
coverage of staff to provide for patient care, every team member will be responsible for completing his/her 
schedule by utilizing the guidelines set forth.   
 
PROCEDURE 
A. The following guidelines will be adhered to when self-scheduling: 
1. Each team member must complete his/her schedule according to the FTE status within which he/she was 
hired. 
2. Each Children’s Hospital team member is responsible for completing his/her schedule according to 
his/her assigned self-scheduling dat. 
3. In order to reward team member retention and performance, priority of self-scheduling will be based on 
the total score of each team member’s decision matrix.  The score on the decision matrix is determined 
minimally once a year, in June and December, and is based on length of service, experience, FTE status, 
performance appraisal, disciplinary action, and versatility. 
4. When self-scheduling, team members must review their unit’s staffing matrix and ensure minimum 
coverage for full capacity.  Each shift must not exceed maximum staffing according to the unit’s staffing 
matrix.   Management will have the option of changing the staff’s schedule if the number of staff is not 
within the staffing guidelines for the unit. 
5. WOW staff schedules will be prescheduled on the self-scheduling shell, including requested weekends 
off. 
6. Full-time staff must schedule five 12-hour weekend shifts per six -week schedule, unless otherwise 
determined by the director.  Part-time staff must schedule two 12-hour and one 8-hour weekend shifts 
per six-week schedule, unless otherwise determined by the director.  Weekend shifts are defined as 
Saturday and Sunday for day shift and either Friday and Saturday or Saturday and Sunday for night 
shift.  When staffing permits, employees with the highest matrix score will be given priority to be taken 
off of a weekend shift.  Call-ins on any part of or all of a scheduled weekend will result in that time 
being rescheduled on a following weekend or at the discretion of the director. 
7. Full-time flex-pool staff must schedule five 12-hour weekend shifts per six-week schedule, unless 
otherwise determined by the director.  Weekend shifts are defined as Saturday and Sunday for day shift 
and Friday, Saturday, and Sunday for night shift. 
8. No one can schedule more than four twelve hour shifts back-to-back without management approval. 
9. Full-Time (1.0 FTE) nurses that are scheduled only 72 hours per two-week schedule may be required to 
work an additional 8 hours during peak census seasons. NPD-005 
Page 2 of 5 
10. All specially requested days off must be submitted to the director through the facility’s scheduling 
system or in writing for approval prior to the self-schedule closing date.  If a special request is not 
submitted, the staff member may not be granted the request.  All approvals are based on staff availability 
and unit needs. 
11. Staff on restricted schedules because of classes must notify the management staff in writing and present 
an official copy of the class schedule. 
12. In the event the designated Charge Nurse is absent from a shift, the senior-most staff nurse will assume 
Charge Nurse responsibility. 
13. If an employee does not follow the guidelines for completing the self-schedule, their self-schedule may 
be disregarded for that scheduling period.  After three occurrences of not following the guidelines, the 
employee may permanently lose their privilege to self-schedule. 
 
B. Schedule Changes: 
1. Schedule changes should be made by the staff through the facility’s scheduling system.  If approved, the 
change will be reflected in the facility’s scheduling system and on the schedule with the initials of the 
director or by designated person on leadership team at discretion of the director. 
2. If a staff member wishes to change a scheduled shift, they are responsible for finding their own 
replacement.  Schedule changes should not create overtime. 
 
C. Canceling Staff: 
1. No cancellation is acceptable unless all Children’s Hospital units are staffed according to their matrix. 
2. Charge Nurses are responsible for informing the House Supervisor of any excess staff.  The House 
Supervisor is responsible for determining needs within the Children’s Hospital.  The House Supervisor 
will inform the Charge Nurse of whether the “extra” nurse will be pulled, canceled, or placed on-call. 
3. It is the Charge Nurse’s responsibility to inform the “extra” nurse of the pull, cancellation, or on-call 
status.   
4. If the Charge Nurse fails to notify the staff member appropriately, two hours prior to the shift, the staff 
member will be given the option to stay and work for two hours with pay or go home without pay. 
5. The Charge Nurses on each unit are responsible for keeping a record of all pulls and cancellations.  The 
House Supervisors are responsible for keeping a record of all cancellations for the Flex-Pool staff. 
6. When the number of staff scheduled exceeds the number of staff required by the staffing matrix, the 
Charge Nurse will cancel a staff member on the unit that is overstaffed in the following order: 
a. Emergent or On-Call shift 
b. Overtime 
c. Employee signed up for an “extra” shift in addition to their normal schedule. 
d. PRN staff 
e. Staff member with the earliest date on the cancel log 
• If the staff member with the earliest date on the cancel log refuses the cancel, the staff 
member with the next earliest date should be called.  This process should be continued until 
someone accepts the cancel or it rolls back to the staff member with the earliest date, at this 
point the staff member must accept the cancel. 
• If a unit is overstaffed, excluding any flex-pool staff scheduled, the unit must first cancel 
according to the guidelines described above in 1.  Once all units are staffed according to their 
matrix, the House Supervisor will compare the flex-pool cancel list to all units’ cancel list and 
cancel the employee with the earliest cancel date.  
f. WOW staff, during times of extended low census, WOW employee will be placed in the unit’s    
cancellation rotation. (Refer to Policy #OrgOps/HR/S/011). 
g. Contract nurses may be cancelled as per house supervisor discretion and/or agency contract.  
Agency nurses should not be cancelled unless in overtime. NPD-005 
Page 3 of 5 
7. When a staff member is not needed for a scheduled shift, they are placed on call and are subject to call 
back for any need within the Children’s Hospital.  When more than one staff member is canceled from a 
unit at one time, one staff member is placed on call and the remaining staff members are canceled from 
the shift. 
a. If a staff member is scheduled for a shift and not needed, but there is a chance that the staff member 
may be needed, then they will be put on call.  If called in, they will receive call back pay (time and a 
half) until the next four increment starts (i.e., called in at 8 AM and arrive at the hospital at 8:30 
AM; staff member will receive call back pay from 8:30 AM until 10:30 AM.  Regular pay would 
resume at 10:30 AM). 
b. If a staff member is scheduled for a shift and not needed, then they can be cancelled in four-hour 
increments.  It is the staff member’s responsibility to call at the end of this timeframe to see if the 
unit needs have changed and if they will be needed to come in. 
c. Staff in the Emergency Department may be canceled based on matrix and unit need.  The charge 
nurse or leadership will determine unit staffing needs utilizing the most current matrix.  Once ER 
staff are canceled, they are not placed on-call or required to return. 
 NPD-005 
Page 4 of 5 
d.  
e. In the instance in which a need arises on a unit and a staff member who was scheduled and 
subsequently cancelled and placed on-call will be required to float to the area of need.    
f. This does not include scheduled on-call. 
8. Staff members cancelled can use any accrued Paid Time Off (PTO) to make up hours, not to exceed 
FTE status, or the staff member can take leave without pay. 
 
D. Floating/Pulling Staff: 
1. Charge Nurses are responsible for informing the House Supervisor of any staffing needs. 
2. Flex Pool nurses will be assigned to the unit with the greatest need as determined by the House 
Supervisor.  Both census and acuity will be used to determine the greatest need. 
3. Staff will not be pulled to another unit unless, their home unit is overstaffed according to the staffing 
matrix or unless the House Supervisor determines a greater need. 
 
E. Scheduled On-Call: 
1. Nurses may be on call via personal cell phone or home phone. 
2. The on-call nurse will be required to arrive at the hospital within one hour of being called. 
3. If a nurse signs up for an on-call shift, they will be called in to work only if there is a need on his or her 
own unit.  They may be given the option to go to another unit within the Children’s Hospital if they 
desire. 
4. If a staff member is called in during their on-call shift, and then cancelled during the shift, they may be 
given the option to remain on-call for the remainder of the shift or they may remove themselves from 
being on-call. 
5. An on-call nurse should not be called-in in order to cancel or float a scheduled nurse except during 
extenuating staffing circumstances and after review with Nursing Leadership.  
6. Once a nurse signs up for on-call, they are committed to that time and must receive director approval to 
be removed. 
7. If a staff member is not able to be reached during assigned on call status, he or she will be subject to 
disciplinary action. 
 
F. Paid Time Off (PTO): 
1. Staff may not submit PTO requests unless they have accumulated PTO or will have accumulated it by 
the time they are requesting the time off, unless otherwise determined by the director. 
2. PTO/Vacation requests must be submitted to the manager two months prior to the time requested off.  
The requests should be made in the facility’s schedule system during the Vacation Planning Period.  
Priority of requests are based on the decision matrix and granted based on staff availability and approval 
is at the director’s   discretion.  Requests received after this time will be considered on a first come, first 
served basis and based on staff availability.  
3. The number of staff members per shift allowed to take PTO will be based on staff availability and at the 
director’s discretion. 
4. PTO requests will be limited during the week of major holidays and granted at the discretion of the 
director. 
 
G. PRN/As-Needed Employees: 
1. PRN or As-Needed employees are required to schedule a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours of time 
and/or based on the unit need, and at the director’s discretion within the Children’s Hospital per six-
week schedule.  The time must be scheduled during the self-scheduling process. 
2. PRN nurses booking time on the schedule have made a commitment to work.  Untimely and/or repeated 
cancellations will result in disciplinary action. NPD-005 
Page 5 of 5 
3. Flex Pool/PRN employees will follow the guidelines set by Human Resources. 
 