NPD-010 
Page 1 of 1 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Administration 
Subject:  ECG Competency for Monitored Units Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  August 8, 2018 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
April 12, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPD-010 
  
PURPOSE: 
To define ECG competency demonstration.  ECG competency is required for nurses in the Children’s Hospital.  
NICU nurses are exempt from this requirement and do not take the EKG class or test. 
 
POLICY: 
ECG competency is demonstrated by achieving a passing score on the ECG examination. Participants who do 
not achieve 85% on the ECG competency examination are not allowed to independently care for monitored 
patients. The ECG competency examination may not be taken more than three times. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. The Children’s Hospital Clinical Nurse Educator or designee administers testing for ECG competency. 
a. Staff members with experience utilizing ECG in practice can test out. If the staff member does not 
achieve a passing score, attendance at the OLOL Children’s Hospital ECG class is required.  
b. Staff members without experience utilizing ECG in practice are required to attend the OLOL 
Children’s Hospital ECG class. 
 
2. The OLOL ECG class is assigned by the staff’s manager/educator or the CEC. 
a. Full attendance at the ECG class is required to qualify for ECG competency examination for those 
who do not test out. 
 
3. A score of 85% or greater on the ECG examination is required to demonstrate ECG competency.  
a. For participants that are unsuccessful (below 85%) after 2 attempts, a 3rd attempt is permitted with 
completion of remediation plan. 
1. The remediation plan will be developed by the nurse educator, manager, and/or Human 
Resources (HR) and communicated to the student. 
2. For participants needing remediation plan which includes repeating the ECG class, the 
participant must attend the ECG class within 60 days and only one examination attempt is 
allowed.   
b. After 3 unsuccessful examination attempts, participants will no longer be allowed to continue in 
patient care on a monitored unit and will be referred to HR for other job options. 
c. Transfer staff who successfully completed the OLOL ECG class are not required to repeat the class 
or retake the test at Children’s Hospital.  
 
REFERENCES: 
Policy OC-058 “Life Support Credentialing Guidelines 