NPP-015 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Tube Feedings  Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  August 10, 1994 Supersedes: March 22, 1996 
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
April 25, 2000 
February 28, 2025 
Serial Code:  NPP-015 
  
PURPOSE: 
Maintain a standard of care for pediatric/neonatal patients receiving tube feeding. 
 
POLICY:  
Tube Feedings are administered according to the following guidelines: 
 
I. Tube Verification 
A. Initial tube verification will be confirmed with X-ray prior to use for a feeding, excluding 
gastrostomy devices. 
B. For the neonate, X-ray verification is not required for orogastric/nasogastric tube placement. 
C. Ongoing verification will be done by: 
a. Observe for change in external tube length by noting the depth marking either at the lip or 
nare and making sure it has not changed from the initial insertion. 
b. Aspirate gastric contents 
 
II. Continuous Infusion Method 
A. If a tube feeding bag is utilized, no more than 4 hours of nourishment should be placed in the 
feeding bag at any one time. 
B. For enteral feeds less than or equal to 15mL per hour, the enteral extension set will be utilized to 
deliver enteral feeds or human milk.  Tubing and syringe must be labeled with type of formula, 
date and time. 
C. The below table will be used to guide hang times.  Standard hang times will be used for changing 
tubing, syringe and/bag.  In the event that a feeding needs to be started outside of a standard 
time, the feeding should be started when ordered, and the nurse may use discretion to decide to 
default to the next standard hang time for that one instance. 
 
Bedside Feeding Hang Time Practices 
Expressed human milk (with or without 
fortifiers) 
4 hours 
*Syringe and tubing should be changed       
every 4 hours. 
Facility -prepared formulas (including any 
formula with additives) 
4 hours 
*Replace syringe/feeding bag, and tubing with 
each new hang time. 
Sterile ready to feed (RTF) formulas 4 hours for neonates (<30 days of age) and 
immunocompromised infants/children 
8 hours for non-immunocompromised infants 
(>30 days of age) and children  NPP-015 
Page 2 of 3 
*Replace feeding syringe/feeding bag, and 
tubing with each new hang time.  
Commercial closed system formulas (prefilled 
containers) 
May hang for 48 hours  
*Change spike with each new container. 
 
D. Use a feeding pump or controlled delivery device for continuous feeds. 
E. Irrigate tube with 5-10mL of water for the pediatric patient (depending on the size, weight and 
fluid status of the child), before and after medication, and after checking residual.  Irrigation of 
the feeding tube in a neonate should be done with water or air.  The smallest amount of air or 
water necessary to clear the tubing is recommended (usually not more than 1mL). 
 
III. Bolus Method (excluding NICU patients) 
A. Connect 60 mL syringe to tube.  Pour room temperature formula into syringe.  Unclamp tube to 
keep a slow even flow, adding nourishment until all the feeding is administered. 
B. After the feeding, flush tube with water using lowest volume needed to clear the device.  Use 
sterile water with infants, immunocompromised and critically ill children. 
C. During and after feedings elevate the head of the child’s bed.  If unable to elevate the head of the 
bed, place child on right side to help the stomach empty and prevent aspiration.  Infants, 
positioning should account for prevention of Sudden Unexpected Infant Death (SUID) risk and 
the clinical condition. 
D. All equipment used should be washed with hot water after each use. 
 
IV. Intermittent Gavage  
A. Infusion rate is per MD/NNP order.   
B.  See table 
C. Gastric residuals are checked if the abdomen becomes distended or firm, if the infant has 
excessive vomiting or with an MD/NNP. 
 
V. General guidelines for pediatric patients receiving tube feedings: 
A. Gastric residual volumes will be assessed as ordered by physician. 
B. Strict intake and output should be documented every 8 hours (3-4 hours for NICU patients) for 
any pediatric patient receiving tube feeding.  In the neonate, diaper counts are acceptable if the 
neonate is stable and not receiving IV fluids. 
C. Daily weights on the same scale, in the same clothes at the same time each day are recommended 
and should be documented.  Children under two years of age should be weighed nude 
D. Oral care should be done every 8 hours as needed. 
E. Abdominal girths should be documented at any time the patient’s abdomen becomes distended or 
firm, or if the patient has excessive vomiting, or large residuals are noted. 
F. For patients receiving human milk tube feedings, refer to policy # NPP029. 
G. If using transpyloric feeding tube for medication administration and the medication volume is 
greater than the hourly infusion rate, the medication should be infused over the prescribed rate 
(not bolused).  
H. For transpyloric and gastric/jejunal tubes, an order should be obtained specifying feeding 
regimen and medication administration (gastric vs. jejunal). 
I. Consult manufacturer recommendation for dwell time of nasogastric tube. 
 
 
See Ebsco Online Resource for Enteral Nutrition Administration in a Pediatric Patient 
 NPP-015 
Page 3 of 3 
 
Cross Referenced Policy: 
NPP-029 Human Milk  
 
REFERENCE: 
Boullata, J.I., Carrera, A.L., Escuro, A.A., Hudson, L., Mays, A., McGinnis, C., Wessel, J.J., Bajpai, S., Beebe, 
M.L., Kinn, T.J., Klang, M.G., Lord, L., Martin, K., Pompeii-Wolfe, C.,, Sullivan, J., Wood, A., Malone, A., 
Guenter, P., ASPEN Safe Practices for Enteral Nutrition Therapy Task Force, American Society of Parenteral 
and Enteral Nutrition (2017).  Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition, 41(1), 15-103.  doi: 
10.1177/0148607116673053 
 
Steele, C. & Collins, E. (Eds.).  (2019).  Infant and Pediatric Feedings:  Guidelines for Preparation Human 
Milk and Formula in Health Care Facilities (3rd ed.).  Chicago, IL:  Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. 
 
Wong’s Nursing Care Infants and Children 12th ed. eBook, 2023 
 
See Ebsco Online Resource Administering Pump-Assisted Enteral Nutrition to Pediatric Patient 
 
Administering Gravity Assisted Enteral Nutrition to Pediatric Patients 
 
Providing Continuous Drip Enteral Nutrition to Pediatric Patients 
 
Verifying Nasogastric Tube Placement in Pediatric Patients 
 
Providing Gavage Feeding to Newborns 
 
Administering Medication Through a Gastric Tube to Children & Adolescents 