         NPP-041 
Page 1 of 4 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Children’s Hospital Section/ 
Chapter: Patient Care 
Title: Discharge Guidelines for Safe Transportation 
of Children 
Policy 
Reference #: NPP-041 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: July 5, 2018 Review Date: June 7, 2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE:  
To establish a standard process for OLOL Children’s Hospital to promote safe transportation of the infant 
and/or child at the time of discharge. 
 
To provide guidelines for the Pediatric Emergency Room, Perioperative Departments and inpatient areas 
on safe transportation of patients at the time of discharge.  
 
POLICY: 
It is the policy of OLOL Children’s Hospital to provide patients, ages 1 day to 9 years, a proper 
assessment for safe transportation prior to the time of discharge. 
 
Procedure: 
 
I.  Emergency Room, Perioperative Department, Inpatient Clinical Areas: 
 
A. Upon arrival to the Emergency Room, Pre-Op or during admission to an inpatient clinical 
area, patients 1 day to 9 years of age will be assessed for an appropriate child safety seat.   
 
B. If improper usage or no usage of child safety seat is established:  
1. Education will be provided by RN and made available in discharge instructions.  
2. Available community resources will be given for follow up.  
3. In the Inpatient Clinical Areas, the parent or guardian will be informed of the state 
requirements for an appropriate child safety seat and encouraged to have one 
available for time of discharge. 
 
C. If funds and/or materials are available, a proper child safety seat may be provided to a 
patient/family in need.  Seats will be distributed by a Certified Child Passenger Safety 
Technician (CPST) when available.  It is the discretion of a nurse and/or social worker to 
determine the need for distribution of a seat and should be determined on a case-by-case 
basis.   
1. Education of fitting and installment will be given by a CPST.  
2. Any seat given must include the manufacturer’s instructions. 
3. Installation by the parent and or guardian should be observed following 
manufacturer’s instructions. 
4. All harnessing, installation, and final decisions are to be made by the parent or 
guardian.          NPP-041 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
 
D. In the event that a CPST is not available to distribute a seat, the house supervisor will be 
notified and may provide an appropriate seat with manufacturer’s manual for patient’s age, 
height and weight only after completing the following (note this should only occur in 
circumstances when all other options have been exhausted and should be a last resort only): 
1. Provide Donation Agreement form for family/guardian to review and sign 
2. Provide education on car seat best practices 
3. Provide instructions on following the manufacturer’s guidelines for installation 
found in manual  
4. Provide list of fitting stations and encourage family to have their installation checked 
by a CPST as soon as possible 
5. Forward the signed Donation Agreement form with family contact information and 
details of the distribution to the Pediatric Injury Prevention Coordinator  
 
E. All assessments, education, and distribution should be documented in the patient’s EMR.   
 
 
II. Staff 
 
A. Children’s hospital nurses will be provided child passenger safety education developed by a 
Certified Child Passenger Safety Technician (CPST).    
 
B. All trained CPST staff members are to renew their certification every 2 years according to 
the Safe Kids Worldwide certification requirements.   
 
C. All trained CPST staff participating in harnessing child or child safety seat installation 
education will document on the approved checker form, which includes a parent or 
guardian’s signature and a release of hospital liability.  
 
D. Completed checker forms will be sent to the Louisiana Passenger Safety Task Force and 
originals will be routed to the Pediatric Injury Prevention Coordinator  
 
III. Parent/Guardian: 
 
A.  Responsible for having a child safety seat available for discharge that fits the child’s age, 
height, and weight according to state law. 
 
B.  Responsible for harnessing the child and for installation of the child safety seat according 
to the manufacturer’s instructions.  
 
IV. Child Safety Seats for Children with Special Needs 
 
A.  Any patient with special transportation needs due to a procedure incurred during hospital 
admission will receive a Physical Therapist (PT) or Occupational Therapy (OT) Evaluation 
when ordered by the child’s physician. 
1. The acute care therapy department is responsible for employing and maintaining 
physical and/or occupational therapists that are CPSTs with further training in the 
transportation of children with special healthcare needs. 
          NPP-041 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
B.  Following surgical intervention, if a patient’s personal child safety seat is not suitable, a PT 
and/or OT will assess any transportation needs.  When appropriate, the therapist will 
provide a loaner child safety seat specifically designed to accommodate the child’s needs.   
 
C. If a child safety seat is loaned to a family: 
1. Education of fitting and installment will be given by a CPST.  
2. Any seat given must include the manufacturer’s instructions. 
3. Installation by the parent and or guardian should be observed following 
manufacturer’s instructions. 
4. All harnessing, installation, and final decisions are to be made by the parent or 
guardian. 
5. Expectations for returning the loaned seat will be fully explained to the family by 
the therapist/CPST distributing the seat.  
6. Maintenance of specialized loaner seats including monitoring for expiration or 
recalls, and cleaning will be the responsibility of the therapy department. 
 
D. Any patient deemed by the PT and/or OT to have special transportation needs of a chronic 
nature will be referred to the OLOL Outpatient Pediatric Physical Medicine Clinic’s 
Comprehensive Car Seat Program to be evaluated by the respective therapist. 
 
E. All assessments, education, and distribution should be documented in the patient’s EMR. 
 
V.  Revision of Policy and Provision of Child Passenger Safety Materials 
 
A. It is the responsibility of the Pediatric Injury Prevention Coordinator to:   
1. Review all CPS policies and procedures annually. 
2. Review any written educational materials available for distribution to families 
annually and as needed. 
3.  Collect, maintain, and disseminate current child passenger safety information 
(i.e., Louisiana Law, AAP Guidelines) to all staff members involved in child 
passenger safety practices within the hospital.  
  
REFERENCES:   
 
Children’s Hospital Association (2014).  Checklist for Hospital Discharge Recommendations for Safe 
Transportation of Children.  Expert Working Group by National Traffic Safety Administration.  
 
Durbin, D., & Hoffman, B. (2018). Child Passenger Safety.  Pediatrics, 142(5), e20182461. 
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2018-2461 
 
Healthy Children (2018).  Car Seat Checkup.  Retrieved from 
https://www.healthychildren.org/English/safety-prevention/on-the-go/Pages/Car-Safety-Seat-
Checkup.aspx 
 
Louisiana Highway Safety Commission (2017).  Child Safety Seat Recommendations.  Retrieved from 
http://www.lahighwaysafety.org/Pages/OurPrograms/ChildPassengerSafety.aspx 
 
Louisiana State Legislature (2019).  RS: 295 Child passenger restraint system.  Retrieved from  
http://www.legis.la.gov/Legis/Law.aspx?d=88231          NPP-041 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.  Find the Right Car Seat.  Retrieved from 
https://www.nhtsa.gov/equipment/car-seats-and-booster-seats#inspection-inspection 
 
 
 
National Highway Safety Administration (2014).  Hospital Discharge Recommendations for Safe 
Transportation of Children.  Author.  Retrieved from https://www.childrenshospitals.org/-
/media/Files/CHA/Main/Issues_and_Advocacy/Key_Issues/Child_Health/Injury_Prevention/Webi
nars/2014/04/cps_discharge_protocol_070314.pdf 
 
Safe Kids (n.d.).  Recertification.  National Child Passenger Safety Certification.  Retrieved from 
http://cert.safekids.org/i-am-a-tech/recertification 