NPP-048 
Page 1 of 7 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Hazardous Drugs and Management Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  December 8, 2023 Supersedes: CHON-002 & CHON-003 
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
December 8, 2023 
May 30, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPP-048 
  
PURPOSE: 
To outline and provide pertinent information for safe handling, administration, and disposal of hazardous drugs. 
 
DEFINITIONS:  
A. USP800: United States Pharmacopeia (USP) General Chapter <800> Hazardous Drugs – Handling in 
the Healthcare Setting is a guidance document comprised of best practices handling hazardous drugs in 
healthcare settings.   
B. Hazardous Drug (HD): NIOSH defines any drug having any of the following six characteristics in 
humans or animals: 
1. Carcinogenicity 
2. Teratogenicity or other developmental toxicity 
3. Reproductive toxicity  
4. Organ toxicity at low doses 
5. Genotoxicity  
6. Structure and toxicity profiles of new drugs that mimic existing drugs determined hazardous by 
any of the above criteria 
C.  Categories of HD: 
a.  High Risk HD, High Risk HDs are considered to be NIOSH Group 1 drugs: Antineoplastic 
drugs  
b. Low Risk HD: Low Risk HDs are considered to be NIOSH Group 2 and 3 drugs: Non-
Antineoplastic and those that pose a reproductive risk. 
D. Hazardous Spill:   
a. Drug spills are spills of liquid, High Risk HDs or Antineoplastics (Group 1).   
b  Bodily Fluid Spill:  Hazardous bodily fluid (blood, emesis, urine and feces) spill refers to any 
patient currently receiving a High-risk HD (Group 1) or has received a High-risk HD (Group 1) 
at any point during patients admission, where any bodily fluid has spilled or soiled any locations 
or surface in the patient care area.    
c.  See CH Hazardous Drug Spill Procedure CHNO-004 for guidance on managing High Risk    
     HD (Group 1) drug spills and activating the Spill Response Team (SRT). 
F.  Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) per USP800 guidelines:  
o Gloves:  
▪  Must be powder-free. 
o Gown: 
▪ Disposable and nonabsorbent 
▪ Shown to resist permeability by HDs 
▪ Close in the back and have no openings to the front 
▪ Long sleeved with closed, elastic or nit, cuffs NPP-048 
Page 2 of 7 
▪ Free of any seams or closures that HDs could pass through 
G.  Reference Documents:   
NIOSH List of Antineoplastic and Other Hazardous Drugs in Healthcare Settings, 2016 (cdc.gov) 
A.   NIOSH List of Antineoplastic and Other Hazardous Drugs in Healthcare Settings, 2016 
• Reference list for description of HD classification and safe handling guidance 
B. See Appendix A for Safe Handling of Hazardous Drugs Flowchart and Document    
E.  Safety Data Sheets 
A.  Reference source on TeamLink/Applications/SDS 
 
PROCEDURE:  
I. Preparation of the Patient 
a. Assess level of understanding of HD drug(s)  
b. Review age-appropriate educational materials with the patient and family. 
c. Explain procedure and any side effects of the drugs and answer questions appropriately. 
d. Review previous experience with HD, including types of drugs administered, physical and 
emotional reactions, and interventions that successfully alleviate side effects. 
e. Review patient allergy history. 
f. Assess patient’s access options and initiate a peripheral intravenous access if indicated.  Access 
central device as available. 
g. Review family’s ability to manage the patient’s post-HD care in the home. 
II. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) 
A.  PPE must be worn during hazardous drug activities, including preparation, transportation, 
administration, and when disposing.  
a. Disposable PPE must not be re-used. 
1. Any team member handling HD’s must glove in accordance with Safe Handling of 
Hazardous Drug Flowchart and Document (Appendix A).  
a. Hands must be washed after removing gloves.  
2. Eye and Face Protection: Must be available whenever the risk of splashes, spray, or aerosol 
possible. Goggles with a side panel or a face shield are appropriate.   
3. Spill kit must accompany any liquid/fluid High Risk HD (Group 1) antineoplastic agent that 
is being transported. 
4. Supplemental Engineering Controls: Closed Systems Transfer Device (CSTDs): CSTDs will 
be used to lower the risk of exposure to hazardous drug (HD) residue with parenteral Group 1 
HD’s as appropriate and/or as identified by pharmacy risk assessment.  
5. EPIC will provide visual clues as to the appropriate PPE and disposal recommendations on 
MAR for HD medications. 
III.  General HD Considerations:  
1.  Intravenous High-Risk HD (Group 1) and biotherapy agents may be administered only by bio-chemo  
     certified registered nurse. 
2. Personnel who are pregnant will not be required to prepare or administer any High-Risk HD (Group   
    1) medication. 
3. Breast feeding personnel reserve the right to refuse to administer any High-Risk HD (Group 1)  
    medication.  
4.  Relevant current lab value and tests will meet parameters set in the treatment plan prior to  
     administration as appropriate for the population. 
            5.  Verify if the HD to be administered is a vesicant.  If the access infiltrates or extravasates  
                during the administration, follow the applicable policy: 
a.  CH Chemotherapy Extravasation Protocol CHON-001  NPP-048 
Page 3 of 7 
b. CH Management of Non-Chemotherapeutic Extravasation in Neonate & Pediatric 
Patient CHMP-008 
 6. For patients receiving High Risk antineoplastic HD (Group 1), a HD sign will be placed on     
                   patient’s door. 
 7.  Obtain yellow disposable bin from Central. 
 8.  Administer pre-medications as ordered prior to administering HD. 
    9.  Pneumatic tubes cannot be used to transport any HD. 
IV.  Monitoring 
A. Monitor vital signs as ordered. 
B.  Observe the patient at regular intervals during and after HD administration for hypersensitive 
reaction or adverse reaction. 
C. Notify the physician for any signs of reaction and/or change in clinical condition. 
V.  Disposal of HD medication containers 
1. All supplies used in the administration of High-risk HD (Group 1) should be disposed of in the 
chemotherapy disposal bag and then placed in the Chemotherapy/Cytotoxic waste container. 
2. When disposing of residual High-risk HD (Group 1) and/or tubing, place the residual and 
container in the Chemotherapy/Cytotoxic waste container.  If greater than 3% of the volume 
remains, must be placed in black waste bin. 
VI.  Linen 
1. All linen will be placed in yellow linen bag and placed with hospital laundry. 
VII.  Manipulation  
1. Nursing should avoid manipulating High Risk HD (Group 1) such as crushing tables or opening 
capsules if possible. If crushing tables or opening capsules is required, then pharmacy should crush 
or open capsules and return to nursing in a plastic pouch for administration 
2. If hazardous drug dosage for Group 2 or 3 require manipulation such as crushing tables or opening 
capsule for a single dose, personnel must don appropriate PPE and use a plastic pouch to contain any 
dust, or particles generated (See Appendix A:  Safe Handling of Hazardous Drug Flowchart and 
Document;). 
3. HDs that do not require any further manipulation, other than counting or repackaging of final dosage 
forms, may be prepared for dispensing without any further requirements for containment unless 
required by the manufacturer or if visual indicators of HD appears on MAR. 
4. Active pharmaceutical ingredients or other powdered HDs MUST be handled in a containment 
primary engineering controls to protect against occupational exposure, especially during particle-
generating activities (such as crushing tablets and opening capsules) 
VIII.  Storage 
1. HD will be stored in designated secure area in appropriate labeled bin with barrier pad. 
a. Bin must be wiped after each use with hospital approved disinfectant and barrier pad 
replaced. 
b. Staff member disinfecting bin must double glove. 
c. Barrier pad must be discarded in Chemotherapy/Cytotoxic waste container 
2. Access where HD is stored will be restricted to authorized personnel only. 
3. May be stored with other inventory in separate contained area. 
VIIII.  Hazardous Bodily Fluid Handling after ingestion of a High-Risk HD (Group 1): 
1. Wear double chemo gloves and gown NPP-048 
Page 4 of 7 
2. Wear a face shield if splashing is possible 
3. Incontinent patients – apply a protective barrier ointment to the skin of patients’ diaper area 
4. Patients receiving High Risk HD (Group 1), the family will be instructed while in the hospital to 
flush the toilet with the absorbent pad since no lid exist on toilets to prevent splashing or release of 
aerosols. 
X.  Spill Management 
1. Chemo spill kits should be readily available in any area where High Risk (Group 1) HD is 
handled.  Should a small spill occur, the person that created or found the spill is to utilize the 
chemo spill kit to begin the cleanup procedure. 
2. See CH Hazardous Drug Spill Procedure CHNO-004 for guidance on managing High Risk HD 
(Group 1) drug spills and activating the Spill Response Team (SRT). 
XI.  Administration of High-Risk HD (Group1) on a non-oncology unit 
1. When a patient requires a High-Risk HD (Group 1) antineoplastic intravenously to be administered 
in non-oncology unit such as intensive care, a bio-chemo certified nurse will be consulted and a 
plan for administration will be established.  The House Supervisor should be notified when this 
need arises. 
XII.  Annual Nursing Competency and training  
1. Oncology nursing competency for antineoplastic administration will be evaluated and reassessed 
each year according to the OLOLRMC Organizational policy OrgOps/HR/E/008.  
2. Education will be provided prior to the introduction of a new High-Risk HD, equipment, process 
changes, spills and exposure.  
XIII. Environmental wipe sampling: 
  1. Environmentally wipe sampling for HD surface residue should be performed routinely.  
 
REFERENCES: 
American Society of Clinical Oncology.  Journal of Oncology Practice, 12, 1262-1271.   
 
Chemotherapy and Immunotherapy Guidelines (2019) Oncology Nursing Society.  
 
Herring, R.A, (ED.). (2019) The Pediatric Chemotherapy and Biotherapy Curriculum. (4th ed.). Glenview, IL: 
Association of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Nurses. 
 
 
NIOSH (2016).  List of Antineoplastic and Other Hazardous Drugs in Healthcare Settings 
 
USP General Chapter <800> Hazardous Drugs – Handling in Healthcare Settings Reprinted from USP 40—NF 
35, (2019). 
 
 NPP-048 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
 
 
NPP-048 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 NPP-048 
Page 7 of 7 
 