NPP-026 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Vital Signs in the Pediatric Patient Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  October 1996 Supersedes: October 1996 
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
May 26, 2006 
February 28, 2025 
Serial Code:  NPP-026 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for obtaining the following vital signs in the pediatric patient: temperature, non-invasive 
blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Blood Pressure Measurement 
A. Blood pressures will be obtained on all pediatric patients on admit and every 4 hours unless 
otherwise ordered by physician. 
 
II. Temperature 
A. Oral temperature may be obtained on children when developmentally appropriately and able to 
maintain the thermometer under the tongue properly. 
B. Temporal artery temperatures may be obtained on children: 
1. Greater than 90 days. 
2. Until they can obtain an oral measurement properly. 
C. Axillary temperatures can be utilized when other means of temperature measurement are 
clinically not feasible or available. 
D. Rectal temperatures will be taken on the pediatric patient when: 
1. Patient is less than 30 days.  In the ED, a rectal temperature will be obtained in a patient 6 
months of age or younger if presenting with a medical complaint that is fever related. 
2. Ordered by the physician 
3. At the discretion of the nurse based on the clinical condition. 
E. Rectal temperatures should not be taken on children who are: 
1. Immunocompromised 
2. Who have a decreased platelet count 
3. Who have congenital or surgical conditions involving the rectum 
F. For the neonate in NICU, axillary temperatures will be taken unless otherwise ordered 
G. Temperature probe sites on warming/cooling devices should be rotated every 12 hours and 
should be uncovered. 
 
III. Heart Rate Measurement 
A. An apical pulse should be counted for one minute. 
 
IV. Respirations 
A. Respiratory rate should be counted for one minute. 
 NPP-026 
Page 2 of 3 
V. Pulse Oximetry 
A. Spot check oxygen saturations should be obtained on admission and with routine vital signs. 
B. If continuous pulse oximetry is needed, notify provider. 
C. In NICU, the pulse oximeter probe site changes will be rotated every 4 hours.  For the pediatric 
inpatient, the pulse ox should be rotated every shift. 
D. In the ED, pulse oximetry will be obtained with routine vital signs. 
 
 
VI. Neurologic Checks 
A. Neurologic vital signs include blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate, temperatures, level of 
consciousness, pupillary response, movement, strength of extremities and seizure activity. 
B. Neurologic checks should be part of the nurse’s initial assessment based on MD orders, clinical 
presentation, or nursing diagnosis, and thereafter. Frequency should be ordered by the physician. 
 
VII. Routine Pediatric Vital Signs Include 
A. Temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, and blood pressure on admission. 
B. Temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood pressure pre-operatively. 
C. Temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, pulse oximetry, and blood pressure post-operatively on 
return from recovery room to unit and every one-hour for two hours, and then resume routine 
pediatric vital signs. 
D. Routine pediatric vital signs include temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, 
and blood pressure every 4 hours. 
 
VIII. Routine Neonatal Vital Signs 
A. Axillary temperature, apical heart rate, respiratory rate, SaO2 and non-invasive blood pressure 
(NIBP) once a shift coordinated with “Cares” unless otherwise ordered by provider or indicated 
and complete assessment. 
B. Axillary temperature, monitor heart rate, monitor respiratory rate, SaO2 coordinated with 
“Cares” and visual assessment. 
C. “Cares”-The routine care that infants require including feeding, diaper changes, vital signs, oral 
and skin care. “Cares are coordinated with the infants’ feedings (the natural time of wakefulness) 
and occur every 3-4 hours. 
D. NIBP-Will be obtained at least once every 12 hours on infants with arterial lines. 
 
IX. Documentation 
A. All vital signs will be documented appropriately. 
 
See Ebsco Health Online Resource  
• Indirect Blood Pressure Measurement in a Pediatric Patient 
• Temporal Artery Temperature Taking 
• Oral Temperature Taking 
• Axillary Temperature Taking 
• Rectal Temperature Taking 
• Apical Pulse Taking 
• Respiratory Assessment in Children 
• Oxygen Saturation Measurement by Pulse Oximetry 
 
 
 NPP-026 
Page 3 of 3 
REFERENCES: 
 
Gomella, T.L., Eyal, F.G., & Bany-Mohammed, R.  (2020).  Gomella’s Neonatology Management, Procedures, 
On-Call, Problems, Diseases and Drugs (8th Ed.).  New York:  McGraw Hill. 
 
Wong’s Nursing Care of Infants and Children 12ed. eBook; 2023 
 
See Ebsco Online Resource 
 
Measuring Oxygen Saturation by Pulse Oximetry in Infants to Adolescents 
 
Assessing Temporal Artery Temperatures 
 
Taking an Oral Temperature 
 
Taking Axillary Temperature 
 
Measuring Indirect Blood Pressure in Pediatric Patients Taking a Rectal Temperature 