                                                                                                                                                              NPP-009 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Anthropometric Measurements Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  June 2000 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
June 2, 2005 
February 28, 2025 
 
Serial Code:  NPP-009 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for key pediatric measurements essential for the proper clinical evaluation of growth and 
nutritional status for the inpatient population 
 
POLICY:  
All pediatric inpatients will be weighed in kilograms and measured using the following guidelines to ensure 
accurate measurement of weight, length, or height, and head circumference, unless conditions prohibit. All 
measurements will be documented in the electronic record. 
 
I. Weight 
All weights should be obtained and recorded in kilograms. 
 
A. Measurement of weight an infant or small child (less than 2 years old) 
1. Use an electronic scale. 
2. Remove all of the child’s clothing. 
3. Zero the scale and place the child on it. 
4. Weight in kilograms and to nearest 10 grams (ex., 4.23 kilograms). 
5. For neonates in the NICU, record exact grams. 
 
B. Measurement of weight for a child (greater then or equal to 2 years old) 
1. Use standing scale. 
2. Have the child remove shoes and all clothing except underwear and hospital gown. 
3. Balance or zero the scale. 
4. Place the child in standing position on the scale, facing the scale with hands at side. 
5. Weigh to nearest 100 grams; have child step off the platform (ex., 10.9 kg). 
 
C. Measurement of weight for a child unable to stand 
1. Use a lift scale for children unable to stand (greater than 2 years old). 
2. Remove all clothing except underwear and hospital gown. 
3. Balance the scale. 
4. Place sling under patient. 
5. Hook bed scale to sides of sling. 
6. Lift patient until no longer touching the bed. 
7. Weight to nearest 100 grams (ex., 10.9kg). 
8. Lower the child, remove sling, and reposition child. 
 CHMP-009 
Page 2 of 3 
D. Measurement of weight of critically ill infant or child unable to stand 
1. When applicable, write down all items on bed, when bed scale set to zero, keep at bedside for future 
reference.  As applicable, zero the radiant warmer, crib scale or bed scale with linen prior to 
weighing the patient. 
2. Once patient in bed, press weigh patient button, while holding tubing, cord, medical equipment, etc., 
off bed. 
3. Weigh to nearest 100 grams (ex., 35.4 kg). 
4. On subsequent weights, refer to reference list to make sure only items on list are on bed when patient 
weighed. 
 
E. Measurement of weight of child unable to stand using wheelchair scale 
1. Remove all extra linens, storage items, and equipment from the wheelchair prior to weighing. 
2. Before the wheelchair is placed on the scale, zero the scale. 
3. Place the wheelchair with the patient in it on the scale. 
4. Press weight button while holding any tubing, cords, or attached medical equipment off the patient 
and/or wheelchair. 
5. Weigh to the nearest 100 grams (ex., 75.4 kg). 
6. Remove wheelchair and patient from the scale. 
7. Locate the designated wheelchair weight (in kilograms) on the wheelchair and subtract from the 
recorded weight of wheelchair plus patient.  Record the result in the EMAR. 
 
II. Height/Length 
All children less than two years of age will be measured using a tape measure. 
Those children greater than two years of age, who can stand independently, will be measured standing.  
Children greater than two years of age who cannot be measured standing will be measured using body 
segment measurements. 
 
A. Length (recumbent) 
1. Lay infant in supine position on paper drape. 
2. Hold child’s head at midline point and extend legs fully. 
3. Stretch a tape measure from crown of head to heel of foot alongside child’s body.  If difficult to use 
tape measure with child’s position, draw two pencil lines on paper drape. 
4. Document measurement to nearest 0.1 cm. 
 
B. Height (standing) 
1. Have child take off shoes. 
2. The child should stand with feet together, heels, buttocks, and shoulders against the perpendicular 
upright stadiometer. 
3. With head comfortably erect, a right-angle headboard should be lowered against the top of the head. 
4. Document measurement to the nearest 0.1cm. 
 
C. Body Segments (when no other measurement is possible) 
1. Place child on bed as flat as possible. 
2. Start from top of head and incrementally take body segment measurements down to the child’s heel. 
3. Add together body segment measurements for an estimated height. 
4. Document to nearest 0.1 cm. 
 
III. Head Circumference CHMP-009 
Page 3 of 3 
A. Head circumference is measured on all children younger than two years of age and on older children by 
physician request. 
B. The greatest circumference of the head will be measured using disposable paper tape. 
1. Hold head firmly on the frontal bones, superior to the supraorbital ridge. 
2. Place tape around the head over the maximum occipital prominence at the back.  
3. document measurement to nearest 0.1cm. 
 
IV. NICU 
A. Infants will be weighed daily unless otherwise specified by physician/NNP. 
B. Head circumference will be done on: 
1. Sundays unless otherwise specified by physician/NNP. 
2. Daily on infants with Grade III & IV intraventricular hemorrhage or neural tube defects. 
C. Lengths will be done on: 
1. Sundays unless otherwise specified by physician/NNP. 
D. Abdominal Girths will be done based on gastrointestinal symptoms of infant or per physician/NNP 
order. 
 
 
 
Wong’s Nursing Care of Infants and Children 12th ed. eBook; 2023 
 
See Ebsco Online Resource 
Measuring Abdominal Girth in Newborn 
Measuring Recumbent Body length of Pediatric Patient 
Weighing Infants 
 