NPP-046 
Page 1  of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Patient Care 
Subject: Pasteurized Donor Human Milk Section: Patient Care 
Date of Origination: October 23, 2020 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
Revised 
Reviewed 
 
 
 February 28, 2025 
Serial Code:  NPP-046 
 
PURPOSE: 
The provision of pasteurized donor human milk (PDHM) for premature or sick infant is an evidence -based 
practice intended to improve infant outcomes. The purpose of this policy is to outline criteria for the use of 
pasteurized PDHM and to provide details on the ordering, procurement and dispensing of PDHM. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Indications of Donor Human Milk use 
A. Considerations: 
1. PDHM will be given to infants who meet specific criteria, or on a case-by-case basis, as deemed 
appropriate by the medical provider. 
2. The parent or legal guardian will need to sign consent prior to PDHM feedings. 
3. Infants who are eligible for PDHM will need a provider’s order. 
4. Mother’s own milk (MOM) should be used first. If there is an insufficient quantity of MOM for a 
feeding, this milk can be mixed with PDHM to achieve the desired quantity. If MOM is 
unavailable, PDHM can be used exclusively. 
5. PDHM can be fortified. 
6. Multiples: If one infant is eligible, remaining siblings will be considered for PDHM. 
7. Infant >= 35 weeks: PDHM will be considered as a bridge to MOM establishment, unless meet 
additional criteria that justifies continued use of PDHM. 
B. Criteria: 
1. Birth gestational age (GA) <35 weeks 
2. Infants > 35 weeks birth GA if indicated 
3. GI diagnosis (short-gut syndrome, malabsorption, GI surgery) 
4. Post NEC 
5. Renal failure 
6. Feeding intolerance 
7. Some inborn errors of metabolism 
8. Provider discretion 
       
 
II. Initiation process 
A. A signed consent is needed prior to the administration of PDHM. The consent provides the 
parent/guardian with general information about the use of PDHM. The parent/guardian is encouraged 
to ask questions to bedside nurse, lactation consultant or provider before signing. If the 
parent/guardian is not present, a telephone consent will be accepted. The signed consent will be kept 
in the infant’s chart. 
 NPP-046 
Page 2  of 2 
 
B. The resident, physician assistant, consulting/attending physician will order PDHM for the 
eligible infant as a nutrition order. 
 
III. Exclusive use of Donor Milk 
A. Donor milk is intended for medical benefits related to exclusive use. 
B. Donor Milk will be scanned in accordance with NPP 029 Breastmilk Handling & Storage policy. 
 
IV. Acquiring Donor Human Milk 
A. When the order is entered into EPIC, a designated person will initiate the procurement of 
PDHM from an approved PDHM bank. 
B. When PDHM arrives, Materials Management will deliver to the ordering nursing unit and store in 
Human Milk refrigerator located in the nursing unit Nourishment Room. 
C. The handling and storage of the PDHM will then follow the guidelines listed in the  
     NPP 029 Human Milk Handling & Storage policy. 
D. For PDHM, the lot and batch number should be documented in the electronic medical record 
(EMR). 
 
 
Cross Referenced Policy: 
   NPP 029 Breastmilk Handling & Storage 
 
 Org 10/2020  
Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital 
Consent to Administer Formulated Human Milk and/or 
Human Milk Fortifiers 
 
 
Your baby’s doctor has recommended breast or human milk based on your baby’s current medical condition. If 
you are not able to provide human milk, we are asking your permission to feed your baby donor human milk 
and/or human donor milk fortifiers. When a baby is born early, many of the nutrients that would have been 
provided by you during the final weeks of pregnancy are not transferred to your baby. Since much of your 
baby’s growth takes place in the final weeks of pregnancy, your baby now needs to grow in an environment 
outside of your body. 
BENEFITS 
Human milk is an important source of nutrition for babies and when available donor human milk is a good 
substitute for your own milk. Studies have shown that there are many short and long-term benefits, such as the 
ability to fight infection, reducing the possibility of gastrointestinal complications, and optimal nutrition, for 
infants who receive human milk rather than formula. It is important to know that the human milk your baby 
will receive is from an approved donor milk bank. 
RISKS 
Formulated human milk products come from human milk that has been donated by healthy mothers who have 
extra to share. These mothers are very carefully screened for health behaviors and person-to-person diseases 
including AIDS, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and syphilis. No information is currently available regarding the effect 
of pasteurization on SARS-CoV-2 but similar viruses are inactivated with this process. To date, breastmilk is 
considered to be an unlikely source of transmission. The human milk is pasteurized using a process proven to 
kill large quantities of bacteria and viruses that can cause disease, and then tested after processing to make sure 
it does not contain any viruses and/or bacteria. There is a small chance that your baby may become infected by 
the donor human milk and/or that your baby may not tolerate the donated human milk. 
ALTERNATIVES 
Commercially prepared formulas are used as an alternative to human milk. 
 
 
CONSENT 
I acknowledge that the risks and benefits of the use of donor human milk products have been explained to me 
and that I have had an opportunity to have my questions answered. I consent to the use of donor human milk 
and/or human milk fortifiers as part of the nutritional plan for my baby. I understand that I may withdraw this 
consent at any time by informing the medical staff caring for my baby. 
 
 
Signature:  Date:   Time:   
Name (Printed):   Relationship to infant:       
Witness:   Date:   Time:    
Place Patient Label 