NPP-042 
Page 1 of 9 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Children’s Hospital Suicide Prevention and 
Observation of the High-Risk Behavioral 
Patient in Non-Mental Health Areas 
Section:  
Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  August 2018 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
May 10, 2022 
June 7, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPP-042 
  
PURPOSE: 
To protect and plan appropriate care for individuals at risk for suicide while receiving care and after discharge 
by identifying individuals with suspected or known suicidal ideations.  
To establish guidelines for observation of the high-risk behavioral patient and a patient who is placed under a 
Physicians Emergency Certificate (PEC), Coroner’s Emergency Certificate (CEC), Suicide Precautions, or other 
legal hold for mental health treatment while being treated as a patient within the Children’s hospital. 
 
Definitions:  For Details on legal status definitions and procedures, refer to CM.07.001 Mental Health Legal 
Status Policy. 
Physician Emergency Certificate (PEC) State of Louisiana - legal form used to place involuntary hold on 
patient with mental illness who is a danger to self or others, or gravely disabled, for the purpose of observation, 
diagnosis, and treatment; implemented by any physician; good for 72 hours. 
Coroner’s Emergency Certificate (CEC) State of Louisiana - legal form to be completed by the coroner 
within 72 hours after the PEC has been implemented; must be completed by the coroner or his/her deputy; CEC 
and PEC together are good for a period not to exceed 15 days.  
Judicial Commitment - Any person of legal age may file with the court a petition which asserts the belief that 
a person is suffering from mental illness which contributes or causes that person to be a danger to self or others 
or to be gravely disabled or is suffering from substance abuse which contributes or causes that person to be a 
danger to self or others or to be gravely disabled and may thereby request a hearing. 
Suicidal Patients – Any individual who is brought to the Emergency Department for treatment of attempted 
overdose and/or self-destructive, suicidal behavior. Any patient within our hospital that verbalizes a plan to end 
their life, threatens, or attempts to harm self.  
Homicidal Patients – Any individual who verbalizes a desire and has made significant threats of bodily harm 
towards any person, in which the patient appears to be able to carry out. An actual physical attack (i.e., hit, slap, 
punch, kick, bite, grab, thrown object, etc.) towards another individual within our hospital, or an unanticipated 
outburst of violent, angry, aggressive, impulsive, and/or destructive behavior that poses immediate danger.  
Psychotic Patients – Any individual, who’s thought process is altered as evidenced by hallucinations, 
delusions, paranoia, bizarre behavior, confusion, severe mania, and/or non-reality-based thinking 
Contraband-Any article, substance, whose possession, or use is prohibited, or anything brought in without 
permission. 
 NPP-042 
Page 2 of 9 
 
POLICY: 
A Suicide Screening, Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS) will be completed on all pediatric 
patients > 12 years of age at the time of admission. If a patient is identified as being at risk for suicide, then 
suicide precaution interventions are implemented.  
Observations can only be performed by staff members who have an initial and ongoing training.  Legal 
guardians may not be the sole providers of close observation and/or staff members from other facilities 
accompanying a patient may not serve as observer while under the care and supervision within Children’s 
Hospital. 
All high-risk patients assigned to an inpatient unit are considered a Level 1:  1:1 observation. 
Mental behavior health (MBH) patients in a non-mental health unit under suicide precautions, assessed as being 
at high risk, on PEC, on CEC, or on other legal hold for mental health treatment will be identified as 
observation Level 1 or per MD order.   
Observation monitoring and documentation are delegated from the Registered Nurse (RN) to an appropriate 
unlicensed staff with the RN retaining accountability and supervision. The observation level should be noted on 
the patient observation record. The RN is responsible for hourly review and documentation of observation form. 
Level 1 - 1:1 Observation 
The patient is observed on a 1:1 observer/patient ratio when clinical assessment indicates the existence of a high 
level of risk for immediate or impulsive behavior that may be harmful to self or others. The patient will be 
monitored by a trained staff member and safety checks completed at 15-minute intervals. Any staff member 
performing 1:1 observation maintains visual observation in addition to all of the below:  
1:1 Observation includes the following: 
•Observer may not monitor more than one patient at a time.  
•1:1 staff accompaniment, including times for personal hygiene, toileting, and other self-care needs. 
•Observer should be of the same sex as the patient, as the staffing pattern allows.  If this is not possible, 
arrangements should be made for same sex staff to accompany the patient during times of personal 
hygiene, toileting, and other self-care needs.  In the event that same sex is not available, two staff 
members must be present. 
•Patient may leave the unit for medical consult/testing/transfer.  Observer must remain within visual 
range when accompanying the patient and continue documentation on Patient Observation Record. 
•Any concern identified by the Observer must be immediately escalated to the RN by pressing call bell 
or activating emergency call button if necessary. 
•These 1:1 observations must be followed unless deemed otherwise by a physician.  
 
A. Children’s Hospital Inpatient Procedure: 
1. A patient may arrive on the unit with a legal status of OPC (Order of Protective Custody), PEC 
(Physician’s Emergency Certificate), CEC (Coroner’s Emergency Certificate), or Judicial Commitment. 
Any of the above legal statuses should be discussed with the attending physician so that the appropriate 
level of observation is established. Initiation of monitoring must begin as soon as the patient is identified 
to be at risk and must continue uninterrupted throughout the hospitalization, and/or until patient is 
deemed to no longer pose a risk to self or others.  
 NPP-042 
Page 3 of 9 
2. Suicide precautions and observations should be is initiated if the patient is determined to be at risk for 
suicide or if the presenting problem is a suicide ideation.  Suicide precautions/interventions can be 
initiated by nursing staff, in the absence of a physician, with identified reasons for this decision.  This 
information is recorded in the medical record, and the patient’s physician is notified as soon as possible.  
If the physician concurs, an order is written.  
 
Interventions may include consultation with Psychiatry (Consult MD, Psychiatry). The 
Community Oriented Psychosocial Evaluation (COPE) Team may prepare/assist with transfer of 
patient to a mental health program or facility for continued care when the patient is medically 
stable. 
 
3. Documentation of 1:1 Observation will be recorded using the Patient Observation Record to include:  
a. The patient’s location, activity, and behavior.  
b. The RN reports the purpose and level of observation to the personnel performing the 
observation.  
 
4. Established documentation standards for an in-patient will be followed (i.e., Head to Toe assessments 
including psychosocial, ADL’s, I & O, vital signs, etc.).  For those patients who screen positive and/or 
those with significant patient events, the RN will utilize the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale to 
re-assess the patient every 12 hours.   
 
 
5. The patient’s right to privacy and personal space will be respected at all times with safety remaining the 
priority. Care or treatment, such as a physical examination or assessment, plan of care discussions, or 
medical treatment, will be in an area that provides for privacy of the patient.   
 
6. The physician is notified of any changes in behavior or condition. 
 
7. If the physician determines, either through his/her own assessment or through a psychiatric consult that 
the patient is no longer a threat to self or others, the physician will document the change in the patient’s 
status in the medical record and the interventions outlined above may be discontinued. If a Physician’s 
Emergency Certificate (PEC) has been completed prior to this assessment, the physician should write an 
order to discontinue the PEC/CEC or other applicable legal status.  
 
8. When the patient is medically stable and a physician determines that the patient continues to be a threat 
to self or others, the physician may request transfer to a mental health unit/facility. This may be 
coordinated by the COPE Team. 
 
9. Upon discharge, the patient and/or family should be provided with the National Suicide Prevention 
Lifeline: 1-800-SUICIDE (1-800-273-8255). 
 
10. For the patient who is not being admitted to an-inpatient facility and identified as at risk for suicide, 
COPE, and/or Care Management can assist the patient and family in coordination and/or development of 
a Crisis Prevention Plan (See form at the end of policy). If COPE and/or Care Management is 
unavailable, the Discharge RN is responsible for completing the Safety/Crisis Plan at time of discharge.  
A copy should be given to the patient and/or family and one retained for scanning into the EMR. In the 
event, the patient and/or family is unable to complete a Crisis Prevention Plan, documentation must be 
present to explain why it could not be completed.   
 NPP-042 
Page 4 of 9 
Suicide Precautions for Inpatient Units: 
1) The Charge Nurse or designee notifies the Nursing Director and House Supervisor for on-going staffing 
assistance.  
2) The observer documents every 15 minutes on the Patient Observation Record. 
3) The plan of care is modified by the RN to reflect the increased level of observation and ensure safe 
environmental monitoring id documented.  
4) Any change in staff (i.e., RN and Observer) requires a complete hand-off to include any ligature risk, 
concerning behaviors, legal status, and plans for disposition.  
5) The patient/family should be educated as to the rationale for the precautions and the level of observation.  
Family should be educated as to strategies that may be used to assist in keeping the patient safe, including 
potentially harmful items not being given to the patient.  Education is documented in the electronic medical 
record (EMR). 
6) Visitation may be restricted at the physician’s or nurses’ discretion for the patient and/or staff safety and 
patient support.  
(a) Visitors will be directed to check in at the nurse’s station.  
(b) Only two legal guardians will be allowed visitation at one time.  
(c) Legal guardians are not permitted to bring any outside items into the patients’ room (purses, cell 
phones, etc.). Smart watch technology maybe retained by the parent/legal guardian for their 
personal use.  For Covid positive patients, only one legal guardian will be allowed. These items 
will not be stored by the facility, the legal guardian will be responsible for securing their own 
personal items. If the guardian refuses to secure their own items, Security will be notified, and 
the guardian will not be allowed in the patients’ room. 
(d)  Only one legal guardian will be permitted overnight.  
(e) The Observer is to remain present during all visitation monitoring for transference of contraband 
or any other items that may compromise the safety of the environment. 
(f) In the event that it is felt to be in the best interest of the patient to restrict visitation this will be 
discussed with the patient/family and documented in a patient care note in the EMR. 
(g) The patient will not be allowed to use cellular or electronic device due to the projectile risk.  In 
the event that a special need arises, limited phone privilege may be granted by the physician.  
Observer must remain present for any telephone conversations that occur in the room and be 
aware of the potential risk.   
 
11. The RN reports the purpose and level of observation to the staff member performing the observation.  
 
12. The RN continues to re-assess the patient for risk to self/others and risk for elopement. 
 
13. The RN may contact mental health staff as needed for assistance. 
 
14. With a witness present, two team members will examine the patient’s personal belongings for hazardous 
items/contraband.  The items listed in Table A are considered hazardous/contraband and will not be 
allowed (See Table A for List of Items). 
 NPP-042 
Page 5 of 9 
15. Items deemed as safety risk (legal contraband) will be sent home with the family or placed in safe by 
security. Illegal contraband will be turned over to Security and the Risk Management Chain of Custody 
Form should be completed.  
 
16. Meals are provided on the unit and in the company of Observer. Meals will be delivered by nursing unit 
staff.  Food service is provided on disposable trays. No metal food utensils, glassware, china plates or 
can drinks should be provided to the patient.  Finger foods may be preferred for high-risk patients.  
 
17. All medications administration will be supervised by the nurse.  Patient/legal guardian will not be 
allowed to self-administer any medication.  The nurse must observe the patient while administering oral 
medication to assure all medication are swallowed. 
 
18. The room environment will be assessed for safety and ligature hazards prior to placement of the patient 
in the room. The following items will be removed whenever possible: 
• No medications of any form will not be left in the room.  
• All electrical devices with cords such as radios, laptops, I-Pod’s, phones, etc. should be sent 
home with family or sent to the hospital safe. 
• All non-essential medical equipment that is not necessary for current medical treatment (i.e., 
include tubes, hoses, suction canisters, IV poles, IV pumps, and oxygen/suction regulators). The 
RN will assess equipment needs, remove and store non-essential medical equipment in the clean 
equipment room on the nursing unit. This will be assessed by the Registered Nurse and 
determined on an individual basis. The Ligature Risk Protocol Box can be used to store items as 
deemed necessary.  
• In the event cords of essential equipment must remain in the room the RN will continuously 
assess the cords of all essential equipment and the on-going need to remain in the room.  The 
Observer will be notified of such cords and their location in the patient room and remain 
constantly aware of potential risk. 
• Glass containers will be sent home with family or sent to the hospital safe. Request should be 
made to pharmacy to for non-glass container(s) for medication administration.  If the medication 
must be provided in a glass container, the registered nurse will notify the observer and added 
surveillance maybe needed.  
• Make-up cases and assorted make up items as well as male grooming items will be sent home 
with family or sent to the hospital safe. 
• Oral hygiene will be offered by the RN with toothette and discarded immediately after use or a 
toothbrush/toothpaste may be offered but must be picked up after each use. These items cannot 
be left in patient room. 
• Plastic trash bags will not be allowed in patient rooms.  Observer to remove all plastic trash bags 
and replace with paper bags. Paper bags to be supplied by materials management.  
• Consider removing all non-essential furniture which may include the removal of the trash can, 
over bed table, guest chairs, recliner, sofa, side table, etc.   
• Any other items which may increase risk of harm 
 
19. Bedding (sheets, pillowcases, spreads) will be checked by the observer each shift.   
 
20. Gifts, flowers, etc. will not be allowed in patient room.  Person presenting with gift items will be asked 
to remain in possession of the item and provide to the patient at a later date. Document instructions 
provided to family in the EMR.  
 NPP-042 
Page 6 of 9 
21. Purses, bags, and cellular phones, including that of the patients/legal guardian should not be allowed in 
the patient’s room. 
 
22. Any person entering the patients room needs to be aware of items carried by staff maybe used by the 
patient as a weapon (i.e., pens, stethoscope, trauma scissors, etc.) 
 
23. The patient should have the following special identification items worn until disposition 
a. Appropriate paper garment 
b. Appropriate size nonskid socks 
c. Green and white striped armband 
d. Green rose sign placed on the outside of the patient’s door 
 
19.  Transportation of mental behavior health patient to procedures, off unit for any purpose or transfer to  
        another facility requires the patient to be in wheelchair or stretcher.  The observer will push the patient  
        and Security will escort alongside the patient.  Observations of the patient must continue until care is  
        handed off to another caregiver and/or entity. 
 
20.  In the event a patient becomes verbally or physically abusive and disruptive to the staff, a Code White  
       should be initiated. 
 a.  Non-physical/ de-escalation strategies should be used when dealing with anxious, hostile, or violent  
           patients when possible. 
 
 
Cross Reference Policy:  CM.07.001 Mental Health Legal Status 
 
REFERENCES:  
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention (2020).  Suicide Facts and Figures:  Louisiana 2020.  
https://www.datocms-assets.com/12810/1589486676-2020-state-fact-sheets-louisiana.png 
American Psychiatric Nurses Association (APNA) (2020).  APNA Position Statement: Competencies for 
Nurse-Assessment and Management of Inpatient Suicide Risk. 
https://www.apna.org/i4a/pages/index.cfm?pageid=5688     
Ballard, E., Cwik, M., Van Eck, K., Goldstein, M., Alfes, C., Wilson, M., Virden, J., Horowitz, L., Wilcox, H., 
Ballard, E. D., Wilson, M. E., Virden, J. M., Horowitz, L. M., & Wilcox, H. C. (2017). Identification of 
At-Risk Youth by Suicide Screening in a Pediatric Emergency Department. Prevention Science, 18(2), 
174–182. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11121-016-0717-5 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention (2020).  Suicide and Self-Inflicted Injury.  
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/suicide.htm 
Frost, D.A., Snydeman, C.K., Lantieri, M.J., Wozniak, J., Bird, S., & Stern, T.A.  (2020).  Development and 
Implementation of a Suicide Prevention Checklist to Create a Safe Environment.  Psychosomatics 
Journal, 61(2), 154-160.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psym.2019.10.008    
State of Louisiana. (2017).  Louisiana Department of Health Office of Behavioral Health.  Order for Protective 
Custody.  https://ldh.la.gov/assets/docs/BehavioralHealth/MentalHealthLawForms/ 
OBH%2020%20Order%20for%20Protective%20Custody.pdf 
The Joint Commission. (2022).  Preventing Patient Suicide.   https://www.jcrinc.com 
Veterans Administration and Department Defense Clinical Practice Guideline for the Assessment and NPP-042 
Page 7 of 9 
Management of Patients at Risk for Suicide.  https://www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/MH/srb/ 
Williams, S.C., Schmaltz, S.P., Castro, G.M., & Baker, D.W.  (2018).  Incidence and Method of Suicide in 
Hospitals in the United States.  The Joint Commission Journal on Quality and Patient Safety, 44, 643-
650. 
 
 
 
Table A:  List of Prohibited Items and/or Contraband 
These include but are not limited to: 
a. Personal Linens (i.e., pillows, blankets, quilts, etc.) 
b. Razor Blades, Straight Razors, Double Edge and Safety Razors 
c. Knives and any item that may be used as a weapon (such as ice picks, hair picks/bobby pins, or  
            screwdriver) 
d. Firearms and Ammunition 
e. Illegal Drugs or Other Mood-Altering Chemicals 
f. Medicines brought from home. 
g. Cigarettes, Lighter or Matches 
h. Nail Files or Clippers 
i. Scissors 
j. Glass Items (except eyeglasses) 
k. Any Sharp Item (i.e., needles, hooks, pins, toothpicks, paperclips, staples, and pencils/pens, toothbrush) 
l. Metal Cans and Breakable Hard Plastic Items 
m. Rope, Chain, Other Corded Items, Large Heavy Jewelry, Belts/Belt buckle 
n. Shaving Lotion, Polish Remover 
o. Liquid Paper 
p. Alcohol and/or Alcohol Based Products 
q. Any type of jewelry includes necklaces, chains, earrings, rings, bracelets 
r. Cords in clothing, shoelaces  
s. Clothes hangers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NPP-042 
Page 8 of 9 
 NPP-042 
Page 9 of 9 
 