NPP-037 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Blood Culture Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  January 25, 2010 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
October 23, 2020 
January 15, 2025 
Serial Code:  NPP-037 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide a standard collection procedure for the patient requiring blood culture collection. 
 
POLICY: 
To establish blood culture collection procedure and optimum volume of blood necessary to isolate etiological 
agents responsible for sepsis in the infant and pediatric population. 
 
Blood Culture Collection: 
A. Number of blood cultures 
1. Pediatric blood culture order is for one aerobic or one aerobic and anaerobic (set) if ordered by 
physician (see culture volume table). 
2. Pediatric patients with a central access will have one culture drawn from central access and one culture 
drawn from a peripheral site unless otherwise ordered by physician. 
3. Recommended practice is to draw central access cultures from distal port. 
B. Recommended blood culture volume  
1. Blood culture collection volumes will be determined based on patient weight in kilograms (refer to 
table below). 
2. Anaerobic bottles are drawn per physician order. 
3. Acid Fast Bacillus (AFB) cultures are drawn per physician order.  Optimum volume is 4 mL blood 
placed in sodium heparin vacutainer.  For lower weight infants’ volume may be adjusted. 
4. Blood Fugus cultures are outsourced to a designated lab.  For Mayo Clinic, the requested volume is 5 
mL blood in sodium heparin green top.  For adult blood collection, 2 large green top (sodium or 
heparin) collection tubes with minimum volume of 10 mL.  If less volume is obtained, the outsourced 
lab will make a determination if the deviation is acceptable.   
5. Blood culture sample volumes may vary due to the patient’s condition and difficulty encountered in 
performing the phlebotomy.  Nursing judgment must be utilized in special circumstances, such as 
oncology patients, neonates and critical care patients. 
6. Within a 24-hour period, blood volumes for subsequent blood cultures may be adjusted based on the 
above considerations. 
 
C. Procedure for drawing blood culture – See Children’s Hospital Standard Procedure for Obtaining Blood 
Culture 
 
 
D. Inoculation of blood culture bottles 
1. Always prep rubber stopper with alcohol wipe and, allow to air dry prior to transfer of blood from                                                                   
syringe to bottle. NPP-037 
Page 2 of 2 
 
2. If optimum sample volume is obtained: 
a. Inoculate anaerobic bottle first (if ordered) 
b. Inoculate aerobic bottle second 
3. If suboptimum sample volume is obtained: 
a. Consider possibility of redrawing blood from patient unless contraindicated due to patient 
condition 
b. Inoculate aerobic bottle first with optimum volume 
c. Inoculate anaerobic bottle with remaining blood sample (if ordered) 
4. Transfer blood using appropriate angel wing device, gently invert bottles to prevent clotting. 
 
 
**For > 37 kg utilize adult culture orderable. 
 
REFERENCE: 
Feghaly, R.E., Chatterjee, J., Dowdy, K., Stempkah, L.M., Morgan, S., Needham, W. . . .. Kennedy, M.  (2018).  
A quality improvement initiative:  Reducing blood culture contamination in a Children’s Hospital.  Pediatric, 
142(4), e20180244.  doi:http://doi.org/10.15421peds.2018-0244  