POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Clinical Nutrition 
Subject:  Food and Drug Interactions Section:   
Date of Origination:  April 1st, 1991 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: July 2017 Serial Code:  NSCL05 
Date Last Reviewed: July 2019 
POLICY: 
 
Due to potential food and drug interactions, Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center will take 
actions to control known, significant interactions.  Nursing, pharmacy and nutritional services 
personnel may give Food/Drug interaction education when necessary.  The educator will instruct the 
patient, patient's family and/or caregiver about (a) the medication, (b) potential food interactions and 
(c) and diet restrictions prior to the patient's discharge from the hospital. The Food/ Drug interaction 
education is provided as part of patient's admission packet and also available in each nursing unit. 
The educator instructing the patient will document the education in the education section of the Epic 
electronic medical record.  
 
The Nutritional Service Department will monitor medications listed below:  
  
 Antituberculosis:  Isoniazid (INH) 
 MAO inhibitor: Tranycypromine (Parnate), Phenelzine (Nardil), Linezolid 
(Zyvox) 
 Broncodilator:   Theophylline (Theodur, Somophylline, Slo-phyllin) 
 
 
PROCEDURES: 
Warfarin (Coumadin) 
• Nursing is responsible for providing verbal and written instructions on the drug -nutrient 
interactions of Coumadin.  
• The Registered Dietitian Nutritionist (RDN) or Nutrition Care Technician will instruct 
patients upon consult. Consults will be completed within 48 hours. The patient’s 
counseling is documented in the education section of the Epic electronic medical record.  
 
Phenytoin (Dilantin) 
• For patients on P.O. Phenytoin and receiving enteral nutrition, the dietitian will assess the 
patient and recommend that the tube feedings should be held two hours prior, and two hours 
after the patient has been administered Phenytoin. The dietitian will a lso make 
recommendations as needed to meet the patient’s nutrient requirements in the reduced hours 
that the patient is being tube fed.   
 MAO-Inhibitors (Isoniazid INH) and Theophylline (Theodur, Somophylline, Slo-phyllin) 
 
• The Epic electronic medical record will generate a list of hospitalized patients receiving one of 
the medications listed above and is available for review by the RDN. 
• Drug-food interaction counseling is a multi-disciplinary responsibility. All disciplines will use 
approved education to inform patient of special considerations. 
• The RDN will modify the patient’s diet order as appropriate to avoid foods high in tyramine and 
other pressor amines; Low-tyramine diet or No caffeine diet. [Reference MNT Ordering in 
policy NSCL01] 
• The clinical nutrition team will determine a patient’s need for food-drug interaction education 
and provide appropriate, approved handouts and education if necessary. 
 
Others 
• Grapefruit juice is not served in the hospital due to its interference with the absorption of 
many drugs. 
• The Patient Handbook, which is given to each patient on admission, provides information on 
potential food and drug interactions.  It lists the foods a patient should limit or avoid if they 
are taking anticoagulants, Mao-Inhibitors, or Phenytoin. 
 