NSCL06 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Clinical Nutrition 
Subject:  Student Experiences Section:   
Date of Origination:  April 1st, 1991 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: July 2017 Serial Code:  NSCL06 
Date Last Reviewed: July 2019 
 
STUDENT EXPERIENCES 
 
The Nutritional Services Department of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center has entered into a 
written agreement with Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady University indicating a willingness to participate 
in a dietetic internship program.   
 
This experience will enable the student to gain eligibility to complete the examination required to become a 
Registered Dietitian Nutritionist (RDN). This experience will provide for the acquisition of knowledge and 
development of practitioner skills in accordance with the Standards of Education of the Academy of Nutrition 
and Dietetics.  The maximal student capacity is up to12 students per year. There will be no financial payment 
to the student nor need for additional personnel within the facility.   
 
Each student is assigned to the facility by the Internship Director according to facility accommodations, and 
placed under the responsibility of a staff RDN advisor.  The University is responsible for planning the goals 
and objectives of the program and developing specific course assignments.  Each intern is expected to 
complete new employee orientation at the facility and within the department and adhere to the ethical 
practices as set forth by the dietetic profession and the hospital guidelines.  The staff RDN is responsible for 
supervising all aspects of the student's experi ence, cosigning all medical records, and evaluating student 
performance.  This agreement may be terminated in accordance with the guidelines set forth in the affiliation 
agreement. 
 
While in the facility, students will be required to follow the departmental dress code and safety/sanitation 
procedures, patient confidentiality, and meet applicable employee health regulations. 
 