NSCL03 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Clinical Nutrition 
Subject:  Diet Orders Section:   
Date of Origination:  January 1st, 1985 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: July 2017 Serial Code:  NSCL03 
Date Last Reviewed: July 2019 
 
DIET ORDERS 
 
 
Policy: 
 
All diet orders are provided based upon physicians' diet orders. 
 
Procedure: 
 
Diet prescriptions are ordered via the electronic medical record upon physicians’ order. The diet order is 
transmitted to the nutritional services system  (Cbord). Cbord will receive interfaces from Epic of  diet 
initiation, modifications, and discontinuations for diet orders, NPO orders, tube feeding orders, allergies, and 
fluid restrictions.  
 
Modified Diets: 
 
The specific guidelines for each diet - both regular and modified are based upon The Academy of Nutrition 
and Dietetic Nutrition Care Manual, the currently approved diet manual for Our Lady of the Lake . No 
substitutions in the diet can be provided that conflict with the diet prescription without the physician or 
dietitian’s approval. Diet orders may be modified by the Registered Dietitian Nutritionist to downgrade a diet 
to adjust texture consistency (i.e. Regular diet to Mechanical soft, or Soft diet to Puree) for patients who have 
mouth sores, broken dentures, weakness, etc. A physician order is necessary to upgrade a diet (i.e. pureed to 
mechanical soft), unless the diet was downgraded by the Registered Dietitian Nutritionist and it doesn’t 
exceed the texture of the original diet order. [Reference policy NSCL01] 
 
Patient Tray Identification: 
 
Meal trays for individual patients are identified by name and date of birth. All new diets, changes, new admits, 
transfers, and discharges that have been entered into the Epic electronic medical record are transmitted to the 
nutritional services department via real-time interface to Cbord.  The call center operator or catering associate 
verifies the diet order changes that have taken place prior to each meal period to adjust items that may now 
be non-compliant with patient’s most recent diet order.  
 
 
 NSCL03 
Review of Therapeutic Diets: 
 
The call center operator or catering associate , Nutrition Care Technician, Dietitian, or Clinical Nutrition 
Manager will review, calculate and make any necessary changes for modified diet menus after the patients 
have made a selection. These employees are to review the menus for: 
 
1. Nutritional adequacy 
2. Fulfillment of the modified diet principles and make any appropriate changes to meet modified 
diet requirements. 
 
Temporary Shut Down of the Epic System: 
 
If and when the action system is temporarily not in operation, the following procedures will be followed. 
 
An Announcement will be made by the Medical Center PBX operator or a memorandum for scheduled 
maintenance will be issued if the Epic System is not in operation.  The Epic down time manual process should 
be followed. During this period of time all messages, diet changes, discharges, transfers and admissions will 
be received by the Patient Nutritional Services unit by telephone or by fax. A written record of these changes 
will be kept in order to maintain Patient Nutritional Service unit records. 
 
• If however the Epic System is not functioning: 
1. Operators will use the most recent Diet Order list printed from Epic as a reference and as the official 
authorization record for the prescribed diet.  
 
• If Room Service Choice (RSC) is temporarily unavailable because of internet malfunction, Cbord will 
be used to manually print Room Service tickets, reports, and place orders. IS must be notified of the 
dysfunction of internet and system at (225) 765-4357. 
 
• If Cbord is temporarily down because of a system malfunction: 
1. Operators will use the diet order list (from Epic and Cbord) as the official authorization record of the 
prescribed diet. 
 
2. Call center operator or catering associates will use paper menus to record patient’s meal order. 
Completed menu will be copied and provided to  the Patient Services supervisor to execute meal 
preparations.  
 
 
 
 