Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Departmental 
Subject:  Policy and Procedure process for approval and maintenance  
Date of Origination: May 24, 2002 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: December 2011 
Date of Last Review: April 2018 Serial Code: NSDP14 
 
Nutritional Services Policy and Procedure Process for approval and maintenance 
 
Policies are the formal, approved description of how a management/operational or 
clinical process or practice is defined organized and carried out.  
 
The continued review and maintenance of policies is the responsibility of the Director 
with the involvement of managers and clinicians. Policies must be continually 
updated to ensure that they reflect the current practice, current regulatory practices.  
The management team approves department specific policies, which are 
developed/revised/reviewed.  Clinical policies, which are 
developed/revised/reviewed, are done by the clinical team and reviewed by the 
Clinical Nutrition Manager, then approved by the Director. 
 
The Director is responsible for ensuring that the department specific policies are 
maintained from development and approval through revisions and continued 
approvals.  Department specific policies should not duplicate or contradict 
organization-wide policies.  A current department specific master policy manual is 
maintained at the department level. Documentation of policy review and approval 
will be through Health Flash Compliance 360 which will track all revisions and 
archive old policies. 
 
An annual report will be submitted by the department director to the Organization-
wide Policy Review Team regarding the Department specific policies.  This report 
will reflect the status of the department’s policies.  The department head or their 
designee is responsible for attending the Organization-wide Department Review 
Teams as scheduled to present the department’s annual report.   
 
Policies designated as clinical policies must be reviewed at least annually. 
Policies designated as operational policies must be reviewed at least every three 
years. 
 
It is the responsibly of the department director to review and update their employees 
on new policies and policy revisions. The department shall use a sign-in cover sheet 
and have employee’s sign that they have reviewed the organizational and 
departmental policies initially and then with yearly updates.  The signature sheet shall 
be maintained in the master hard copy of the Policy and Procedure Manual located in the Directors office. 