Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Departmental 
Subject:  Nutritional Scope of Services Section:  
Date of Origination: August 1988 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: December 2017 Serial Code: NSDP03 
Date of Last Review: July 2018 
 
Nutritional Services 
The scope of the inpatient services provided by the Nutritional Services department is as 
follows: 
1.         To provide daily meal plans for all available diet orders for 
patients under the supervision of the Clinical Nutrition Manager 
that meet nutritional requirements established by the Dietary 
Reference Intakes. 
2.         To prepare quantity foods using standardized recipes to assure the 
food is of high quality as measured by patient satisfaction surveys. 
3.         To maintain adequate temperatures of foods for patients and 
cafeteria guests, meeting departmental established criteria ensuring 
hot food as measured by patient satisfaction surveys. 
4.         To provide for the nutritional care of inpatients by: educating 
inpatients in all phases of normal and therapeutic nutrition; 
identifying, assessing, and monitoring patients identified to be at 
nutritional risk; identifying and recommending appropriate 
nutrition therapies; monitoring efficacy of nutrition therapies; 
providing nutritional assessment/consultation upon physician 
referral; and participating in interdisciplinary specialized health 
care teams. 
5.         To operate an employee/visitor cafeteria, providing a nutritionally 
balanced variety of foods and beverages.  
6.         To provide one meal per each meal period (breakfast, lunch, and 
dinner) for one parent or caregiver of pediatric patients as 
requested each day of the week. 
 
7.         To operate physicians dining in the St. Mary’s Tower. 
  
The scope of the ambulatory services provided by the Nutritional Services Department is 
two-fold. 
1.         To provide nutritional assessment, therapeutic intervention, and/or 
education upon physician referral. 
2.         To participate in community education programs through OLOL 
Education and Wellness Department. Menus are planned and followed to meet the nutritional needs of patients and according to 
physician’s orders and Dietary Reference Intakes , set forth by the Institute of Medicine,  
based on the A cademy of Nutrition and Dietetics Diet Manual (Nutrition Care Manual) . 
Therapeutic diets are prescribed by the physician, prepared and served by nutritional 
services as ordered. The Nutritional S ervices department provide s patient meal service 
from 6:45 AM to 6:30 PM. 
 
The department of Nutritional Services provides foodservice to all patients, employees, 
and guests with three meals daily, seven days a week. Meal service is provided in the 
cafeteria for Medical Center personnel at the following times: 
 
Cafeteria Hot Line/Grill: 
            Breakfast   6:30 AM - 10:00 AM 
            Lunch/Dinner   11:00 AM - 8:00 PM 
 
Any patient who has an order from a physician with hospital privileges meets criteria for 
entry to Nutritional Services, including inpatient and outpatient. Additional inclusions are 
families of patients, visitors, physicians and employees.  
 
The goal of the department is both to provide high-quality nutritional care and to serve 
attractive, well-prepared, and nutritious meals in the most efficient manner to patients and 
personnel, within budget limitations, adhering to sanitation and safety standards. It is our 
goal to function effectively in meeting the overall mission of the hospital. 
  
 