Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Human Resources 
Subject:  Employee Health Standards Section:  
Date of Origination: January 1985 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: July 2002 Serial Code: NSHR05 
Date of last Review: April 2015 
 
EMPLOYEE HEALTH REGULATIONS 
 
 
Personal Hygiene 
 
The Nutritional Service employee will practice good personal hygiene in regards to body 
cleanliness, hair, hands, fingernails, etc.  The Nutritional Service employee will be free from 
colds, sore throats, boils, infections and skin eruptions.  The Nutritional Service employee 
will not handle food until recovered. No employee will work in any capacity in which there 
is the likelihood that the employee may contaminate food, utensils, or food-contact surfaces 
due to pathogenic organisms from an external lesion.  Any skin lesion must be covered with 
a protective bandage. If the infection is on the hand, a protective glove must be used to cover 
the bandage; otherwise, the employee cannot be allowed to work.  
 
It will be the sole responsibility of each employee to report to the Supervisor on duty any 
infectious condition and seek medical attention.  These include Hepatitis A (jaundice), 
diarrhea, vomiting, fever, respiratory infections, sore throat, skin lesions (boils, cuts, rashes).  
Employees should also report to the supervisor if they have been in a country where there 
was an epidemic of cholera, typhoid, or gastroenteritis. It will also be the sole responsibility 
of each employee requiring medical treatment to submit physician verification that they are 
free of infection. 
 
Health Monitoring 
 
1. Health policies must be in compliance with federal, state and local laws. 
 
2. Personnel will comply with pre-employment and annual employee health policies 
(Tuberculin skin test, chest x-ray and drug screening). 
 
3. Employees must be free of active or communicable diseases such as skin lesions, 
boils, or respiratory infection. Employees with any of the above conditions, or ill, 
should be cleared by a return to work permit from their physician.  This permit must 
be presented to the employee health office before reporting to duty in the 
department.  It is the responsibility of both the employees to report any infectious 
diseases or lesions and the supervisor to routinely monitor employees for such 
lesions.    
4. Employees will report and get treatment for sores, burns, and cuts to prevent 
infections and contamination. 
 
 
Employee Health Regulations 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
To insure that employees returning to work following illness are not potentially infectious.  
To insure that employees returning to work after injury are physically capable of performing 
assigned duties with few or no restrictions. 
 
POLICY: 
 
The Employee Health Nurse will issue a "Return to Work" authoriza tion form for all 
employees absent from their jobs for three (3) days or longer. All managers reserve the right 
to require a physician’s statement at anytime. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. The employee will schedule an appointment with Employee Health Nurse prior to 
returning to work. 
 
2. The employee will bring to this appointment a "Return to Work" statement from the 
doctor. 
 
3. After an assessment, the Employee Health Nurse will issue a "Return to Work" 
authorization to the employee. 
 
4. The employee will present the "Return to Work" authorization to his/her supervisor 
upon returning to their job. 
 
5. The "Return to Work" assessment and the doctor's "Return to Work" statement will 
be kept in the employee's health file in the Employee Health Office.  
 
  
 
 