 1 
 
 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Human Resources 
Subject:  Dress Code Section:  
Date of Origination: July 1988 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: May 2018 Serial Code: NSHR06 
Date of last review: August 2010 
 
CATERING ASSOCIATE TEAM MEMBER DRESS 
 
 
Patient Services Dress Code 
 
The nutritional service department employees are required to comply with the Medical Center 
policy for Team Member Dress and Appearance.  It is th e responsibility of the catering 
associate to present a professional image at all times.  Each catering associate should be 
appropriately groomed, wearing clothing of an appropriate size, with moderate tastes in regard 
to makeup and hairstyles. No colognes or perfumes are permitted.  
 
 
UNIFORMS 
 
A. Overall 
Employees should be neat and clean at all times. Clothes should be free of soiled 
appearance, in good repair, neatly pressed and of proper size and length. Uniform 
must be in proper fitting size.  
 
B. Pants 
Black dress slacks are required. Slacks need to fit properly and sit at the waist. If 
there are visible belt loops, a black belt should be worn. Pants should be free of 
cargo pockets, faded areas, side splits and/or hanging strings or ornaments. Stretch 
pants, leggings, and jeans are not allowed.  
 
During probation period, new hires must provide their own black dress slacks.  
 
C. Shirts 
A solid white and/or solid blue dress button down shirt must be worn. White t-shirt 
may be worn under the uniform top. All uniform shirts must be tucked in at all 
times. Shirt must be pressed and free of soiled appearance. Tattoos must be covered 
at all times with shirt sleeves, ace cloth bandage, or arm/wrist band. 
 
During probation period, new hires must provide their own royal blue oxford button 
down shirt.   2 
 
 
 
 
D. Undergarments 
No patterns should show through uniform or be visible. 
 
E. Jackets 
Catering Associates must not wear sweaters or jackets while on duty. Black lab 
coats/jackets (white lab coats/jackets are only approved for clinical and managers) 
may be worn as part of the uniform.  
 
F. Shoes 
Shoes must be solid black, sturdy with a non-slip sole, closed toe and heel, free of 
cut out designs and/or holes. All shoes must have a back. No heel elevation, 
platform shoes, canvas or other cloth types are allowed. Shoes must be leather black. 
 
G. Stockings/Socks 
Black socks or black stockings must be worn with uniform. Stockings and socks 
must be clean and in good repair at all times. 
 
H. Hair & Hair Styles and Color 
Hair must be clean, neatly cut, and held back from the face. All staff must wear 
appropriate hair restraint (hairnet or approved baseball cap-OLOL baseball cap or 
solid black cap) at all times in kitchen areas. Baseball caps can only be worn if hair 
is short enough to be covered completely by a cap.  Hairnet and baseball caps must 
be removed whenever exiting the kitchen. 
 
Hairstyles need to allow employees to completely cover hair while working in 
department. Decorative beads and other hair ornaments which may come loose and 
fall in the food may not be worn. Sweatbands are prohibited. Hair color is limited to 
colors that naturally occur. Colors that are not allowed include and are not limited to 
green, purple, blue, and orange. 
 
Facial hair must be effectively restrained as per local and state regulations. Mustache 
and/or sideburns must be neatly trimmed. Mustache should not extend below the 
corners of the mouth; sideburns should not grow beyond the earlobe.  
 
I. Jewelry 
1. Ears 
Post type earrings, dime sized or smaller, are allowed. No large earrings or 
hoop style earrings are allowed when working in the kitchen area. Only one 
earring per ear allowed. 
 
No facial or tongue piercings allowed. 
           
2. Arms and Wrists 
Watches and Fitbit type bands are permissible. Watches must be free of  3 
 
 
 
additional accessories to include but not limited to diamonds and charms. 
  
Bracelets are not allowed unless they are a medical alert bracelet. See your 
immediate supervisor to approve bracelet. 
 
3. Rings 
One ring is allowed. The ring must be a type (preferable a band with no stones) 
that permits sanitation during hand washing. In the kitchen area, gloves must 
be worn when handling and serving food. 
 
4. Neck 
One necklace that fits inside uniform top is permissible. No chains are allowed 
to be worn outside of uniform top. 
  
J. Make-Up 
Moderate, tasteful makeup is allowed. Artificial makeup accessories (i.e. false 
eyelashes) is not allowed. Perfume or cologne is also not allowed.  
 
K. Hands 
Hands should be clean. Fingernails must be kept clean and trimmed to a 1/3” length 
or less. Fingernail polish is not permitted. No artificial nails are allowed. Hands must 
be covered with gloves when building trays. 
 
L. Personal Hygiene 
All Team Members should bathe daily with soap and hot water. Deodorant should 
be used daily. Teeth should be brushed daily. Men should shave daily. 
 
M. Badges and Hospital Pins 
Hospital name badges are to be worn at all times when on the hospital grounds. A                    
temporary badge should be worn if the employee forgets their badge. The name of 
the department should be clearly visible. Service award pins and professional 
organization pins may be worn, but must not penetrate the name badge.    
 
N. Other 
Additional restrictions may apply based on the work area and precautions as needed 
to protect patients, customers, and staff. 
 
 
“Fun Clothes” 
 
Clothes such as soft, knit/spandex outfits, stirrup pants, Capri pants, denim m aterial (any 
color), halter/tank tops, shorts, jogging outfits/sweatshirts, t -shirts, sleeveless garments, 
sandals or novelty shoes, hats or any kind  with the exception of the OLOL baseball cap, 
sunglasses, tight garments, and military fatigues are not considered professional wear and are 
not permitted. In addition, any employee reporting to work wearing any clothes as described  4 
 
 
 
above will be sent home to change and required to return to work. (For more specific 
information regarding professional attire, name tags, button/pins, length of skirts/dresses, 
make-up, rings, and earrings, and excluded attire refer to the Medical Center Dress and 
Appearance Policy.) 
 
Personnel reporting for duty out of uniform, improperly attired, or whose appearance does not 
meet OLOLRMC and Nutritional Services Department standards may be considered 
ineligible for work. 
 
NOTE: This policy is to serve as a broad set of guidelines for attire and appearance of staff; 
it is not  a conclusive set of rules.  Nutritional Services Department reserves the right to 
interpret these guidelines, as well as establish and enforce other standards specifically listed 
of addressed in this policy statement. 
    
 
 