NSO-041 
Page 1 of 3 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Oncology Special Care 
Title: Paxman Scalp Cooling System 
Policy 
Reference #: NSO041 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: June 18, 2020 Last Review 
Date:  December 11, 2023 
Last Revision Date: June 18, 2020 
 
PURPOSE:  
To provide clinical guidance for the use and management of the scalp cooling device 
used during the administration of alopecia causing agents to adult patients.  
 
DEFINITION: 
The Paxman Scalp Cooling System consists of a small compact refrigeration unit 
containing a coolant which is circulated at -5C through lines connected to specially 
designed cooling caps. Scalp cooling is a method of minimizing chemotherapy-induced 
alopecia.  It acts by reducing the temperature of the scalp, causing the blood vessels 
supplying the hair follicles to constrict, which decreases the amount of chemotherapy that 
can pass to the hair follicles.  Thus reducing cellular uptake of the drug and degree of hair 
loss.  
 
 
POLICY:   
Scalp cooling may be performed on some patients receiving cytotoxic chemotherapy 
according to the procedure defined below. 
 
 
Patient selection for inclusion criteria:  
a. Appropriate patients will be identified by physician referral only.  
b. Patients will be counseled/educated by trained clinical staff member 
from the referring medical oncology clinic. 
c. A trained clinical staff member from the referring medical oncology 
clinic will be responsible for fitting patients to the appropriate cap size 
and completing the enrollment form to fax directly to the Paxman 
Company.   
d. The patient will receive cap and all necessary supplies directly from 
Paxman.  
 
 
 
 NSO-041 
Page 2 of 3 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. The nurse will turn the paxman unit on at least 30minutes prior to the 
patient’s anticipated arrival to the infusion suite. 
2. Once the patient arrives at the infusion center the patient will wet hair and 
apply a small amount of conditioner.  The patient must be physically 
capable of donning the cap independently or with assistance from his/her 
caregiver.  The patient is responsible for cap placement. 
3. The cap should be positioned so that it comes below the patient’s hair line 
and the top of the cap is touching the crown of the head to ensure all parts 
of the scalp maintain good contact with the cap.   
4. A headband may be used to prevent contact between the cap and the skin 
of the patient’s forehead.   
5. The nurse will scan the token that is attached to the patient’s cap. 
6. The nurse will then follow the prompts on the Paxman unit. A precooling 
period of at least 30minutes is recommended.  In patients with extremely 
thick hair or afro-Caribbean hair, the precooling period can be extended to 
45 minutes.  
7. Once chemotherapy has started, the nurse will advance the Paxman unit to 
step 2 (infusion cooling).  
8. Upon completion of chemotherapy the nurse will advance the Paxman unit 
to step 3 (post cooling).  The post cooling period is dependent on the type 
of chemotherapy that the patient has received (refer to Paxman manual 
attached to the unit).   
9. At the completion of the post cooling period the nurse will turn the 
Paxman unit off and unhook the patient from the unit.  To prevent damage 
to the patient’s scalp or hair, advise the patient to wait 10 minutes before 
removing the cap as ice crystals may have formed on her hair.  
10. The nurse will then wipe the Paxman unit with cavi wipes, place a clean 
tag, on it and store the unit in the clean utility room. 
 
 
Paxman Scalp Cooling System 
Patient Teaching Instructions 
 
1. Patients should be advised to avoid using hair dryers, straighteners, products     
   containing alcohol or peroxide or washing hair with hot water. 
 
2. Patients are responsible for bringing their cap and necessary supplies to infusion 
suite.   
 
3. Encourage patient to familiarize themselves with their cap and practice putting 
cap on prior to their first treatment. 
 
4. The most uncomfortable time is the first 15 minutes after the cap has been  
                applied. NSO-041 
Page 3 of 3 
 
        
5. Encourage the patient to use the restroom prior to starting precooling, if the  
               precooling period is interrupted it must be restarted.  
  
6. During step 2 (infusion cooling) if the patient needs to go to the restroom they     
should call the nurse to unhook from the Paxman unit. He/She may unhook for 
as long as 10 minutes. 
 
References: 
 
Scalp Cooling Guidelines for Adult Oncology Patients: West Midlands Expert  
  Advisory Group for Systemic Anti-Cancer Therapy (2017) Neale, S. ANP 
 
Paxman Quick Reference Guide available at: 
        https://paxmanscalpcooling.com/perch/resources/paxman-system-overview-   
   clinical-3.pdf 
 
 