NSO-040 
Page 1 of 3 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Oncology Special Care 
Title: Elastomeric Chemotherapy Infusion 
Device 
Policy 
Reference #: NSO-040 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: May 11, 2010 Last Review 
Date:  June 10, 2024 
Last Revision Date: March 1, 2017 
 
PURPOSE:   
 
To provide a cost effective, safe treatment regimen for patients requiring continuous 
small amounts of chemotherapy utilizing a disposable elastomeric infusion device.   
 
DEFINITION: 
Elastomeric Infusion System - is a single use infusion pump that can be utilized to 
provide chemotherapy, antiemetics and pain medications.  The pump is controlled by 
volume regulation and has no programming, alarms, or batteries.  The fluid in the pump 
is infused over a pre-set period of time. 
 
POLICY:   
 
Patients receiving chemotherapy regiments that require continuous infusions of 
chemotherapy will be provided with a home infusion pump from pharmacy.  The 
pharmacy will fill the volume based on the MD orders. 
 
Patient selection for inclusion criteria for this disposable elastomeric infusion device 
use: 
1. Patients appropriate for outpatient use includes the following: 
a. A central venous access device. 
b. Transportation to return to the hospital upon completion of the 
infusion 
c. The ability to communicate with healthcare providers via phone. 
d. The patient or caregiver has the ability to understand/comprehend 
information provided on the administration and possible adverse 
events and seeks medical care if necessary. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. A physician order for the elastomeric infusion system will be generated 
and a copy sent to pharmacy. NSO-040 
Page 2 of 3 
 
2. Pharmacy will prepare ordered medication according to pharmacy’s policy 
and procedure. 
3. The pump will be labeled and filled by pharmacy.  The label will contain 
the patient’s name, name of the drug, dosage, rate and infusion volume, 
and date when the pump is started. 
4. The nurse will verify the dosage and laboratory values will be confirmed.  
Prior to infusion, utilizing two chemotherapy nurses the patient, drug, 
dosage, rate and infusion volume, and date to initiate the infusion will be 
verified. 
5. The infusion pump will be allowed to warm to room temperature prior to 
infusion. 
6. A central venous access device will be utilized to administer outpatient 
infusion of continuous chemotherapy.  The infusion system will be 
prepared utilizing sterile technique according to existing hospital central 
line access policy. 
7. The pump will come attached with primed tubing from pharmacy.  Once 
access is confirmed via blood return, the infusion will be attached to the 
central venous access device. 
8. Tape the clamp (not the filter) to the patient’s skin. 
9. Begin the infusion by opening the clamp; fluid delivery will start 
immediately.  If the tubing is kinked, roll the kinked portion of the tubing 
between your fingers to reshape the tubing and promote fluid flow. 
10. Give the patient; a carrying pouch and chemotherapy bag. 
11. The patient will be instructed with a specific date and time to return when 
the infusion is completed. 
12. Pumps that are not depleted due to device malfunction will be sent to 
pharmacy for follow up. 
 
 
References: 
  
Olsen, M., LeFebvre, K., & Brassil, K. Chemotherapy and Immunotherapy Guidelines. 
2019. Oncology Nursing Society.  
 
Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference 
 
 NSO-040 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
Pt Label 
 
 
 
Elastomeric Chemotherapy Infusion Device 
Patient Teaching Instructions 
 
1. Your pump does not have any alarms or batteries.  It is affected by heat or high 
temperatures. 
 
2. Do not bathe, shower or swim while using this pump.  You may take a sponge    
bath while receiving your chemotherapy by this infusion pump.  Very high (more 
than 100 degrees) and very low (less than 40 degrees) temperatures may make the 
medication go into your veins faster or slower than the doctor has ordered. 
 
3. Do not get alcohol or soap on the filter.  This can cause the system not to work 
properly. 
 
4. Do not let others touch your infusion pump.  The only people who should touch 
your pump are hospital staff. 
 
5. While getting your medication, keep your infusion pump in the carrying pouch, 
your pocket, or close to your body where it won’t move.  When sleeping, put the 
pump where you will not roll over on it.  When outside, keep the pump tubing in your 
clothing.  Please save the carrying pouch to use again for your next chemotherapy 
treatment.  
 
6. The lower part of your tubing has a clamp. Keep this taped to your body at all 
times.  
 
7. If the tubing is kinked, roll the kinked portion of the tubing between your fingers to 
reshape the tubing and promote fluid flow. 
 
8. If the pump disconnects or comes off, close the clamp, and place it in the bag you 
received at the hospital or infusion center  If this should occur,  call your doctor, and 
plan to come back immediately  to the Outpatient Infusion Center or the Emergency 
Department after 5PM weekdays) for further treatment. 
 
9. If you have other problems or questions regarding our infusion pump, please call 
Outpatient Infusion at 225-765-7677. 
 
 
Return to the hospital on (day)____________ at (time)________________ 
 
 