NSO-042 
Page 1 of 4 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Oncology Special Care 
Title: Nimbus™ II Flex Ambulatory Infusion 
Device for Chemotherapy 
Policy 
Reference #: NSO-042 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: September 5, 2019 Last Review 
Date:  June 10, 2024 
Last Revision Date: December 14, 2020 
 
PURPOSE:   
 
To provide a cost effective and safe treatment regimen for patients requiring continuous 
infusion of chemotherapy utilizing a reusable, electronic infusion device.   
 
DEFINITION: 
The Nimbus™ II Flex Ambulatory Infusion Device is a multi use infusion pump that can 
be utilized to provide chemotherapy, antiemetics, pain medications, and fluids.  The 
pump is battery controlled with electronically programmed rates and volume delivery.   
 
POLICY:   
 
Patients receiving chemotherapy regimens that require continuous infusions of 
chemotherapy will be provided with a home infusion pump by the infusion center. The 
pharmacy will compound the IV bag based on the licensed independent practitioner 
medication order. 
 
Patient selection for inclusion criteria for this infusion device use: 
1. Patients appropriate for outpatient use includes the following: 
a. A central venous access device. 
b. Transportation to return to the infusion center or hospital upon 
completion of the infusion. 
c. The ability to communicate with healthcare providers via phone. 
d. The patient or caregiver has the ability to understand/comprehend 
information provided on the administration, possible adverse events, and 
regarding seeking medical care if necessary. 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. An order for continuous ambulatory infusion will be entered and signed in 
the treatment plan of the electronic medical record by the provider.   
2. Once the patient arrives to the infusion center, the nurse (after assessing 
the patient, verifying labs, and accessing the port or verifying patency of a 
central line) will release the treatment plan to the pharmacy.  NSO-042 
Page 2 of 4 
 
3. The pharmacy will compound the ordered medication according to 
pharmacy policy and procedure. 
4. The medication IV bag will be dispensed from pharmacy connected to the 
Nimbus™ II Flex Ambulatory Infusion Device administration set and 
primed for use.  It will be labeled with the patient’s name, name of the 
drug, dosage, rate, infusion volume, and date when the pump is started. 
5. The nurse will program the pump per the chemo orders and select “Save 
CurRX” to set it in memory.  Then the nurse will attach the administration 
set onto the pump by lining up the two plastic fingers onto the metal bar to 
create a hinge and lock it onto the pump by pressing the black button and 
snapping it closed.  
6. Prior to connecting the medication to the patient, two chemotherapy 
certified nurses will verify the correct patient, drug, dosage, expiration 
date of drug, appearance of solution, rate, and infusion volume match the 
provider’s order.   
7. Next, the nurse will turn on the pump and select “Current RX” → “New 
Infusion” → “Run/Stop” → “OK to Confirm” (Second Check Review) to 
start the infusion.  
8. A central venous access device will be utilized to administer outpatient 
infusion of continuous chemotherapy.  An external central venous access 
device must be utilized if the chemotherapy is a vesicant. The infusion 
system will be prepared utilizing sterile technique according to existing 
hospital central line access policy. 
9. The nurse will attach a closed system male luer lock to the end of the IV 
set.  Once access is confirmed via blood return, the infusion will be 
attached to the central venous access device.  The nurse will ensure that 
are no alarms or battery low lights lit prior to giving pump to the patient.   
10. With the patient’s first use of the ambulatory infusion pump, the patient 
should be given a chemotherapy spill kit and instructed on use of the spill 
kit.  
11. The patient should be given an appropriate chemotherapy pouch to carry 
the device.  
12. The patient will be instructed with a specific date, time, and location to 
return when the infusion is completed. 
13. When the patient returns at the instructed date and time, the nurse will 
verify the chemotherapy has completely infused.  Any pumps that are not 
depleted or have malfunction will be sent to pharmacy for follow up. 
14. The pump should be cleaned and disinfected after patient use or whenever 
the pump becomes visibly soiled.  After the pump is cleaned, return the 
pump to an empty box in the designated cabinet in the medication/supply 
room.  
15. To clean the pump: 
a. Turn the pump off before cleaning. 
b. DO NOT spray cleaning fluids directly onto the pump. 
c. DO NOT steam autoclave, EtO sterilize, immerse the pump, or 
allow fluid to enter the pump. NSO-042 
Page 3 of 4 
 
d. DO NOT use hard or pointed objects to clean any part of the pump. 
e. DO NOT use acetone, other plastic solvents, or abrasive cleaner to 
clean the pump. 
f. Acceptable cleaning and disinfection solution is 10% bleach 
solution (1 part household bleach to 9 parts water) 
 
 
References: 
 
Nimbus™ II Flex Clinical Education Pack (7/2019) 
 
Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference 
 NSO-042 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
Pt Label 
 
 
 
Nimbus™ II Flex Ambulatory Infusion Device  
Patient Teaching Instructions 
 
1. Your pump runs on batteries and has alarms to alert you of low battery or any other 
malfunction. 
 
2. You may bathe but do not submerge the pump in water.  The tubing can get wet, 
but the pump cannot get wet.  Make sure your dressing stays clean and dry.  It may be 
better during this time to sponge bathe around the central line dressing site.   
 
3. Do not let others touch your infusion pump.  The only people who should touch 
your pump are hospital staff. 
 
4. While getting your medication, keep your infusion pump in the carrying pouch, 
your pocket, or close to your body where it won’t move.  When sleeping, put the 
pump where you will not roll over on it.  When outside, keep the pump tubing in your 
clothing.  Please save the carrying pouch to use again for your next chemotherapy 
treatment.  
 
5. The lower part of your tubing has a clamp. Keep this taped to your body at all 
times.  
 
6. If the tubing is kinked, roll the kinked portion of the tubing between your fingers to 
reshape the tubing and promote fluid flow. 
 
7. If the pump disconnects or comes off, close the clamp, and place it in the bag you 
received at the hospital or infusion center. If this should occur, call your doctor, and 
plan to come back immediately  to the Outpatient Infusion Center or the Emergency 
Department (after 5PM weekdays) for further treatment. 
 
8. If you have other problems or questions regarding our infusion pump, please call 
Outpatient Infusion at 225-765-7677. 
 
 
Return to the hospital on (day)____________ at (time)________________ 
 
 