NSO044 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Oncology 
Title: Radiation Transportation  
Policy 
Reference #: NSO044 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: November 2024 Review Date: November 5, 2024 
Revision Date:  November 5, 2024 
 
                               
PURPOSE:  
To provide an inpatient process for safe transportation to and from Mary Bird Perkins Cancer Center 
(MBPCC) and Our Lady of the Lake Reginal Medical Center (OLOLRMC) for patients who have a 
physician order for consultation, simulation, and gamma knife treatment.   
 
 
POLICY: 
A. Preparation of the Patient 
 
1. All patients are to be transported by wheelchair or stretcher. 
 
2. Patients should always be accompanied by a MBPCC employee. 
 
3.  A hospital respiratory therapist and nurse must accompany and remain with any patient on a 
ventilator. 
 
4. If any patient is transported from Intensive Care Unit (ICU), the patient must be accompanied by 
an OLOLRMC staff member. 
 
5. Patients in the process of receiving intravenous chemotherapy, blood products, medication or 
equipment that needs to be closely monitored should not be transported until after administration 
is completed. If patient is unable to leave the unit for radiation therapy, notify the radiation 
physician and attending physician.  
 
6.   Notify attending physician that patient is leaving the department and approximate time of 
treatment. Nurse is to chart in electronic medical record.  
B. The MBPCC radiation therapist or clinical staff member should:  
1. Notify MBPCC transporter that the patient needs to be transported to the department giving the 
transporter as much information as possible regarding the patient’s name, room number, mode of 
transportation, appointment time. 
 
2. The clinical staff member will also be required to add the patient to the hospital transportation 
schedule to ensure the patient is transported at the correct time. 
 NSO044 
Page 2 of 2 
3. When transporting high risk patients, the medical assistant or nurse may be required to help 
transport the patient to and from radiation treatments. 
 
C. The MBPCC in-patient transporter will: 
1. Make a daily schedule for all in-patients 
 
2. Call the OLOLRMC nurse's station to ensure that an order for treatment has been written by a 
physician and to ask if the patient will come by stretcher or wheelchair, if not known, or if the 
patient has special needs (e.g., oxygen, IVAC, etc.). 
 
3. At the appropriate time, notify the hospital nurse that the patient is being taken to MBPCC. 
 
4. Obtain the patient's hospital chart, sign the patient out, and ask the nurse to administer any 
medicines or disconnect chemotherapy, if applicable, and receive a ticket to ride from 
OLOLRMC staff member that states the patient’s code status.  
 
5.  Upon entering the patient's hospital room, explain to the patient and/or family who he/she is and 
what he/she is planning to do. 
 
6.  Make sure the patient is covered after he/she has been moved to a stretcher or wheelchair. 
 
 7.  After the patient's consultation, simulation, or treatment is completed at MBPCC, take the patient 
back to his/her room.  
 
 8.. Notifies the patient's OLOLRMC nurse that the patient is back in his/her room, return the 
patient’s chart, and sign patient back in. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 