Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Patient Services 
Subject:  Patient Tray Line Accuracy Section:  
Date of Origination: April 1988 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: July 2014 Serial Code: NSPS01 
Date of last review: September 2015 
 
Patient Tray/Diet Order Accuracy Assurance 
 
A uniform procedure will be used for preparing the patient’s meal and assembling the 
patient’s meal trays.  
 
Temperature checks, appearance and texture of food, correct serving portions, patient 
selections, and total appearance of tray are a priority for quality service.  
• Test trays are done and recorded daily by Patient Services team members.  
• Food temperature is checked and documented every two hours.  
 
Procedures: 
 
Individual meal orders will be called into the Call Center or taken by Ambassador. The 
Operator or Ambassador will enter the meal into CBORD. Patients who are room service not 
appropriate will be given a non-select meal in accordance with the diet order via CBORD.  
Operators will read the notes section to adhere to any special instructions or requests. The 
order will then be transmitted to the appropriate printer, based on designated location for 
each item ordered. 
▪ Hot Entrées - This ticket contains those menu items needing preparation by the 
Room Service (RS) cooks, and is displayed in the area of the kitchen where the 
food will be prepared.  After the meal is prepared the cook will place the order 
under the heating elements on the room service line for pickup and placement on 
the patient meal tray. 
▪ Cold Entrées - This ticket contains those cold menu items needing preparation by 
the RS cooks, and is displayed in the area of the kitchen where the food will be 
prepared.  After the meal is prepared the cook will place the order on the room 
service line for pickup and placement on the patient meal tray. 
▪ Expeditor – This ticket contains all items ordered by the patient for their meal.  This 
ticket will print at the Starter station and be used for all items not prepared by the 
RS cooks.  The Starter will use this ticket as a notification to start a new patient 
meal tray.  This position will place silverware and napkin, etc. on the patient tray, 
as well as any other assigned items.  This ticket will be located on the meal tray, 
progressing down the line from the starter to each station, who will then put the 
items on the tray that are assigned to that station.  The expediter will place the meal presented by the RS cooks on the tray, check the tray for accuracy and place the 
tray in the appropriate cart, depending on zone of delivery.   
 
Staff assigned to the Hot Entree Station will prepare the menu items listed on each Hot 
Entree Meal Ticket following recipes and instructions provided to them.  Once completed, 
staff will plate the menu items following instructions provided. The staff will garnish the 
finished plate according to  the established garnish schedule.  Finally, the staff will place 
the plated items, along with the Hot Entree Meal Ticket, in a designated area to await tray 
assembly.  The designated area will have the capability of keeping the hot food at the proper 
temperature. 
Staff assigned to the Cold Entrée Station will prepare the menu items listed on each Cold 
Entrée Meal Ticket following recipes and instructions provided. The staff will garnish the 
finished plate according to the established garnish schedule.  Finally, the staff will place 
the plated items, along with the Cold Entrée Meal Ticket, in a designated area to wait tray 
assemble.   
The staff person designated as the Expeditor will have a copy of each meal order listing 
all of the items (hot, cold, and expeditor) to be placed on each patient tray.  Using this copy, 
the Expeditor will get the hot food from the Hot Entrée Station and get the cold food from 
the Cold Entrée Station .  The Expeditor will check to make sure the appearance of each 
item adhere to established standards, making corrections where needed.  
The Expeditor will place each item on a meal tray following instructions indicating the 
specific placement of each item on each tray. The staff should minimize handling of the 
hot food in order to maintain proper temperature.  
The Expeditor will perform a final check of the tray to ensure it is complete and conforms 
to established standards.  The Expeditor will leave their copy of the meal ticket on the tray, 
removing and saving the Entrée Tickets, and load the completed tray in to the appropriate 
tray cart for the tray. If the tray is the first tray to be loaded into a given cart, the Expeditor 
will set the timer located at the Expeditor station for “10” minutes”. 
After the ten minutes has passed, or the cart is full, the Porter will be dispatched to deliver 
patient meals. 
 
Ambassador is to check the tray ticket for accuracy upon delivering the tray to the patient, as 
part of the mandatory Patient Services scripting and training.  If any items are not consistent 
they are to notify the supervisor immediately via the assigned Cisco phone. 
 
Disciplinary proceedings will occur if negligence in any of the areas is present.  If an employee 
has made three or more errors during the same room service line activity, a written verbal 
counseling slip may be issued.  If an employee has received one written verbal counseling, 
the second negligent performance will result in a written counseling .  Any additional 
violations, disciplinary proceedings will be initiated in accordance with policy and procedure 
of the Human Resource Department. 