Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Patient Services 
Subject:  General Meal Service Section:  
Date of Origination: August 1985 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: July 2013  Serial Code: NSPS02 
Date of Last Review: February 2018  
 
GENERAL MEAL SERVICE PLAN 
 
POLICY 
 
The nutritional services department provides patient meal service from 6:30 a.m. to 7:00 
p.m.  The Cafeteria is open until 8 PM.   Provision of meals for patients requires a close 
working relationship with nursing service.  The departments work cooperatively to serve 
meals to our patients throughout the day.  The nutritional services department is 
responsible for the delivery of all trays.  Every effort will be made to deliver trays in a 
timely manner for patients.  All meals should be distributed to patients courteously and 
efficiently in a manner that ensures food temperatures are maintained at their intended 
level.  
 
A. MEAL SERVICE TIMES: 
 
a. The cafeteria is open until 8:00pm. 
 
b. The nutritional service department in conjunction with nursing services has 
designated the following time frame for patient meal service; patients may 
order meals (breakfast, lunch, and/or dinner) from 6:30am to 7:00pm.   
 
c. Nursing Services is sent a refrigerated cart for late admits.  The cart contains 
sandwich boxes, a selection of tube feedings, and supplements. 
 
d. The Transitional Care Unit (TCU) and Rehab Unit must have no more than 14 
hours between a substantial evening meal and breakfast the following day. 
These facilities offer snacks at bedtime daily. Patients are advised of this upon 
admission by the TCU and REHAB staff.  
 
 
B. MEAL SERVICE PROCEDURE: 
 
a. The diet order must be in accordance to the Cerner Diet List.  Operators will take 
patient’s order (who are room service appropriate and/or assist) via Health 
Touch.  Patients who are room service not appropriate will be given a non-select 
meal in accordance with the diet order via Health Touch.    
b. A nutritional service worker will assemble the trays and the checker will 
verify each tray for accuracy before loading the tray onto the food cart. 
 
c. The nutritional services department is responsible for the delivery of the food 
carts at meal time to the designated nursing unit within the appropriate time 
frame or within 45 minutes of the patient’s order. 
 
d. Nursing service personnel will deliver all trays from the food cart for patients 
in isolation, ICU, TCU, and Rehab units directly to the patient rooms. 
 
e. Nursing service personnel will pick up soiled trays from patients rooms and 
return them to the food cart. 
 
f. The nutritional services department will deliver early trays, late trays, and 
second trays. 
 
 
C. PROCEDURE OF TRAY DELIVERY STAFF: 
 
a. Always practice courtesy. 
 
b. Always knock on the door before entering a patient room and ask for 
permission to enter.  
 
c. When an NPO, HOLD, or CONTACT ISOLATION sign is on the patient’s 
door, the food service worker should locate the nurse caring for that patient 
and the nurse will deliver the tray to the patient. After the patient has eaten the 
food on the tray, the nurse will return the dirty tray to the dirty tray cart and 
close the door to prevent contamination.  
 
d. The nutritional service worker will check the ticket against the room number.  
The worker will also call the patient by name and ask the patient for their date 
of birth. Both of these will assure the correct tray is delivered to the correct 
patient. If any items are missing from the tray, the worker is to call the 
nutritional service department for immediate delivery of these items. 
 
e. The nutritional service worker may assist patient with setting up meal tray, 
condiments, and utensils (ex. Opening milk carton). For other services and 
patient requests, press the call button, identify yourself, and verbalize the 
patient's request so that nursing service personnel may help the patient. 
 
f. If the patient is not in the room, inquire to his/her whereabouts at the unit 
desk.   If the patient is not on the unit, return the tray to the nutritional services 
department and notify call center or Patient Services manager that patient’s 
meal may need to be rescheduled.   
 
D. RETURN OF TRAYS: 
a. The return of food carts with soiled trays from nursing units to the nutritional 
service department is the responsibility of food service workers. The 
nutritional service department will begin the process of removing food carts 
with soiled trays from nursing units daily (please refer to Delivery of Not-
Appropriate Trays and Soiled Cart Retrieval chart).  Nutritional services will 
make a final pass to retrieve the supper trays at 8:00 pm. 
 
b. Nutritional Services is responsible for recording arrival and departure times of 
cart delivery/removal from the nursing unit. 
 
c. Any trays stored in the soiled utility room must be scraped in order to control 
for insects or pests. 
 
d. ***It is crucial for nursing services to return patient trays on the cart for 
each meal period to ensure that the nutritional services department has 
enough supplies*** 
 
 
 
E. LATE TRAY POLICY 
a. Late meals for patients who have been on hold, NPO or a new admit will be 
delivered by food service personnel after receiving an alert in the EMR.  
Requests for trays will be delivered to the patient by Nutritional Services 
department personnel until 7:00 pm. 
 
 
F. SECOND TRAY POLICY 
a. Occasionally patients may request a second helping, additional foods, or a 
complete tray.  A clinical team member will evaluate the merit of the request 
and will investigate repeated requests for additional food or second trays.  The 
Nutritional Services department will prepare and deliver these additional 
items for regular diets upon request. Additional food items or substitutes for 
patients on therapeutic diets will not be processed without consent of the 
dietitian and/or diet technician. Please refer all requests to the clinical office 
for approval. 
 
 
G. DIET CHANGES DURING MEAL SERVICE 
a. Operators are alerted of all diet order changes in the EMR at the time of 
change.  Operators will make changes to the diet immediately if a non-select 
meal is loaded. It is the responsibility of the operators to read all notes and 
verify before completing order.  
  
 
H. LATE ADMISSION POLICY FOR ALL DIETS 
a. Patients on regular and special diets will not be permitted to eat supper in the 
cafeteria.  The patients will be escorted to their rooms by an admission host or 
hostess.   
 
b. Patients needing a supper meal after 8:00 p.m. will receive items from the 
refrigerated meal cart sent each night to the nursing services offices at 7:00 
p.m.   
 
 
I. ISOLATION TRAY POLICY 
a. An isolation procedure refers to patients confined in their rooms to prohibit 
exposure of their infectious illness. 
 
b. The Food and Nutritional Department will supply the patient with nutritional 
meals, but will not enter the patient’s room.  All meals will be given to 
nursing for delivery. 
 
c. The following are procedures for isolation trays: 
i. Food preferences will be handled through the phone system or nursing 
services.  
ii. Nursing will deliver all isolation trays to the patient.  
 
d. Isolation trays are served as follows: 
i. They are sent up on the food carts and served on regular china and 
silverware service. All patients with a Radiation diet order will receive 
all meals on disposable goods. 
ii. Trays are to be removed and placed back onto food cart once meal is 
eaten.  No special bagging is required to remove this tray from a room. 
 
 
BUFFET MEAL SERVICE TO MENTAL HEALTH (One North) 
 
     In order to enhance the quality of patient care on the Mental Health unit and to 
increase the satisfaction of patients there, the nutritional service department provides 
Buffet Meal Service to this unit for breakfast, lunch and dinner.  The following policies 
are established to aid in maintaining consistently high-quality meal service to this unit. 
 
     The nutritional service department will provide buffet service to this unit that permits 
selection of nutritionally balanced, aesthetically pleasing meals by each patient.  
Whenever possible, lunch and dinner service will include a choice of more than one 
entree', two or more vegetables, and desserts so that patients are able to select their most 
preferred foods.  Any patient on a modified diet receives a special tray prepared from the 
patient tray-line with all disposable utensils. The tray will be sent along with the buffet cart.  
 
     The buffet cart will be prepared so that it leaves the nutritional service department 
according to the following schedule: Breakfast - 7:15 A.M., Lunch – 12:15 and  
Dinner - 4:40 p.m... 
 
     The nutritional service department will provide hot food, breads, desserts, and drinks 
as scheduled on each day's menu, and will send appropriate serving utensils for each item 
with the buffet cart.  Unit nursing staff is responsible for receiving the cart each day, 
preparing an appropriate place for the cart in each dining area, scheduling patients' timely 
arrival in the dining area, serving food to the patients, assisting patients with feeding 
activities as needed, and cleaning the dining areas after each meal service. 
 
     In most cases, sufficient quantities of vegetables and bread will be served on the buffet 
so that second helpings of vegetables can be served, after all patients have received their 
first serving, at the discretion of the nursing staff providing the service.  Abundant 
quantities of foods will be provided according to the census count provided each day by 
the unit.  Only in the event of documented extreme circumstances will extra food items 
be prepared by the nutritional service department and sent to the unit to re-supply the 
buffet cart while the meal service is in progress. 
 
The registered dietitian and the diet technician assigned in this area shall be responsible 
for assuring that quality nutrition care is provided to patients- nutrition evaluation and/or 
assessment, nutrition re-screening/re-assessment, and nutrition education per nutrition 
services protocol (see Standard of Nutrition Care NSCL01). 
 
     The 1 north nursing staff will be responsible for maintaining a supply of plastic eating 
utensils, drink cups, placemats, and napkins for use during service in the event a patient 
requires additional utensils than those provided on each meal tray.  Food service will 
send non-breakable eating utensils with the buffet cart. These items may be requisitioned 
from the nutritional service department by messaging through the CIS system. 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 