Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Retail 
Subject:  Housekeeping Department Responsibilities Section:  
Date of Origination: January 1988 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: December 2011 Serial Code: NSRT05 
Date of Last Review: April 2015 
 
HOUSEKEEPING DEPARTMENT CAFETERIA  AND DIET OFFICE 
PROGRAM 
 
The Housekeeping Department in conjunction with Nutritional Services shall maintain the 
customer service area and diet office in a clean and orderly fashion.  There shall be a routine 
established and maintained to insure that these areas of the Medical Center, which receive 
some of the highest traffic, will reflect an image consistent with the rest of the facility. 
 
1. Carpeted Areas 
 
The carpeted areas shall be kept in a clean, spot-free condition.  To assure that this occurs, it 
is important that a schedule be implemented. 
 
1. Housekeeping shall police the carpeted areas on a daily basis.  This will include 
sweeping of all paper, crumbs and debris.  It will be done twice a day.  The first 
pass will be at 10:00 A.M. in the Doctors Lounge, and at 10:30 A.M. in the 
Cafeteria.  The second pass will be at 2:00 P.M. in the Doctors Lounge, and at 
2:30 P.M. in the Cafeteria.  During the hours of 11:00A.M. and 2:00 P.M. a 
house keeper will be stationed in the café area to pull trash.   
 
2. The carpeted areas in the main cafeteria shall be vacuumed during the evening 
shift after the Cafeteria closes.  This shall occur on a daily basis. They should be 
extracted quarterly. 
 
3. The established seating pattern shall be enforced, and all tables and chairs shall 
be returned to the proper configuration.  This shall include the Private Dining 
Room. 
 
4. The bottoms of the table bases should be swept clean of any debris as needed. 
 
5. The chair seats should be cleaned within an orderly schedule, focusing on any 
with visible stains. 
 
6. The Cafeteria tile flooring shall be mopped nightly, buffed on a weekly basis, 
and waxed regularly. 
  
7. The Diet Office tile should be stripped on a quarterly or on an as needed basis as 
determined by Housekeeping.  A weekly maintenance schedule should be in 
effect regarding the sweeping, mopping and trash removal in the diet office 
complex. The diet office team leader will report to Housekeeping when this is 
not completed. 
 
8. The walls around the dish return window need to be cleaned daily, along with 
the walls in the dining room (especially the areas adjacent to the tables). 
 
2. Non-Carpeted Floor Covering Cleaning Cycle/Treatment: 
 Non-carpeted floor coverings will be assessed to determine cleaning cycle/treatment. 
Housekeeping and Nutritional Services will both approve the plan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 