 1 
 
 
 
1 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Retail 
Subject:  Catered Functions Section:  
Date of Origination: March 1988 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: April 2015 Serial Code: NSRT01 
Date of Last Review: July 2009 
 
CATERED FUNCTIONS 
 
 
POLICY 
 
The Nutritional Services Department caters Special Functions for Internal Groups and 
Departments.  Outside organizations and groups will also be accommodated.  The Retail 
Manager of Nutritional Services determines if the Department can cater a function based on 
requested time schedule, number of people, and food items desired. The Nutritional Services 
Department will notify persons requesting special catering as to the decision of approval or 
disapproval.  A catering menu with prices is maintained within the Nutritional Services 
Department. Any department or unit desiring a Special Function should select the type of 
function desired from this menu when filing their special function request.  There will be a 
charge for all special catered events which will include the cost of food and labor.  All 
internal functions must be signed in advance by a Vice President and costs will be charged 
to the respective depart mental budgets.  This amount will be credited to the Nutritional 
Services Department budget as Special Catering Income.  All external organizations will 
pay the Nutritional Services Department by cash, check, or credit card.  This amount will be 
credited to the Nutritional Services budget as Special Catering Income. 
 
PROCEDURES 
 
The Nutritional Services Department has established the following procedures for Special 
Function catering. 
 
1. The Nutritional Services Director requires a 4 -7 business day written notice for 
submission of Special Function request form. 
2. This form must be submitted to t he nutritional services Retail Manager. (Forms 
available from Nutritional Service Accounts Clerk  or online through  the Special 
Function Office.) 
3. The form must be completely filled out specifying all pertinent requested 
information and signed by a Vice President or above.  
4. All menus for breakfasts, lunches, suppers, banquets, etc. will be planned by the 
Nutritional Services Department. 
5.    The Retail Manager and Executive Chef  will evaluate the requested function  2 
 
 
 
2 
including cost. 
6.   The Nutritional Services Department will notify individuals requesting a catered      
event of approval or disapproval. 
7. Individuals scheduling meeting rooms must make certain there is one half hour after 
and one hour before Functions when food is being requested.  (This is necessary for 
Housekeeping and Food Service set-up time.) 
8. The Nutritional Service Department requires verification of head count for a 
scheduled function one-day prior.  Each department will be charged for the number 
of people guaranteed by the fluctuations by the sponsoring department. Fluctuations 
greater than 5% require adjustments in food and/or service provided.   
10. The Nutritional Service Department requests the individual responsible for 
scheduled functions to notify Food Service when the meeting is over to enable 
Nutritional Service to clean up as soon as possible. 
11. Breakfast, Luncheon and Dinner meeting scheduled for the Private Dining rooms are 
welcome to pass thru the Cafeteria line after prior arrangement has been made with 
Nutritional Service. This will provide the departments with the greatest savings in 
cost.  Cafeteria prices and discounts are in effect.  A special sign-in sheet would be 
at the cashier's table.  No guarantees would be required if group is 25 persons or less; 
however, prior arrangement is still necessary.  Nutritional Service will be 
responsible for pick-up of the room. 
12. Department Directors will receive a monthly report indicating cost of Catered 
Functions. 
13. A copy of the costs associated with the function will be transmitted to Accounting in 
order for costs to be charged to the appropriate department. 
14. All Special Function requests are to be signed by the Vice President of the 
requesting department.  No functions can be honored without this level of 
administrative approval. 
15. Use of the cafeteria for special functions requires prior approval by the Nutritional 
Services Director.  Use of the cafeteria for special functions is discouraged due to 
the interruption of normal service to staff and clients.  The only exceptions are the 
regularly scheduled meetings of the medical staff and hospital -wide functions 
currently held in the cafeteria. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  3 
 
 
 
3 
STORAGE OF PARTY ITEMS/LOANING OF EQUIPMENT 
 
Nutritional Services Department policy does not permit the storage of food items for 
individuals, other departments, groups or organizations.  Heating or cooking of foods 
brought in from the outside or home will also not be permitted. 
 
The Nutritional Service Department is not equipped for the loaning of pots, pans, glasses, 
utensils, china, etc. or for providing paper goods for departmental or group functions. Under 
no circumstances will equipment be loaned to department personnel for personal use. 
 
OPEN HOUSE FUNCTIONS 
 
The Nutritional Service Department hosts two large open house functions annually at 
Christmas time and during National Hospital Week.  These occasions are planned and 
displayed rather elegantly. The primary purpose of these open house functions is to express 
appreciation to all Medical Center employees for their loyalty and dedication in furthering 
the mission and service of the Franciscan Sisters.  This eliminates departmental requests for 
an individual open house celebrating an anniversary, recognition of professional 
organizations or for marketing departmental services.  However, the Nutritional Service 
Department will host an open house for a newly opened unit or facility in the Medical 
Center. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 