Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Safety 
Subject:  Disaster Preparedness Section:  
Date of Origination: May 1987 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: April 2015 Serial Code: NSSF02 
Date of Last Review: July 2014 
 
Internal and External Disaster Plan 
 
 
In the event of an internal or external disaster, the nutritional service department has an 
established Department Call-In System. The Director of Nutritional Service (after being 
notified from the Administra tive Representative) calls the  Operations Manager, Retail 
Manager, Assistant Food Services Director, Executive Chef, Clinical Nutrition Manager, and 
the department secretary. They in turn have assignments for call in of employees which have 
been outlined in detail.  (Refer to Internal and External Disaster Plan, Department Call In 
System list of telephone numbers kept in the in the office. Each Managers and Supervisors is 
responsible for retaining a list of phone numbers for his/her employees.) 
 
There are 2 Disaster Teams:   
1) Activation (Team A) -during the disaster  
2) Recovery (Team B) - after the disaster 
 
The nutritional service department has an inventory in the ingredient storeroom at all times of 
provisions to feed a minimum of 5,000 or more people.  
 
Dry Goods 
Nutritional Services keeps a 5-day disaster supply on hand at all times to feed a patient 
population of 650.   
 
SYSCO supplies will deliver 48 hours after notification, the following disposable ware in 
order to be prepared for disaster situations. The need level has been established at 7,000 for 
each of the following: 
 
6” Black Plates 
9” Hinged Styrofoam Containers 
12” Plastic Soup Bowls 
Styrofoam Lids 
6 oz. Versa Cups 
Versa Lids 
 Napkins 
 Sandwich Bags 
 9 oz. Cold Cups 
 Disposable Spoons 
 3 Piece Flatware 
` Carry Out Bags 
 
 
 In addition, there is a letter of agreement with t he BNC Group warehouse to supply all 
disposable items per our par level in case our normal vendor can’t supply us for an additional 
two days. 
 
Food Items  
 
Par levels have been established to order upon the approach of a hurricane.  The order is 
sufficient for up to a Category 2-3 storm. If the expected storm exceeds this level, additional 
supplies will ordered.   
 
The par levels included in our Hurricane Time Line as well as available in the disaster plan. 
Special attention is given to foods which are able to be prepared and served cold such as 
cereal, sandwiches, and salads in case the kitchen does not have any emergency power for 
cooking. Food storage and warehousing agreements have been made to assure a seven day 
supply. 
 
Arrangements have been made with SYSCO our prime vendor through our Sodexo 
Purchasing Agreement.  They guarantee delivery to Healthcare facilities as a priority.  A 
yearly letter of agreement is kept on file. Orders have been pre-determined and are on file 
with SYSCO.  SYSCO will contact us 72 hours prior to the anticipated occurrence. 
 
The disaster order will be completed annually prior to June 1st.  This order includes 
minimum of 600 gallons of 1-gallon water.  SYSCO will furnish hospital with water in 1-
gallon containers if necessary. (See water supply priority for disaster).  
 
There is a letter of agreement with dairy supplier, guaranteeing a special refrigerated truck be 
placed on the loading dock with an extra four day supply of milk. This is in addition to three 
day supply that will be in the dairy walk-in. The supplier will also make available a tanker 
truck of water for use by food service for sanitation, preparation, and hydration of food service 
staff. 
 
Par levels are developed and in the disaster plan for oral and enteral feedings. Nutritional 
supplements for a seven day supply. Milk, canned juice, bread, canned tuna, canned salmon, 
cheese, franks, ham, boneless chicken (for chicken salad), canned soup, canned chili, peanut 
butter, jelly, crackers, cookies, canned fruit, fresh fruit (apples, pears, and orange), dry cereal, 
potato chips are secured for a five day supply. 
 
The ice machine(s) will be run on emergency power. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Internal Disaster 
 
A. Electrical Power Shut Down    
 
If and when this should occur the Nutritional Services department will be able to operate on 
limited emergency power.  The nutritional service department will have steam power to make 
soups and heat canned entrees. Some freezers and walk-in coolers also operate on Emergency 
Power. Elevator service to floors for transportation of food carts will be available through 
emergency power. The patient tray line is on emergency power for the assembly of trays or 
bulk food as needed. All tube feeding pumps are backed by battery power.  Emergency outlets 
are available on all patient units.  Tubing and all equipment for bolus feeding is available if 
needed. 
 
B. Fire 
 
The department assembly point in case of a fire evacuation would be outside in front of the 
housekeeping department.  An isolated fire on a floor or other area of the hospital would be 
handled in the following manner by the nutritional service department: If Elevator service 
would not be available, nutritional service personnel would be assigned to form a human chain 
in cooperation with nursing service and team members designated from the personnel pool. 
“Trays” would consist of clear plastic hinged boxes with sandwiches, shelf stable fruit and 
applesauce, shelf stable juice, sandwich, cookies/crackers, napkins and plastic ware.  This 
type of packaging makes the transport of food vertically a possibility.  Food will be carried in 
bulk or trays depending on the time of the emergency.   
 
In the event of evacuation, the Nutritional Service department would prepare to feed cold 
foods consisting of sandwiches, fruit, and beverage when necessary. 
 
C. Evacuation 
The Incident Commander, Safety Officer or designee will make the decision to evacuate.   
If evacuation is necessary, the Food Services department will follow the incident command 
protocols and evacuate to the designated areas.  Follow evacuation routes.  Do not use 
elevators.   
 
 
 
External Disaster 
 
In the event of an external disaster, the nutritional service department will be prepared to feed 
victims and their families.  For a minor disaster the present patient nutritional service unit and 
Cafeteria would be able to accommodate the additional numbe r of people.  If the disaster 
occurred during the operational day the nutritional service department will immediately gear 
their efforts to feed an additional number of people.   
 
If the disaster occurred between closing and opening hours, the nutritional service department 
will be alerted by administration and the department through the Department Call-In System.  Immediate arrangements will be made to serve from the Cafeteria. 
 
In the event a severe external disaster effecting hospital operations such as electrical power 
not available, emergency procedures will be used.  Nutritional Services will immediately 
inventory all food and paper products. Foods will be utilized to insure a minimum loss of 
perishable food items and depending on staff availability. The menu could potentially be 
limited to cold foods for the first 24 hours. Patient Services will be the priority.  
Hand transportation of food in bulk may be needed to nursing units. Food will be distributed 
to patient’s rooms by a cooperative effort between nutritional service and nursing service. 
 
The cafeteria’s menu will be determined insuring minimum loss of perishable food items and 
depending on staffing. The menu could potentially be limited to cold foods for the first 24 
hours. Cooking will be limited to the simplest preparation possible. All foods will be served 
on disposable paper goods any time hospital operations are effected by any type of major 
disaster. 
 
         
DEPARTMENTAL DISASTER CALL IN 
 
The Nutritional Services employee disaster call in telephone tree will be updated each 
month by the Secretary in the accounts office.  Each manager shall have a copy at his or her 
home.  There will also be a master copy in the office kept in a confidential manner.  It shall 
remain locked with the supervisor on duty having access to the key.  
 
Menus for Disaster: 
Nutritional Service department will operate on emergency power using the current menus 
or menus with slight modification, depending upon situation and status of inventory.  If 
the loss of power continues for a significant period of time, emergency procedures used 
for internal fires or severe external disasters will be instituted. 
 
If meals can still be prepared in the kitchen and provided to patients and staff, the 
menu will be converted to Chef-Select menu for all patients. As the staff has time to 
evaluate food stock that is on hand, the menu may vary from the sample menus in 
order to utilize stocks, including perishable items, leftovers, and frozen foods. 
All meals served will adhere to the following patterns:
• Breakfast 
o Hot or cold cereal 
o Protein/Peanut Butter 
o Bread 
o Fruit 
o Milk 
o Juice  
o Margarine 
o Coffee or tea 
• Lunch 
o Soup or salad 
o Protein entrée 
o Starch appropriate with entrée 
o Fruit  
o Milk  
o Dessert  
o Juice  
o Coffee or tea 
• Dinner 
o Soup or salad 
o Protein entrée 
o Starch appropriate with entrée 
o Vegetable 
o Milk 
o Dessert  
o Juice  
o Coffee or tea  
*Juices, canned soups, broth and pudding will be served on liquid and pureed diets. 
These are only sample menus in case it would become necessary to use them.  However, 
the first priority foods to move out would be all perishable cooked cold foods that could 
be utilized, such as cooked roast beef, cooked turkey, cooked ham, meat salads, custard,           
gelatin, ice cream, etc.  The cafeteria menu would consist of all similar cold food items 
and any existing already prepared salads and desserts. 
 
B.  No Safe Water (such as in nuclear emergencies, some other disasters) 
   
A safe source of water is available from Sysco and Coca Cola, this water will be used on 
a priority basis. 
 
Water Supply Priority for Disaster: 
 
The Nutritional Services shall have a limited water supply in the event of need 
(approximately 600 gallons in1500, 16 oz. individual servings of water from Coca Cola).  
The nutritional service department will require 150 gallons per day for the duration of a 
disaster.  Each additional day for the duration of a disaster would require 150 gallons of 
water per day. The nutritional service department has established the following priorities 
for utilization of the water allotment. 
 
     1.  Patients receiving tube feeding requiring water usage in preparation. 
 
     2.  Hand washing water for food preparation and food handler employees.  
          Anti-bacterial and/or hand sanitizer will be utilized instead of water if hands are 
          not visibly soiled. 
 
     3.  Water for food preparation to be limited to the simplest preparation possible.  (In 
severe disaster menu will be limited to food that can be eaten cold for the first 24 
hours.)  Other liquids for cooking and service will be obtained by saving juices 
from canned fruits and vegetables, using canned juices, evaporated milk, canned 
soup, and canned carbonated beverages. 
 
     4.  Drinking water for food service employees. 
      
5. Sanitation of patient trays and food holding equipment and utensils. 
 
Community Disaster Plan - Food Service Supplies  
 
1. Nutritional Services will have on hand food supplies to immediately accommodate 
500 people at a moment’s notice.   
2. The plan is to immediately set up two special function food tables for 250 each with 
sandwiches, fruit, soft drinks; water, (if the emergency does not impact water usage). 
3. Set up three ice chest located in the special function's area with water, sports drinks, 
and soft drinks. 4. Deliver the two food carts and three ice chests to the back entrance of the ER to be 
distributed to designated area.  
5. Call the Coca-Cola representative for back-up water and sports drinks if inventory on 
hand is not sufficient for duration of disaster. 
6. Call sandwich vendor if staffing levels are impacted by the disaster and/or not enough 
products on hand to produce sandwiches in department. 
 
**Note: Vendor Phone List is attached and updated annually or as needed by production 
manager. 
 
 
Equipment on Emergency Power: 
 
Dairy Walk-in Cooler 
Freezer Walk-in Cooler 
Thawing Walk-in Cooler 
Produce Walk-in Cooler 
 
 
 
 
120 Volt Plugs: 
 
Dairy Lights & Blowers 
Seco Wash 
Hood Lights 
Freezer Lights 
Produce Cooler Lights 
Slicer 
Ice Machine 
Tray Lines 
 
 
Hurricane Preparedness 
 
General Employee Guidelines in the Event of a Hurricane 
 
 
Hurricane Check List 
 
1. Administration, security alerts department of possible severe weather. 
2. Food and Nutrition Services will assess supplies and monitor the alerts. 
3. 72 hours prior to the anticipated start of the possible severe weather, Sysco will 
contact us for approval to deliver our pre-ordered disaster order. 
4. Management Team (Director, Operations Manager, Patient Services Manager, Retail 
Manager, Executive Chef, Production Manager, & Clinical Nutrition Manger) will 
meet to determine which other orders will need to be placed and each manager will 
be assigned orders to place. 
 
• Disposables have been pre-ordered as part of the SYSCO Disaster Order. Need to have 
at least 7,000 hinged containers, cups, silverware, packets, and napkins. BNC Inc. will 
be contacted by Central Supply for additional paper ware as needed. 
• Gallon Water –SYSCO will supply 600 gallons in 1-gallon bottles to be used for 
kitchen sanitation and distribution to the floors with food supplies.  Abita is on standby 
to back up Sysco. • Water 10 ounce – Coke delivers 1,500 bottles of Dasani water.  This is for back-up 
Patient and Employee needs. Community Coffee is back up as well as 1,500 bottles of 
juice from Coke. 
• Juice – A minimum of 8,000 shelf stable PC will be ordered from BC as well as 1,500 
bottles of juice from Coke. 
• Sodas – A minimum of 3,000 assorted cans and bottles of Coke product and Shasta 
sodas will be ordered from Coke as part of the disaster order. 
• Ice – Reddy Ice will bring a freezer merchandiser box, which will be stocked with 
1,000 lbs.-3,000 lbs. of cube ice.  The ice machines are connected to emergency power. 
Back ice is for if water is not potable. Ice will be stored in clean bags for 24 hours out 
from the anticipated start of possible severe weather. 
• Bread- The bread order will be a minimum of 600 loaves. The order will be placed 48 
hours prior.  SYSCO is the backup vendor, and the disaster order should include an 
additional 200 loaves. 
• Cereal- the SYSCO disaster order will include a minimum of 4,000 boxes of individual 
boxes of cereal. 
• Milk – The dairy vendor has been contacted and has agreed to leave a refrigerated truck 
of milk on the loading dock set in place until we did not need it anymore.  They have 
also agreed to back up our water supply by delivering of a tank truck for potable water 
for food service. 
• Produce – Capitol City and Sysco will deliver non-perishable fruit 5,000 pieces 
ordered 48 hours prior. Extra cut lettuce (up to 15 cases) and 40lbs. cherry tomatoes. 
• Canned Fruit – PC shelf stable assorted fruit totaling 8,000. 
• Sliced Deli Meats – 600 lbs. sliced turkey, 300 lbs. ham, and 300 lbs. beef and 
minimum 300 lbs. of canned tuna. 
• Potato chips – 25 cases of assorted chips. 
• Oral and enteral supplements - A five day supply of Nepro, Glucerna shakes, Ensure, 
as well as Diabetisource AC, Jevity 1.2, and Nepro tube feedings will be ordered by the 
Clinical Nutrition Manager.  The Clinical Nutrition Manager will conduct a physical 
inventory 72 hours prior to the anticipated arrival of severe weather. 
• Linen – The Linen Department will be contacted 72 hours prior to obtain additional 
cleaning towels. One case of disposable towels will be ordered from Sysco for back-up. 
• Sanitation – Extra 10 gallons quat sanitizer was ordered in along with extra 12 gal 
bleach. 
• Sterno – 4 cases of Sterno Canned Heat will be ordered with the disaster order. 
• Cafeteria emergency menu signs will be printed. 
• Pocket calculators – The department will purchase four hand-held calculators for the 
Cafeteria by June 1st. 
 
Department Communications 
By June 1st- Department in-service with all Nutritional Services Staff to explain the 
disaster plan, review team assignments (Activation Team and Recovery Team), and 
communication plan prior to storm and after storm. 
 
 OLOL DISASTER CONTINGENCY FOOD SERVICE PLAN 2014-2015 
BREAKFAST Regular Soft Dysphagia Controlled Carb Cardiac Puree Renal 
  1 box Dry Cereal 1 box Cornflakes, 
Cheerios, or Rice Krispies 
1 pkg instant Oatmeal 1 box Cheerios Dry Cereal  1 box Dry Cereal 1 pkg instant Cream of 
Wheat 
1 box Cornflakes, 
Cheerios, or Rice Krispies 
  1  Whole Wheat Bread 1  Refined  Wheat Bread 1 each Applesauce 1  Whole Wheat Bread 1  Whole Wheat Bread   1  Refined Wheat Bread 
  1 each Margarine 1 each Margarine 1 each Margarine 1 each Margarine 1 each Margarine 1 each Margarine 2 each Margarine 
  1 each Jelly 1 each Jelly 1 each Jelly 1 each Diet Jelly 1 each Jelly 1 each Applesauce 1 each Jelly 
  8 oz Lowfat Milk 8 oz Lowfat Milk 8 oz Lowfat Milk 8 oz Lowfat Milk 8 oz Lowfat Milk 8 oz Lowfat Milk 4 oz Milk 
  4 oz Juice 4 oz Juice 4 oz Juice   4 oz Juice 4 oz Juice 4 oz Juice (Apple or 
Cranberry) 
Thick Liquids 8 oz Thick Milk 8 oz Thick Milk 8 oz Thick Milk 8 oz Thick Milk 8 oz Thick Milk 8 oz Thick Milk 4 oz Thick Milk 
8 oz Thick Juice 8 oz Thick Juice 8 oz Thick Juice   8 oz Thick Juice 8 oz Thick Juice 8 oz Thick Apple or 
Cranberry Juice 
LUNCH/DINNER Regular Soft Dysphagia Controlled Cardiac Puree Renal 
  6 oz Tomato Soup 6 oz Tomato Soup 6 oz Tomato Soup 6 oz Tomato Soup 6 oz Low Sodium Tomato 
Soup 
6 oz Tomato Soup 4 oz LS Chicken Broth 
vegetarian = mac & chs Turkey sandwich  Turkey sandwich  Tuna salad Turkey sandwich Turkey sandwich 4 oz Pureed Chicken Turkey sandwich on white 
  4oz Green Beans  4oz Green Beans  4oz Green Beans (Diced) 4oz Green Beans  4oz Green Beans  4 oz Pureed Carrots 4oz Green Beans  
  1 each Margarine 1 each Margarine 1 each Margarine 1 each Margarine 1 each Margarine  4oz applesauce 1 each Margarine 
  8 oz Lowfat Milk 8 oz Lowfat Milk 8 oz Lowfat Milk 8 oz Lowfat Milk 8 oz Lowfat Milk 8 oz Lowfat Milk   
  4 oz Juice 4 oz Juice 4 oz Juice   4 oz Juice 4 oz Juice 4 oz Apple or Cranberry 
Juice 
  Cookie Cookie Applesauce 4 oz Canned Fruit 4 oz Canned Fruit 4 oz Ice Cream 4 oz Canned Pears 
Thick Liquids 6 oz Thick Tomato Soup 6 oz Thick Tomato Soup 6 oz Thick Tomato Soup 6 oz Thick Tomato Soup 6 oz Thick Low Sodium 
Tomato Soup 
6 oz Thick Tomato Soup 4 oz Thick LS Chicken 
Broth 
8 oz Thick Milk 8 oz Thick Milk 8 oz Thick Milk 8 oz Thick Milk 8 oz Thick Milk 8 oz Thick Milk 4 oz Thick Milk 
8 oz Thick Juice 8 oz Thick Juice 8 oz Thick Juice   8 oz Thick Juice 8 oz Thick Juice 8 oz Thick Apple or 
Cranberry Juice 
4 oz Canned Pears 4 oz Canned Pears       4 oz Pureed Fruit    