OC-004 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Coroner’s Cases Policy Reference #: OrgClin-004 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 1, 1987 Last Review Date: November 4, 2024 
Last Revision Date:   July 26, 2021 
 
PURPOSE 
To define deaths that are to be reported to the Coroner.  
 
POLICY 
A physician or nurse must report all patient deaths to the Coroner’s Office.  
 
Information needed regarding the patient’s cause of death and/or medical history when calling the 
Coroner’s office may include but is not limited to the following circumstances listed below: 
▪ Suspicious, unexpected, or unusual deaths. 
▪ Sudden or violent deaths. 
▪ Deaths due to unknown or obscure causes or in any unusual manner. 
▪ Bodies found dead. 
▪ Deaths due to suspected suicide or homicide. 
▪ Deaths in which poison is suspected. 
▪ Any death from natural causes occurring in a hospital under 24 hours of admission Deaths 
following an injury or accident, either old or recent. 
▪ Deaths due to drowning, hanging, burns, electrocution, gunshot wounds, stabs or cutting, 
lightning, starvation, radiation exposure, alcoholism, addiction, tetanus, strangulation, 
suffocation or smothering.  
▪ Deaths due to trauma from whatever cause. 
▪ Deaths due to criminal means or by casualty. 
▪ Deaths in prison or while serving a sentence. 
▪ Deaths due to virulent contagious disease that might be caused by or cause a public health 
hazard, including acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). 
 
PROCEDURE 
1. All patient deaths will be reported to the designated Parish Coroner’s office. 
 *When death appears to have been due to natural causes.       
     
2. All patient deaths will be reported to the Coroner of the parish where the crime or accident occurred. 
*When a death occurs and a crime or accident is suspected (i.e. Trauma patient), the Coroner of 
the parish in which the incident occurred should be contacted. 
 
3. It is the decision of the Parish Coroner whether to release the body to the funeral home of the OC-004 
Page 2 of 3 
family's choice or to order an autopsy. 
4. Do not move the body from where it expires for any reason. No cleansing of the body should be 
done and all tubes, drains, IV lines, leads, etc. should be left in place. Lines, tubes, leads, etc. may be 
cut from attached equipment, but do not remove from the body, unless directed otherwise by the 
Coroner. Do not place the body in a body bag or move it from its current location (bed to stretcher or 
stretcher to bed). Do not move the body to the morgue.  
5. Any patient who is Dead on Arrival (DOA) should not have clothing or valuables removed from the 
body without approval from the Coroner.  The clothing and articles on the body may provide 
important facts to the Coroner or law enforcement personnel regarding the circumstances relating to 
the death. 
 
Documentation 
Documentation in the medical record will be completed via the patient expiration note and should 
include the following: 
▪ Date and Time of Death 
▪ The Physician Pronouncing the Patient Deceased 
▪ The Time the Coroner is Notified 
▪ Coroner's Name 
▪ Coroner's Disposition of Body or Release 
▪ Name of the Funeral Home and Time Notified 
▪ Disposition of Valuables and Clothing 
 
Autopsy of a Patient Deemed a Coroner’s Case 
1. In a Coroner's case, the consent of the victim's family is not required.  The family is not responsible 
for the expense of the autopsy. 
2. A completed copy of the medical record is provided by Health Information Management (HIM) with 
the Coroner's order, disposition of valuables and clothing, and the family's choice of funeral home 
will accompany the body. 
3. The Coroner's permission is needed to release any articles of clothing or valuables to the family 
belonging to the patient when the death occurred. 
4. If the autopsy is to be performed by the Coroner at another facility, the body will be placed in the 
morgue. The Coroner will be responsible for making arrangements for the autopsy and arranging for 
transport of the body to another facility. 
5. For an autopsy requested by the family or patient's physician, see OC-037 Death of a 
Patient/Autopsy Pathology or Patient Care Services notifies the funeral home once the autopsy is 
complete. 
 
 
 
 
 
 OC-004 
Page 3 of 3 
REFERENCES: 
 
LA.R.S.13:5713 
 
LA.R.S. 13:5706  
 
OLOLRMC Policy - HIMR22 – Release of Information 
 
OLOLRMC Policy - HIMR37 – Coroner’s Request for Medical Information 