 
 
OC-003 
Page 1 of 5 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Code Blue / Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation 
Policy Reference #: OrgClin-003 
Supersedes #: EA003; AD/B/040 
Date of Origination: May, 1985 Last Review Date: March 27, 2024 
Last Revision Date: April 8, 2024 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define the Code Blue process and delineate the responsibilities of participating health care providers in 
order to ensure the safest and best outcome for the patient, employee or visitor while considering the 
special confines to the response time and resource utilization of our staff. 
 
POLICY 
A. A code team is continuously on-call to provide personnel and equipment to the following areas: 
1. Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) Hospital: 
▪ inpatient  
▪ ambulatory 
▪ observation 
▪ Emergency Mental Behavioral Health (EMBH) Location – 2nd floor Main Building 
▪ designated outpatient departments 
▪ all areas housed within the main facility 
▪ all areas of the Heart and Vascular Institute (HVI) operated by OLOL 
▪ Sky bridges  
2. Including the following areas adjacent to the main building: 
▪ Pre-Surgery Diagnostic Center (PAAC Facilities /Lab in Suite 112; Radiology Area in 
rear of Suite 111; Registration Desk and Waiting Area in MOB I 1st floor) 
▪ OLOL Advanced Diagnostics– MOB 1 1st floor Suite 116 
▪ Sleep Center, EEG – Suite 216 and 214 MOB 1 Second floor 
▪ OLOL GAMMA Knife or adjacent Radiation Services area- located in the Treatment 
Rooms of Mary Bird Perkins 1st Floor  
 
B. OLOL personnel shall initiate resuscitation procedures and call a Code Blue for all cardiac arrest or 
life-threatening situations unless the attending physician has written an order to the contrary. 
 
C. Dual lock crash carts are restocked by central supply to ensure all supplies are in place and supply 
drawers are locked.  To ensure medications are secure, pharmacy restocks and locks medication 
drawers.  Carts are placed in areas that allow for staff observation when not in use. 
 
D. ED Physicians shall have either Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) and/or Advanced Cardiac Life 
Support (ACLS) and Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS). Code Team RN’s responding to code 
blue will have ACLS or PALS. 
 
PROCEDURE 
1. The employee first identifying the emergency situation presses the code blue button on the nurse call 
console in the room to immediately alert PBX and an employee dials the emergency number 5-3333 
when using a landline, or in the event the telephone system is out of service, the employee is to use a  
 
OC-003 
Page 2 of 5 
 
cellular phone to dial 225-765-3333. During a CODE PURPLE the nurse call console may be the only 
way to alert PBX and the Code Team of a situation. 
 
2. The employee informs: 
a. The operator that a Code Blue needs to be called and the location of the emergency situation.  
b. In the event the victim is a child 15 years or younger, the employee will tell the operator that a 
Pediatric Code Blue needs to be called and the location of the emergency situation. . 
  
 
3. Basic life support procedures will be initiated and continued until the arrival of a physician and/or an 
order is received from a physician to cease resuscitation efforts.  
 
4. The ECU physician shall direct the "code" until the arrival of the patient's physician or designee. 
 
5. Emergency Equipment 
a. Crash cart obtained from nearest location; for pediatric codes, universal crash carts will be 
used. 
b. Prior to defibrillation ensure that the oxygen source is removed from the patient’s bed. 
c. The charge nurse or designee will check Monitor/Defibrillator battery function once a month 
and document on the Crash Cart Check Sheet.  
 
6. Personnel assures that resuscitation equipment is available at the site of the emergency.  
 
Location of Crash Cart Areas of coverage for emergency response 
1 North Psych Unit Pre-Surgery Diagnostic Center Medical Office 
Building I (MOB) 1st floor (PAAC 
Facilities/Outpatient Lab and Radiology) 
 
HVAU HVI lobby 1st floor, HVI family waiting 2nd floor  
Sky bridge to Garage II   
Main PACU Critical Care/OR Waiting area, 2nd floor and MOB I 
Suite 216 
St. Mary’s Tower PACU St. Mary’s Tower Waiting Room 
  
Universal cart locations Main PACU, Tower PACU, ED, Trauma 3, Trauma 
4, Cath Lab 3, SMAU and Main OR, Tower OR, CT, 
and MRI 
     
7. For areas on the hospital’s property not specified in this policy, personnel will follow the directives of 
the Emergency Services Policy, ADM-01 on Triage and Medical Screening Exam (Number 1, A-D). 
 
8. Appropriately trained personnel respond to the Code Blue and constitute the Code team: 
▪ Physician 
▪ Code Team RN 
▪ House Manager/Nurse Manager or Designee 
▪ Code Team RN Recorder 
▪ Unit Nurse assigned to the patient and other unit staff 
▪ Respiratory Therapist  
 
OC-003 
Page 3 of 5 
 
▪ Laboratory Personnel  
▪ Attendant       
▪ Pharmacist      
▪ Pastoral Care for family support 
▪ Additional staff should respond when necessary or as requested by the Code team.  
     
9. Procedure for Code Blue called in Mary Bird Perkins Radiation and Gamma knife.  
a. The person first identifying the emergency situation dials the emergency number 765-3333 (all 
digits must be dialed from any phone outside OLOL hospital), and 225-765-3333 if using a 
cellular phone. The employee informs the Operator that a code blue needs to be called 
overhead to the location of “MBP Radiation, 1st floor”.  
b. Mary Bird Perkins staff must be alerted of emergency situation. 
c. The person identifying the emergency situation initiates appropriate emergency procedures 
(CPR, etc.) until the code team arrives. 
d. Mary Bird Perkins staff will bring a continuous suction device and vital signs machine and 
crash cart to the Code. OLOL Code Team will respond in usual fashion.   
 
10. Procedure for employees and/or visitors – If an employee identifies an emergency situation involving 
another employee or a visitor, the employee dials the emergency number 5-3333 or in the event the 
telephone system is out of service, the employee is to use cellular phone to dial 225-765-3333.  The 
employee informs: 
a. The operator that a Code Blue needs to be called and the location of the emergency situation.  
b. In the event the victim is a child (under the age of 15); the employee will tell the operator that a 
Pediatric Code Blue needs to be called and the location of the emergency situation.   
c. The employee first identifying the emergency situation initiates appropriate emergency 
procedures as applicable until the Code Team arrives. 
 
 
Responsibilities of Staff During a Code  
11. The patient’s unit nurse and/or other unit staff as appropriate shall 
a. Call Code Blue and initiate CPR    
b. Have crash cart and cardiac board brought to patient’s room/location, bring AED/Defibrillator 
if available and connect leads/pads to patient 
c. Remain with the patient to provide pertinent patient information/history. 
d. Notify attending physician of events. 
e. Ensure patient’s medical record is available. Record resuscitation events on “Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation Record”. 
f. Notify family. 
g. At conclusion of the code, assure the following has occurred: 
i. A stocked cart from Central Supply has been exchanged for the used crash cart.  
ii. Completed documentation of the code will be recorded in the patient’s EMR. The 
nursing unit of the code blue is responsible for entering Safety events or improvements 
from the code as they may occur.  These events should be entered in the Hospital Safety 
Event Reporting system. 
h. Communicates with coroner and funeral home in the event of a death 
 
12. Emergency Care Unit Physician 
a. Direct Code Team until attending physician arrives. 
  
 
OC-003 
Page 4 of 5 
 
13. Any physician in the hospital may direct the Code Team until the responding code team physician 
arrives. 
 
14. Critical Care Code Team Nurse – two nurses respond to all Code Blue calls 
a. Initiates appropriate life support protocol.  
b. Serves as Code Team Leader until physician arrives and serves as recorder for the Code. 
c. Responsible for directing Code Team Members with continuous assessment of situation. 
d. After resuscitation efforts are initiated, remain with and accompany the patient to a higher level 
of care unit such as ICU or PACU. 
e. For Pediatric Code Blue, the Code Team Nurse will respond from the ED and PACU nursing 
teams.  
 
15. House Manager/Nurse Manager or Designee 
a. May assume duties of inserting IVs. 
b. Controls traffic during code. 
c. Assists with family until Pastoral Care arrives. 
d. Arranges for critical care bed and/or assists with transport of patient to critical care unit as 
needed. 
e. Obtains written consent from family if autopsy requested by family or physician. 
 
16. Respiratory Therapist 
a. Sets up suction equipment. 
b. Establishes airway (may include intubation) and maintains adequate ventilation. 
c. Obtains arterial blood gases (ABG) as directed. 
d. Assists with CPR as needed. 
e. Assists with transport of patient to critical care unit. 
 
17. Pharmacist 
a. Dispenses emergency medications. 
b. Prepares IV fluids. 
c. Obtains additional medications as needed. 
 
18. Attendant performs chest compressions and assists with transport of patient to designated area. 
 
19. Laboratory personnel draws requested blood work and delivers specimen to laboratory. 
 
20. Pastoral Care attends to the family and/or patient. 
 
21. Checking the Crash Cart 
a. The crash cart is checked and documented on the log daily, when there is patient care on the 
unit, by the charge nurse or designee, and the completed crash cart log is retained on the unit.  
b. If any lock is missing, notify the appropriate department             
c. Notify Pharmacy when meds have expired. 
d. Notify Central Supply if any supply is expired. 
 
22. Crash Cart Exchanges Restocking of Crash Cart (after a code) 
a. If a dual lock crash cart has been used, the cart will be resealed with the appropriate locks, 
indicating that the cart has been used.  These locks will be placed in the second medication 
drawer and the third drawer (in emesis basin).  
 
OC-003 
Page 5 of 5 
 
b. Central will pick up the used cart from the unit and will bring it to the pharmacy for the 
medication trays to be exchanged.  A patient charge sheet will always accompany the cart 
before it is brought to the pharmacy.   
c. Pharmacy staff will break the lock (used after a code) and remove both drug trays. 
d. Pharmacy staff will exchange the used medication trays with new unused trays. Pharmacy staff 
will attach a tag detailing the date of the earliest expiring medication and lock the medication 
portion of the crash cart.    
    
23. Review and exchange of expiring medication trays  
a. Crash Carts are checked by pharmacy each month for pending expiration of drugs. 
b. Once expiring trays are identified, pharmacy staff will go to each crash cart to exchange the 
expiring medication trays with new trays with appropriate expiration dates 
c. After the exchange is complete, pharmacy will attach a crash cart tag with updated expiration 
information and lock the medication portion of the crash cart.  
 
 
   