OC-017 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Patient Chart Documentation Policy Reference #: OrgClin-017 
Supersedes #: AD/B/047; OC-008 
Date of Origination: June, 2000 Last Review Date:  September 9, 2024 
Last Revision Date:  February 28, 2022 
 
KEYWORDS: Hold the Ctrl key and click on a link below to view that information 
General Information;  Handwritten Documentation;  Documentation Errors;  Electronic Patient 
Documentation;  Electronic Order Entry;  Incorrect Physician Orders;   
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to define procedures associated with Patient Chart Documentation apply to 
facilities located within the Baton Rouge Market of the Franciscan Missionaries (BR Market FMOLHS) 
of Our Lady Health System (FMOLHS) which includes: Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical 
Center, Our Lady of the Lake Ascension,  Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital, Our Lady of the 
Lake Livingston, and Our Lady of the Lake North Baton Rouge . BR Market FMOLHS documentation 
standards, universal to all disciplines that document in the patient’s medical record.   
 
POLICY 
A. All handwritten entries into the patient’s medical record must meet the minimum standards listed in 
the procedures section below. 
B. Stamped signatures are not acceptable on any medical record. If a signature stamp is found on any 
medical record documentation, the physician must be contacted for clarification. The person 
clarifying the order will document the clarification as a telephone order.  
C. Documentation of errors and omissions should be corrected as close to the time of the occurrence or 
the event(s) as possible. 
 
PROCEDURES 
 
General Information 
1. The patient chart is a legal document; it provides a current, concise description of the patient's 
status with minimal duplication of information.   
2. The patient chart serves as a communication tool among disciplines. 
3.  Entries into the patient chart should be made at the time the event occurred.          
EXCEPTION: Entries into the patient chart beyond the time the event occurred must be 
identified as such, with appropriate date and time of occurrence, and time of late entry. 
 
Standard for Handwritten Documentation: BR Market FMOLHS are paper-light facilities. Electronic 
documentation/order entry will be used first. In the event of technology downtime, the Downtime 
process will be followed. 
1. No original part of the patient’s medical record is to be discarded under any circumstances. 
2. Charting entries are made in permanent black ink. 
3. The “Do Not Use” abbreviations and symbols are not to be used in any handwritten OC-017 
Page 2 of 3 
documentation (see Org/Clin/061 for prohibited abbreviations and symbols). 
4. Each page of documentation (including front and back of duplex forms) must be labeled with 
the patient’s full name, date, and medical record number. 
5. Each entry will include the date and time. 
6. All entries must have times and dates. All pages must be dated.  
7. The writer of the entry is clearly identifiable. All clinical documentation is signed with the first 
initial, last name, and credentials of the person making the entry.  
i. Licensed personnel are to use the sur-name that appears on his/her current license.  
8. The entry is legible to health care providers other than the writer. Illegible entries will require 
follow-up clarification. 
i. Illegible physician orders, signatures, or use of any BR Market FMOLHS 
prohibited abbreviations in an order will be clarified by contacting the ordering 
physician. 
ii. The clinician will document the clarified order on the physician order sheet prior to 
carrying out the order, except in patient emergency situations. 
iii. A copy of the “Illegible Orders” along with the clarification order will be sent to 
the Medical Staff office. 
9. Late entries are to be documented by a notation of “Late Entry” or “Addendum” with the time 
and date. Do not attempt to insert entries between the lines of previous documentation. 
10. Documentation will reflect assessment, planning, intervention (including patient and family 
education), and evaluation of the patient. 
11. The documentation system will provide a format in which information can be easily retrieved 
for audit and/or research purposes. 
12. Departmental guidelines for each documentation form are to be followed. 
 
Documentation Errors 
1. Documentation errors made on a manual entry during the patient's visit are corrected manually 
by: 
i. Draw a single line through the error 
ii. Write "void" or "in error" above the entry 
iii. Record the correct information 
iv. Record the date (month, day, year), time and signature (first initial, last name and 
credentials) of individual noting. 
2. Documentation omissions that need to be added to the manual record during the patient's visit 
are done by recording the entry after the last entry in the current documentation form. The entry 
should be labeled “Late Charting”, record the date (month, day, year), time and signature (first 
initial, last name and credentials) of individual noting. 
3. An incorrect entry should be lined through once. The individual making the error will initial and 
date next to the error and add notation regarding why the error was made, such as "wrong 
chart", etc. 
4. Do not attempt to erase an error. Liquid paper (white-out) or any other means to completely OC-017 
Page 3 of 3 
erase an entry is strictly forbidden as a method of correcting errors in the medical record. 
 
Electronic Patient Record 
1. To correct a mistake in filed flowsheet data, whether it was manually entered or recorded 
through a device, select the value that you want to change and enter the new value. A record of 
the change appears in the Show Audit section of the Details report.  
2. Documentation errors and omissions/corrections that are noted more than 48 hours after the 
time the information was collected, but prior to patient discharge, require notification and 
approval by Risk Management and Health Information Management (HIM) supervision before 
a correction is made in the legal record. Staff will need to notify their department manager to 
begin this process. 
3. Charting for another caregiver is allowed during official computer downtime. Managers may be 
required to chart for another caregiver under special technical circumstances as designated by 
Clinical Information Services. During procedures, nurses may document for a physician (i.e., 
circulating nurse, Endoscopy, Code Blue). 
 
Incorrect Electronic Order Entry 
In the event that an order was entered in the electronic medical record in error, the physician should be 
notified, the facts related to the event documented and a safety report completed. Also, the affected 
department should be notified to correct charges. 
1. If an error is noted prior to the order being carried out: “Void” the incorrect order. 
2. If an error is noted after an order has been carried out: 
i. For single-event order(s) that have been carried out, the order is completed, and no 
action may be taken to change that order.   
ii. For ongoing active orders (i.e. with an ongoing frequency), the order should be 
“voided.”  The “void” action will remove any uncharted prior or future tasks related to 
this order.  
 
Incorrect Physician:  If the wrong physician has been entered as being responsible for the doctor's order 
and has not been previously corrected, the individual discovering the error should report it to a 
Supervisor in the Health Information Management (HIM) Department. 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
1. TJC Standard RC.01.03.01 EP 2 
 