1 
OC.016_ Organ, Tissue, and Eye Donation 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational / Clinical  
SUBJECT:  
Organ, Tissue, and Eye Donation 
PAGES: 
10 
REPLACES POLICY DATE: 
08/28/2019 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE:  11/01/1980  
REVIEW DATE:  
5/30/2023                  
REVISED DATE: 7/08/2024 
POLICY NUMBER:  
OC016 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOLH”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”). 
PURPOSE: 
To encourage and provide the means whereby those, who wish to do so, may donate organs and bodily tissue for 
ethically legitimate purposes for donation and research after death in accordance with applicable federal, state and local 
laws and regulations and the Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services. 
POLICY: 
The Louisiana Organ Procurement Agency (“LOPA”) is the designated Organ Procurement Organization (“OPO”) for 
OLOLH.  LOPA is responsible for the organ and tissue donor process and will follow federally designated standards for 
recovery and allocation. 
 
The Baton Rouge Regional Eye Bank (“BRREB”) is the designated eye bank for OLOLH.  BRREB is responsible for 
the eye donation process and will follow federally designated standards for recovery and allocation. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
● Death: (Per Louisiana Revised Statute 9:111) “A person will be considered dead if in the announced opinion of 
a physician, duly licensed in the state of Louisiana based on ordinary standards of approved medical practice, the 
person has experienced an irreversible cessation of spontaneous respiratory and circulatory functions.”   
● Brain Death/Death by Neurological Criteria (Per Louisiana Revised Statute 9:111): “In the event that 
artificial means of support preclude a determination that spontaneous respiratory and circulatory functions have 
ceased, a person will be considered dead if in the announced opinion of a physician, duly licensed in the state of 
Louisiana based upon ordinary standards of approved medical practice, the person has experienced an 
irreversible total cessation of brain function. Death will have occurred at the time when the relevant functions 
ceased.” 
● Donation after Brain Death (DBD): refers to the recovery of donated organs from a donor after declaration of 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
2 
OC.016_ Organ, Tissue, and Eye Donation 
 
brain death. 
● Donation after Circulatory Death (“DCD”): DCD refers to the recovery of donated organs from a donor after 
declaration of death on the basis of an irreversible cessation of circulatory and respiratory functions.  
● Anatomical gift or gift: means a donation of all or part of a human body to take effect after the death of the 
donor for the purpose of transplantation, therapy, research, or education. R.S. 17:2351 
●  Document of gift: means a donor card or other record used to make an anatomical gift. The term includes a 
statement or symbol on a driver's license, identification card, or donor registry. R.S. 17:2351 
● Designated requestor:  According to federal regulations (42 CFR § 482.45), a designated requestor is an 
individual who has completed a course offered or approved by the OPO and designed in conjunction with the 
tissue and eye bank community in the methodology for approaching potential donor families and requesting 
organ or tissue donation.   
● Coroner's Authorization:  In all situations it will be necessary to obtain a Coroner's Authorization prior to 
organ donation.  This will be done by the OPO representative.  Nursing will notify the coroner of the death.  
OPO will notify coroner of donation. 
● Authorized Agent: According to La. R. S. 17:2352 and 17:2354.3, persons who may execute an anatomical gift 
are: 
o An anatomical gift may be made during the life of the donor by: 
a. An adult donor;  
b. A minor donor, if he or she has been emancipated or authorized under state law to apply for a 
driver’s license;  
c. An agent of the donor, unless the power of attorney for healthcare or other record prohibits it.  
“Agent” means a person authorized to make healthcare decision on behalf of the principal by a 
power of attorney for healthcare, or a person expressly authorized to make an anatomical gift on 
behalf of the principal by any other record signed by the principle.    
d. A parent of the donor, if he or she is an unemancipated minor;  
e. The guardian of the donor.     
f. The rights of the donor are superior to the rights of the surviving spouse and next of kin.  In the 
absence of an express, contrary indication by the donor, a person other than the donor is barred from 
making, amending, or revoking an anatomical gift if the gift complies with Louisiana law.  
Notwithstanding the foregoing, If an unemancipated minor donor dies, his or her reasonably 
available parent may revoke or amend the anatomical gift.  
o If the potential donor has not made his/her wishes known, any of the following persons, in the order of 
priority stated, may give all or any part of a decedent’s body unless s/he has knowledge that contrary 
directions have been given by the decedent:   
1. Agent authorized  
2. The surviving spouse of the decedent 
3. Adult children of the decedent 
4. Parents of the decedent 3 
OC.016_ Organ, Tissue, and Eye Donation 
 
5. Adult siblings of the decedent 
6. Adult grandchildren of the decedent 
7. Grandparents of the decedent 
8. An adult who exhibited special care/concern for the decedent 
9. The person acting as the guardian of the decedent at the time of death 
10. Any other person having authority to dispose of the body of the decedent. 
If there is more than one member of a class listed as an Authorized Agent entitled to make an anatomical 
gift, an anatomical gift may be made by a member of the class unless that member or a person to which the 
gift may pass knows of an objection by another member of the class.  If an objection is known, the gift may 
be made only by a majority of members of the class who are reasonably available. 
● Spouse: A person who is lawfully married to the qualified patient. 
PROCEDURE: 
The dignity of the potential donor is of paramount importance and any intervention which is intended to preserve organ 
function, but which may cause discomfort or hasten the patient’s death is prohibited.  Organs shall not be removed until 
it has been medically determined that the patient has died (Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care 
Services, Sixth Edition, Directive #64). 
The physician or nurse caring for the patient should not discuss organ, tissue or eye donation with the family prior to the 
OPO or BRREB approaching the family for authorization for donation.  
Discussion related to discontinuing ventilator support and grave prognosis shall be separate and independent from the 
discussion of organ donation. Discussions regarding organ donation may occur only after the decision has been made by 
the surrogate or family to withdraw life-sustaining therapy in accordance with the potential donor’s wishes.  
In accordance with CMS regulation 42 C.F.R. § 482.45, OLOLH shall allow LOPA to determine medical suitability for 
tissue and eye donation, using the definition of potential tissue and eye donor and the notification protocol set forth 
herein. 
The determination of death should be made by the physician using commonly accepted scientific criteria.  To prevent 
any conflict of interest, the physician who determines death should not be a member of the transplant team (Ethical and 
Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, Sixth Edition, Directive #62 and #64).    
In any case when organs are to be used in transplant, one physician duly licensed in the state of Louisiana, not a member 
of the transplant team, will make the pronouncement of death.  An opinion by a second physician, not a member of the 
transplant team, must document the candidacy of the person for the process of organ donation. (Per Louisiana Revised 
Statute 9:111) 
In cases of brain death, the Determination of Death by Neurological Criteria in Adults Physician Progress Note will be 
used to document death and the candidacy of the person for the process of organ donation.  In cases of DCD, 
documentation will be done in the physician progress note.  These notes shall be timed, dated and signed by the 
physicians.  
 
GUIDELINES FOR ORGAN DONATION FOLLOWING DEATH BY NEUROLOGICAL CRITERIA: 
1. Timely Notification: 4 
OC.016_ Organ, Tissue, and Eye Donation 
 
A. Notify LOPA within one (1) hour of Imminent Neurological Death (“Imminent Death”), which means a patient 
who meets the following criteria: 
has a severe neurological injury or life-threatening injury requiring ventilator support (regardless of sedation) 
who, upon clinical evaluation documented in the OPO record or Donor Hospital chart, has: 
(1) a loss of two (2) or more brain stem reflexes, including, but not limited to: spontaneous breathing, Pupillary 
reaction, Response to iced caloric, Gag reflex, Corneal reflex, Doll’s eyes reflex, Response to painful 
stimuli; OR 
(2)  A Glasgow Coma score of eight (8) or less; OR 
(3) Poor prognosis or non-survivable injury, including, but not limited to: anoxic brain injury, cerebral vascular 
accident (CVA), trauma, OR 
(4) Hypothermic or Targeted Temperature Management (TTM), OR 
(5) Anticipated discussions regarding goals of care/hospice/palliative, code status, withdrawal of life sustaining 
treatments or brain death testing, OR(6) If the patient’s family or legally authorized representative mentions 
donation.   
B. For asystolic patients, referrals must be made to LOPA within two (2) hours of asystole. 
 
This is to be completed by calling LOPA at 1-800-833-3666.   A LOPA representative is available 24 hours a day, 7 
days per week.  A nursing representative will document notification on the ad hoc electronic LOPA referral form. 
2. Evaluation and Authorization 
A. After notification by OLOLH, the OPO representative shall initiate the determination of the candidate’s 
suitability for organ donation based on accepted medical standards. As the designated requestor, the OPO 
representative shall meet with the family members of the potential donor and discuss the documented decision of 
the potential donor and/or request the Authorized Agent (see Definitions above) authorize any part of the 
decedent’s body as an anatomical gift. The OPO shall be responsible for determining whether the potential 
donor has made a valid donor designation under state law and/or obtaining any required authorization. When 
requesting authorization, the OPO representative shall exhibit discretion and sensitivity with respect to the 
circumstances, views, and beliefs of the potential donor's family. 
B. The OPO shall be responsible for determining whether the potential donor has made a valid anatomical gift 
under state law and /or any required authorization. 
C. If authorization for organ donation is received either by authorizing agent or a valid anatomical gift, the 
OPO representative will complete the authorization/notification form.  A copy of the authorization/notification 
form shall be included in the decedent’s medical records.  
D. After obtaining authorization, the OPO representative will evaluate the patient’s medical and social history with 
the Authorized Agent or the best historian and, if appropriate, coordinate the organ donation process. 
E. Upon approval of the request, the OPO representative shall notify the Nurse Manager or her designee 
and OLOLH will collaborate with the OPO in the procurement of the anatomical gift. A person authorized to 
make an anatomical gift may amend or revoke the gift in accordance with La. R.S. 17:2356.   A revocation is 
effective only if before an incision has been made to remove apart from the body of the donor or before invasive 
procedures have begun to prepare the recipient, the procurement organization, transplant hospital, or physician 
or technician knows of the revocation. 
F. If authorization for donation is not obtained, the OPO representative shall document the outcome of the 5 
OC.016_ Organ, Tissue, and Eye Donation 
 
referral in the medical record of the patient.  
3. G. If there is disagreement between the documented wishes of the deceased and the family, it is the responsibility of 
the OPO representative to resolve the differences. OLOLH will comply with all applicable federal and state statutes 
and regulations regarding organ donation. 
4. Management of Patient Meeting Death by Neurological Criteria after Authorization is Obtained and Documented 
A. Upon declaration of death, the potential donor is transferred to the OPO service (potential donor will be 
discharged from OLOLH and readmitted as an organ donor with a new billing number under the care of the 
OPO).  At this point, the OPO is the guarantor for all expenses.  
B. Donor Maintenance:  The potential donor will be maintained medically by a representative of the OPO and in 
very rare instances it will require a consulting medical staff physician.  The OPO will write necessary orders.  
Donor maintenance protocol may be accessed in the physician orders sets under Dr. Procurement within the 
electronic health record. 
C. The OPO will determine the Authorized Agent’s wishes regarding performing cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
efforts should the patient cardiac arrest prior to organ recovery. 
4. Coordinating Transplant Team 
A. The OPO organ donation coordinator who is maintaining the potential donor is responsible for scheduling the 
operating room time and calling out the surgical transplant team which may consist of surgeons, residents, 
medical students, and/or organ preservationists.   
 
B. Transferring the potential donor to another location for the organ recovery may be possible with authorization 
from Authorized Agent.  If the Authorized Agent grants authorization for transfer of the patient, the patient will 
be picked up from the hospital and transported to the OPO recovery suite.  The OPO will assume all 
responsibility for the transportation of the patient prior to and following tissue and/or organ recovery. 
C. If the Authorized Agent does not grant authorization for transfer of the patient, the organ recovery may take 
place in the hospital operating room; the OPO will contact appropriate hospital personnel to schedule an OR 
time. 
 
5. Potential Donor Taken to Surgery 
A.  Operating room staff must be available (minimum of circulator, scrub tech, CRNA or Anesthesiologist) for the 
procedure. The OR procedure for organ recovery will be considered a priority case when recovery takes place in 
OLOLH.  
B. The operating room manager will be responsible for notifying operating room on-call staff. 
C. Once organ procurement is complete the OPO will notify Patient Care Services. Patient Care Services will be 
responsible for notifying the appropriate funeral home. 
6. Transportation of Recovered Organs  
A. The OPO is responsible for storage and transportation of the recovered organs according to federal and state 
standards and regulation. 6 
OC.016_ Organ, Tissue, and Eye Donation 
 
7. Follow-up to the Donor Family 
Any follow-up communications to the donor’s Authorized Agent will be handled by the OPO. GUIDELINES FOR 
ORGAN DONATION AFTER CIRCULATORY DEATH (DCD): 
1. Timely Notification: 
A. Notify LOPA within one (1 hour when a patient has a severe neurological injury or life-threatening injury 
requiring ventilator support (regardless of sedation) who, upon clinical evaluation documented in the OPO 
record or Donor Hospital chart, has: 
(1) a loss of two (2) or more brain stem reflexes, including, but not limited to: spontaneous breathing, Pupillary 
reaction, Response to iced caloric, Gag reflex, Corneal reflex, Doll’s eyes reflex, Response to painful stimuli; OR 
(2)  A Glasgow Coma score of eight (8) or less; OR 
(3) Poor prognosis or non-survivable injury, including, but not limited to: anoxic brain injury, cerebral vascular 
accident (CVA), trauma, OR 
(4) Hypothermic or Targeted Temperature Management (TTM), OR 
(5) Anticipated discussions regarding goals of care/hospice/palliative, code status, withdrawal of life sustaining 
treatments or brain death testing, OR 
(6) If the patient’s family or legally Authorized Agent mentions donation.   
B. For asystolic patients, referrals must be made to LOPA within two (2) hours of asystole. 
This is to be completed by calling LOPA at 1-800-833-3666.   A LOPA representative is available 24 hours a day, 7 
days per week. A nursing representative will document notification on the ad hoc electronic LOPA referral form. 
2. Evaluation and Authorization 
A. After the referral of a potential DCD, in accordance with CMS regulation 42 C.F.R. § 482.45, Donor 
Hospital staff or physicians shall allow LOPA to determine medical suitability for tissue and eye donation, using 
the definition of potential tissue and eye donor and the notification protocol set forth herein.   
B. The OPO shall be responsible for determining whether the potential donor has made a valid anatomical gift 
under state law and /or any required authorization. 
C. If authorization for DCD is received, the OPO representative will complete the authorization/notification form.  
A copy of the authorization/notification form shall be included in the decedent’s medical records.   
D. After obtaining authorization, the OPO representative will evaluate the patient’s medical and social history with 
the Authorized Agent or the best historian and, if appropriate, coordinate the organ donation process. 
E. Upon approval of the request, the OPO representative shall notify the Nurse Manager or designee and 
OLOLH will collaborate with the OPO in the procurement of the anatomical gift.  A person authorized to make 
an anatomical gift may amend or revoke the gift in accordance with La. R.S. 17:2356.   A revocation is effective 
only if before .an incision has been made to remove apart from the body of the donor or before invasive 
procedures have begun to prepare the recipient, the procurement organization, transplant hospital, or physician 
or technician knows of the revocation. 
F. If authorization for donation is not obtained, the OPO representative shall document the outcome of the 
referral in the medical record of the patient.  
G. If there is disagreement between the documented wishes of the DCD and the family, it is the responsibility of the 
OPO representative to resolve the differences. OLOLH will comply with all applicable federal and state statutes 7 
OC.016_ Organ, Tissue, and Eye Donation 
 
and regulations regarding organ donation. 
5. Management of DCD Donor 
A. The attending physician or designee will continue medical responsibility for the patient until declaration of 
death. The patient will not be discharged and re-admitted to the OPO.  The patient will remain under the care of 
the attending physician. 
B. Prior to the patient’s death, the OPO will not order changes or adjustments to the patient’s current medical 
therapy.  The OPO will consult with the patient’s attending physician, or designee, for any testing or procedures 
that need to be performed.   
C. The OPO will determine suitability of the organs for transplantation through general and organ specific testing.  
This includes, but is not limited to, blood, urine, sputum testing, chest x-rays, and bronchoscopies to evaluate 
organ function, as well as serology, tissue typing and cultures. When appropriate, authorization will be obtained 
from the Authorized Agent.  Any laboratory tests or procedures performed at the request of the OPO will be 
done at no charge to the Authorized Agent as defined in the hospital’s agreement with the OPO.  
D. The OPO will determine the Authorized Agent’s wishes regarding performing cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
efforts should the patient cardiac arrest prior to the terminal wean.   
E. The Authorized Agent will be given the opportunity of allowing the patient to continue as a brain-dead donor if 
the patient is declared brain dead prior to the scheduled DCD recovery. 
5. Coordinating Transplant Team 
A. The OPO organ donation coordinator who is maintaining the potential donor is responsible for scheduling the 
operating room time and calling out the surgical transplant team which may consist of surgeons, residents, 
medical students, and/or organ preservationist.   
6. Potential Donor Taken to Surgery 
A. Operating room staff must be available (minimum of circulator, scrub tech, CRNA or Anesthesiologist) for the 
procedure. The OR procedure for organ recovery will be considered a priority case when recovery takes place in 
OLOLH. 
B. The operating room manager will be responsible for notifying operating room on-call staff. 
C. Once in the operating room, the potential donor will be surgically prepped and draped for surgery and all 
recovery materials present. At this point, recovery personnel (surgeons and other recovery practitioners) must 
leave the operating room until declaration of death In accordance with CMS 486.344(f)(2), OPO personnel will 
remain in the OR in order to maintain complete information of the recovery. 
D. The physician will withdraw all ongoing life-sustaining therapies and comfort measures may be provided. The 
physician shall observe the patient for complete cessation of cardiac and respiratory function. 
E. When appropriate, a family representative may be in the OR once life-sustaining therapies are discontinued.  If 
the family elects to have a family representative present, an OPO representative will remain with the family 
representative during the time they are in the OR. The family representative must leave the OR prior to initiation 
of the recovery process.   
F. The physician removing life-sustaining therapies and declaring death shall in no way be involved in the 8 
OC.016_ Organ, Tissue, and Eye Donation 
 
procurement of the organ(s). 
G. The declaring physician, in accordance with state laws, shall declare death when there is a loss of a palpable 
pulse or the arterial wave line is flat and documented the same in a progress note. 
H. Once the physician has pronounced the patient, recovery personnel (surgeons and other recovery practitioners) 
will return to the room after a minimum of two minutes and begin surgical recovery of organs according to 
standard procedures. 
I. Once organ procurement is complete, the OPO will notify Patient Care Services. Patient Care Services will be 
responsible for notifying the appropriate funeral home. 
J. Patients will be a candidate for DCD if death occurs within 120 minutes of removing life-sustaining therapy.  If 
the patient does not die within 120 minutes, the family will be notified and the patient will be taken to a private 
room for ongoing palliative care.  
7. Transportation of Recovered Organs  
A. The OPO is responsible for storage and transportation of the recovered organs according to applicable federal 
and state standards and regulations. 
8. Follow-up to the Donor Family 
A. Any follow-up communication to the donor’s Authorized Agent will be handled by the OPO. 
GUIDELINES FOR TISSUE DONATION 
1. Timely Notification:   
A. Within 2 hours of all deaths regardless of age and medical diagnosis. 
This is to be completed by calling LOPA at 1-800-833-3666.   A LOPA representative is available 24 hours a day, 7 
days per week. A nursing representative will document notification on the ad hoc electronic LOPA referral form. 
2. Evaluation and Authorization 
A. All deceased patients are potential candidates for tissue donation.  The OPO will evaluate the patient to 
determine medical suitability. Do not release the patient to the funeral home prior to evaluation. 
B. Once the OPO accepts the patient as a potential tissue donor, a designated OPO representative, who may 
approach via phone conference, will offer the option of tissue donation to the Authorized Agent (see Definitions 
above). 
C. If authorization for tissue donation is received, the OPO representative will complete the authorization form.  
The OPO shall be responsible for determining whether the potential donor has made a valid donor designation 
under state law and/or obtaining any required authorization.   A copy of the authorization/notification form shall 
be included in the decedent’s medical records. 
D. After obtaining authorization, the OPO representative will evaluate the patient’s medical and social history with 
the Authorized Agent or the best historian and, if appropriate, coordinate the tissue donation process. 
3. Management of the Tissue Donor 
A. The OPO will pay charges pertaining to tissue donation, following declaration of death and authorization for 
donation from Authorized Agent, in accordance with the hospital’s agreement with the OPO. 9 
OC.016_ Organ, Tissue, and Eye Donation 
 
B. Transferring the potential donor to another location for the tissue recovery may be possible with authorization 
from the Authorized Agent.  If the Authorized Agent grants authorization for transfer of the potential donor, the 
potential donor will be picked up from the hospital and transported to the OPO recovery suite.  The OPO will 
assume all responsibility for the transportation of the donor prior to and following tissue recovery. 
C. If the Authorized Agent does not grant authorization for transfer of the potential donor, the tissue recovery may 
take place in the hospital operating room; the OPO will contact appropriate hospital personnel to schedule an OR 
time. 
4. Transportation of Recovered Tissue 
A. The OPO is responsible for storage and transportation of the recovered tissue according to designated standards 
and regulations. 
5. Follow-up to the Donor Family 
A. Any follow-up communications to the donor’s Authorized Agent will be handled by the OPO.   
GUIDELINES FOR EYE DONATION 
1. Timely Notification:   
A. Within 2 hours of all deaths regardless of age and medical diagnosis. 
This is to be completed by calling LOPA at 1-800-833-3666.   A LOPA representative is available 24 hours a day, 7 
days per week. A nursing representative will document notification on the ad hoc electronic LOPA referral form. 
2. Evaluation and Authorization 
A. All deceased patients are potential candidates for eye donation. The LOPA designee will refer a potential eye 
donor to BRREB.  BRREB will evaluate the patient to determine medical suitability. Do not release the patient 
to the funeral home prior to evaluation. 
B. Once BRREB accepts the patient as a potential eye donor, a designated BRREB representative, who may 
approach via phone conference, will offer the option of eye donation to the Authorized Agent (see Definitions 
above).  BRREB or LOPA shall be responsible for determining whether the donor has made a valid donor 
designation under state law and/or obtaining any required authorization.   
C. If authorization for eye donation is received, the BRREB representative will complete the authorization form.  A 
copy of the authorization form shall be included in the decedent’s medical records. 
D. After obtaining authorization, the BRREB representative will evaluate the patient’s medical and social history 
with the Authorized Agent or the best historian and, if appropriate, coordinate the eye donation process. 
3. Management of the Eye Donor 
A. Donor maintenance: Irrigate eyes with sterile ophthalmic irrigating solution.  Eyelids should be closed 
completely, and small ice packs applied to forehead.  Do not tape lids. 
B. Transferring the potential donor to another location for eye recovery may be possible with authorization from 
Authorized Agent.  If the Authorized Agent grants authorization for transfer of the patient, the patient will be 
picked up from the hospital and transported to a designated recovery location.  BRREB will assume all 
responsibility for the transportation of the patient prior to and following eye recovery. 
C.  The eye recovery may take place in an appropriate location i.e. the pathology suite, operating room, patient 10 
OC.016_ Organ, Tissue, and Eye Donation 
 
room. 
5. Transportation of Recovered Eyes 
A. BRREB is responsible for storage and transportation of the recovered eyes according to designated standards 
and regulations. 
6. Follow-up to the Donor Family 
Any follow-up communication to the donor’s Authorized Agent will be handled by BRREB.  
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and OLOLH reserves the right to deviate from, 
revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
● Cox, J. & Bayley, C. (2001) Organ Donation and Prudential Deliberation:  The Opinions of Physicians, Other 
Caregivers, and the Public at large should be taken into Consideration.  Health Progress, 82, 1. 
● DuBois, J.M. (2001).  Non-Heart-Beating Organ donation:  Designing an Ethically Acceptable Protocol.  Health 
Progress 82, 1  
● Knight, W. J. (2006).  Louisiana’s Legislative Framework for Organ Donation and Right to Die Issues.  
Louisiana Bar Journal, 54, 3 pp. 176-180. 
● Louisiana State Legislature – Regulatory Statute 17:2351 et seq. 
● U. S. Department of Health and Human Services Administration, Organ Procurement and Transplant Network, 
(2011). Requirements for Controlled Donation after Cardiac Circulatory Death Recovery (DCD) Protocols: 
Candidate Evaluation. 
● State of Louisiana Legislature, (2010). Act 937 – Uniform Anatomical Gift Act 
● United States conference of Catholic Bishops, (2020). Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care  
● Services (Sixth Edition). 
● Zamperetti, N., Belleomo, R., & Ronco, C., (2003).  Defining Death in Non-Heart Beating Organ Donors.  
Journal of Medical Ethics, 29, 3.  PP. 182-185. 
● OO/ET/006 Guidelines for Determination of Death in Adults policy 
● OC056 Guidelines for Determination of Death by Neurological Criteria in Adults 
● NPI-013 Guidelines for Determination of Death in Children Due to Irreversible Cessation of Brain Function 
● Louisiana Revised Statute 9:111 
● Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference. 
● 42 C.F.R. §482.45 
ATTACHMENTS:  
● List all attachments in this section in bullet format and attach each at the end of the policy in order of reference, 
labeled with the Attachment reference (E.g., “Attachment A”, etc.).  If none, complete with “N/A”. 
 11 
OC.016_ Organ, Tissue, and Eye Donation 
 
 