 
OC023 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational- Clinical  
SUBJECT:  
Photographing/Videotaping/Audio taping at OLOL 
and of Patients 
PAGES: 
4 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
August 2019 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
August 6, 2019   
REVISION DATE: 
August 1, 2019 
REVIEWED DATE: 
September 9,2024 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OC 23 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To establish guidelines for photography, videography and/or recording audio of patients and/or while on Our 
Lady of the Lake (OLOL) property, in an effort to minimize the interruption of the orderly provision of patient 
care, maximize the patient's, families and employee's right to privacy, and provide an environment conducive 
to the healing process. 
 
See Clinical photography policy (OrgClin/055) for guidelines for photography of patients for identification, 
diagnosis and treatment.  
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
OC023 
2 
POLICY: 
A. Any media or vendor requests related to the use of the OLOL campus and facilities for photography, 
videography, television production, or other videos to be used by organizations other than Our Lady of the 
Lake must be authorized and supervised by a member of the Marketing and Communications Department 
or a person designated by the Department.   
 
B. A representative from the Marketing and Communications Department or the Department’s designee must 
escort any media or vendor photographers/videographers at all times while they are on OLOL property. 
Exemptions can be made for exterior shots of the hospital or its facilities. Exemptions must be approved in 
advance by the Marketing and Communications Department.   
 
C. Patients/families may not invite media personnel to the any Our Lady of the Lake facilities without 
permission and knowledge from Our Lady of the Lake Marketing and Communications Department.  
 
D. Anyone who engages in video/audio recording or photography (who is not already bound by the 
hospital’s confidentiality policy) must sign a confidentiality statement to protect the patient’s identity and 
confidential information. 
 
E. Prior to being video recorded or photographed by a member of the media, a vendor, a marketing & 
communications team member or anyone else for purposes other than clinical identification, diagnosis and 
treatment of the patient, the patient or the patient’s legal representative must give written consent in 
advance by signing the Authorization for Use/Disclosure of Information and Consent/Use of Images and 
Recording form. By signing this form, the patient acknowledges that they understand an explanation of 
how the recordings or other images will be used. The patient understands that they do not have to give 
authorization and that their treatment, payment, benefit or eligibility or enrollment activities are not 
affected by the signing of the form. 
1. Verbal consent should be obtained for team members or physicians to be included in filming or 
photography by media/vendors. 
 
F. Patients/families may request permission to record video/audio of meetings with physicians, and if 
permission is granted by attending physician, the patient/family may record only to assist in remembering 
and understanding instructions.   
1. Patients/families or guest may not video or take photographs of physicians, or any staff member 
without prior permission. 
 
G. Patients/families may not take pictures or record audio/video in areas where other patients or patient 
information is visible. 
 
H. Photographs of a patient by the family for personal use are allowed in a patient's private room and may not 
     include other patients and guests or protected health information of any patient.  
OC023 
3 
DEFINITIONS: 
• Media – any credentialed member of the media  
 
• Vendor – any external organization or person excluding credentialed media that is not associated with the 
patient care team seeking to photograph or record video or audio.  
 
• Marketing/Communication Team Member– An employee of Our Lady of the Lake’s Marketing & 
Communications Team. 
 
• Care Team – Any clinical team member of OLOL and its entities 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Requests for media/vendor filming/photography should be submitted in writing to the Marketing and 
Communications Department within 24-hours 
1. Prior to arrival, a member of the Marketing & Communications team is responsible 
for alerting security and any necessary or affected clinical staff/team members of the 
vendor/media arrival time and details. 
B. To obtain consent to record audio/video or take photographs, a Marketing and Communications 
representative will: 
1. Receive approval from a member of the patient’s care team regarding patient involvement in 
photography or videography.    
2. A member of the patient’s care team will first approach the patient to ask their permission for a 
Marketing and Communications representative to speak with them.  
3. While interacting with the patient and family, the Marketing and Communications representative will 
act with the utmost respect for the patient and will not forcefully ask for them to agree to photography 
or videography.  
4. The representative will present and explain the Authorization for Use/Disclosure of Information and 
Consent/Use of Images and Recording form for the patient to sign. 
 
C. If a patient is unable to sign the authorization for disclosure of their information, a legal representative 
may give consent on their behalf. See verification of Hospital/Informed Consent for Operations and Other 
Procedures (OrgClin/012) for who can give consent. 
  
D. When a patient or legal representative is unable to give informed consent prior to the production of 
photography or videography, the production may occur provided the following:  
1. The Marketing and Communications Department receives approval from the physician, unit director, 
and ethics committee representative when possible.  
2. The product remains in Our Lady of the Lake’s possession and is not used for any purpose until and 
unless informed consent is obtained.  
3. The material is destroyed if the consent cannot be subsequently be obtained. 
4. The material is destroyed if the patient declines to give consent. 
 
  
OC023 
4 
E. Photography and videography activities must not interfere or interrupt the patient’s care. A member of the 
patient’s care team will monitor the patient during the photography and videography activities and will 
stop production if the patient shows signs of distress.   
 
F. The patient has the right to request cessation of the production of the photography or videography.  
 
G. The patient has the right to rescind consent before the recording, film or image is used.  
 
H. The signed confidentiality and authorization statement will be kept in the patient’s medical record when 
possible and a copy will also be filed with the Marketing and Communications Department.  
 
I. The authorization is valid for the length of the project, starting with the date signed.  All use of 
photography or videography containing the patient’s information must cease upon expiration. 
 
J. The Marketing and Communications Department will manage the log of patient authorizations and will 
regularly delete all photography and videography content in their possession upon expiration. 
K. Patients/Families or guests reported to be in violation of this policy will be 
1. Requested to cease the behavior and delete any information. 
2. The staff member will contact security if the patient/family or guest refuses 
 
Photography/Videography for Vendor or External Commercial Use 
 
1. Our Lady of the Lake and all of its facilities may allow the use of its campus and properties for 
commercial film production, upon approval of the Marketing and Communications Department.  
 
2. Requests for commercial filming/photography should be submitted in writing to the Marketing and 
Communications Department with a signed Commercial Location Agreement no later than 10 days prior 
to the anticipated start date.  
 
3. All requests related to the use of the campus and facilities for photography, videography, television 
production, or other videos to be used by organizations other than Our Lady of the Lake must be 
authorized and supervised by a member of the Marketing and Communications Department or a person 
designated by the Department.   
 
4. Written advance approval and signed authorization forms must be obtained for any patients filmed by 
the production company. Verbal consent must be obtained for team members or physicians to be 
included in filming. 
 
5. The production company must provide the Marketing and Communications Department with an advance 
list, submitted five days prior to the project start date, of areas to which access is sought and provide a 
detailed schedule for proposed use of these areas, including dates and times; and provide names of all 
personnel to be present in these areas 
 
6. If Commercial Location Agreement so provides, Production Company may bring personnel and 
equipment (including props and temporary sets) onto the Property and to remove same after completion 
of its use of the Property hereunder.  
  
OC023 
5 
 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and OLOL reserves the right to deviate from, 
revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• N/A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
• N/A 
 
 
 
 
 