 
OC 032 Palliative Care Ventilator Withdrawal 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational / Clinical 
SUBJECT:  
Palliative Care Ventilator Withdrawal (Removal of 
Mechanical Ventilation from a Dying Patient) 
PAGES: 
4 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
February 11, 2008 
REVIEW DATE: 
January 2, 2025 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OC 032 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To assist physicians, advanced practice professionals, nurses, clergy and other staff to provide a compassionate 
process for Palliative Ventilator Withdrawal (PVW) in the dying patient.  
**This policy is only for when death is the expected outcome following PVW** 
POLICY: 
A. Palliative ventilator withdrawal (PVW) provides maximum comfort for the intubated patient who is dying. PVW is 
indicated when the informed patient or surrogate decision maker requests ventilator withdrawal.   
B. A patient may forgo care that in their judgment does not offer a reasonable hope of benefit or entails an excessive 
burden.  The free and informed decision of the patient or surrogate decision maker concerning the withdrawal of life-
sustaining procedures should always be respected.  Patients should be kept as free of suffering as possible so that 
they may die comfortably and with dignity. (Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, 
Sixth Edition #57, #59, #61.) 
C. The goals of PVW are to: 
a. provide optimal management of the patient’s physical symptoms 
b. provide spiritual and emotional support for the patient and family and 
c. support the interdisciplinary team caring for the patient.  
D. Withdrawal of mechanical ventilation is a medical procedure that requires the same degree of physician/ advanced 
practice professionals’ participation, skill and quality as any other procedure. 
E. Clinical indications for PVW include but are not limited to: 
a. severe irreversible brain injury 
b. multi-organ system failure 
c. irreversible respiratory failure 
d. untreatable metastatic cancer 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
OC 032 Palliative Care Ventilator Withdrawal 
2 
e. overwhelming sepsis  
f. patients with valid living will. 
F. Medications for comfort are not necessary for withdrawal of mechanical ventilation for a patient who has been 
determined legally dead due to irreversible total cessation of brain function; however sensitivity and dignity must be 
maintained. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
PVW: Palliative Ventilator Withdrawal 
PROCEDURE: 
Step 1:  Decision and Documentation 
1. The prognosis, options and goals of care have been fully explored with the patient/legal surrogates/family; 
consensus has been reached that PVW with expected death is the optimal treatment course. The following 
related issues should be discussed prior to PVW: 
a. withdrawal of artificial hydration/feeding 
b. withdrawal of blood pressure support 
c. withdrawal of antibiotics and blood products 
d. withdrawal of ET tube after ventilator is discontinued 
e. wishes concerning organ donation-(contact LOPA to determine options) 
2. A physician or advanced practice professional shall document in the medical record the date/time of the PVW 
discussion, who was present and the agreed upon goals and plan. This documentation will include discussion of 
code status at the time of the PVW. 
3. When survival is anticipated to be greater than 2 hours, post withdrawal of ventilator support, discuss with 
family the possible transfer of the patient to a general medical unit.  
4. A time/date is determined for PVW. 
Step 2:  Preparation for PVW 
1. A physician (attending physician or ICU fellow or senior resident) will be available before, during and 
immediately after PVW, to supervise symptom control and provide support to family and staff. An order is 
written to discontinue the ventilator. 
2. The primary nurse and physician or advance practice professional will provide information to the patient or 
family regarding: 
a. the option for family to be present during ventilator withdrawal; 
b. potential outcomes: rapid vs. delayed death, potential symptoms/signs; 
c. process of withdrawal: ventilator, endotracheal tube, or any other tubes as determined by 
family/physician 
3. Notify Respiratory Therapy of PVW timing; respiratory therapist to be present. 
4. Ask family/surrogates if they wish chaplain or other clergy present before or during PVW, notify as appropriate. 
5. General guidelines for pre-medication for sedation: (Note: the primary goal of sedation is to prevent dyspnea 
post extubation; medications needed for comfort should not be held for hypotension, bradycardia, and depression 
of consciousness or respirations. Reversing agents (e.g. Narcan) should not be administered.  
OC 032 Palliative Care Ventilator Withdrawal 
3 
a. Discontinue paralytics as these will mask signs of distress, and test for return of neuromuscular function. 
b. Titrate medications to minimize shortness of breath and/or anxiety and achieve the desired state of 
sedation prior to extubation. 
6. According to physician order, discontinue blood pressure support medication, artificial hydration and feeding, 
and/or remove oral gastric/nasogastric tubes as well as labs and x-rays. 
7. Remove restraints and unnecessary medical equipment.  
Step 3:  Removal of Mechanical Ventilation  
1. Ensure adequate sedation 
2. Prepare space at the bedside for family members. 
3. Ask Respiratory Therapist to silence all ventilator alarms; reduce ventilation in step wise fashion. Observe for 
signs of respiratory distress, adjust medication to optimize patient comfort. 
4. If the patient has an endotracheal tube, extubate and suction (if necessary).  If patient has a tracheostomy, place 
patient on trach collar.  A physician must be available when the ventilator is discontinued. Remove ventilator 
from bedside. 
5. Observe for signs of respiratory distress, adjust medication. 
Step 4:  Actions following PVW 
1. Document in the medical record the procedure, medications used and the immediate outcome of the process of 
PVW. 
2. Continually monitor for adequate symptom control (pain, shortness of breath, secretions and restlessness).  
Notify MD for adjustments in medication as appropriate. 
3. If death has not occurred within two hours of PVW consider transfer to non-ICU bed. 
4. At this time, the emphasis of care is on maintaining patient comfort through personal hygiene, close attention to 
symptom management and providing the family psycho-social and spiritual support. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and OLOL reserves the right to deviate from, 
revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• CAPC Central TM IPAL-ICU, (2011) Removal of mechanical ventilation in the dying patient.  
Retrieved November 6, 2018 from https://central.capc.org/  
• United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, (2018), Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic 
Health Care Services (Sixth Edition). 
• Von Gunten, C & Weissman, D. (2015) #33 Ventilator Withdrawal Protocol 3rd edition. Retrieved 
November 6, 2018 from www.mypcnow.org  
• Von Gunten, C & Weissman, D. (2015) #34 Symptom Control for Ventilator Withdrawal in the Dying 
Patient 3rd edition. Retrieved November 6, 2018 from www.mypcnow.org  
• Von Gunten, C & Weissman, D. (2015) #35 Information for Patients and Families about Ventilator 
Withdrawal 3rd edition. Retrieved November 6, 2018 from www.mypcnow.org 
ATTACHMENTS: N/A 
 