 
OC 030 General Visitation and Patient Support Policy 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational / Clinical 
SUBJECT:  
General Visitation and Patient Support Policy 
PAGES: 
4 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
October 1, 1985 
REVIEW DATE: 
May 1, 2024 
Revised Date:         
March 29, 2024 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OC 030  
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) is responsible for providing a supportive, protective, and 
healing environment for all patients. Appropriate patient visiting plays an important role in the patient experience and the 
healing process.  
This policy is intended to provide visitation guidelines with regard to patients’ rights including the right to have a 
support person to be present during the course of the stay to provide emotional support. 
POLICY: 
• All patients (inpatient, observation patients, outpatient, and ambulatory patients) will have full and equal 
visitation privileges consistent with patient preference and subject to clinically necessary restrictions.  Each 
patient has the right (subject to his or her consent, which can be withdrawn at any time) to receive visitors whom 
he or she or parents designates, including but not limited to a spouse (including same-sex marriage), domestic 
partner (including same sex domestic partner), another family member or friend.  Visitation privileges shall not 
be restricted, limited, or otherwise denied on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, gender 
identity, sexual orientation, or disability.   
• A support person (a spouse, family member, friend or other individual) is allowed to be present with the patient 
to provide emotional support during the course of the visit.  This support person may or may not be the patient’s 
surrogate decision maker or legally authorized representative. The support person is subject to any clinically 
necessary or reasonable restrictions/limitations. 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
OC 030 General Visitation and Patient Support Policy 
2 
Upon admission as in inpatient or observation patient, the patient or the patient’s representative will be 
asked to identify a support person.  In the case of a minor patient (under age 18 years), the designated 
support person will be the parent or legal guardian unless another support person is collectively 
identified by the parent or legal guardian.   For inpatient and observation admits, a Patient Access 
Representative (PAR) will provide a copy of the patient handbook to each patient or patient or patient 
representative upon admission which outlines the general visiting policy as well as patient rights. Unit 
specific support person and general visitation guidelines will be discussed with the patient and/or 
support person, including any clinically necessary or reasonable restrictions/limitations by the 
admitting nurse on the patient’s unit. 
• For Justice Involved Individuals (prisoners) please see the Care and Management of Justice Involved 
Individuals (Prisoners) policy (OrgClin/014) for visitation guidelines.  
• Healthcare professionals will exercise their best clinical judgment when determining when visitation is, 
and is not, appropriate.  Best clinical judgment takes into account all aspects of patient health and 
safety, including the benefits of visitation on a patient’s care as well as potential negative impact that 
visitors may have on other patients in the hospital. 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
• Family: any individual that plays a significant role in the patient’s life such as spouse (including same-
sex,) parent, domestic partner, significant other (different sex and same sex) children, siblings, other 
ascendants or descendants and/or other individual(s) not legally related to the patient who exhibit 
special care and concern for the patient. 
• Spouse: an individual who is lawfully married to another individual including same-sex marriage.  
• Support Person: a spouse, family member, friend or other individual who is at OLOL to support the 
patient during the course of the patient’s stay at the hospital. This person may exercise the patient’s 
visitation rights on the patient’s behalf if the patient is unable to do so.  This individual may, but need 
not be, an individual legally responsible for making medical decisions on the patient’s behalf. 
• Parent:  a father or mother that gives birth to or nurtures and raises a child, either biologically or 
adopted. 
• Guardian:  a person who looks after and is legally responsible for someone who is unable to manage 
on their own. i.e child or disabled person 
 
• Clinically Necessary or Reasonable Restrictions/Limitations: any clinically necessary or reasonable 
restriction or limitation imposed by OLOL on a patient’s visitation rights which are necessary to 
protect the health and safety of all patients.  A clinically necessary restriction/limitation may include,  
OC 030 General Visitation and Patient Support Policy 
3 
but not be limited to, one or more of the following:  
1. A court order limiting or restraining contact;  
2. Infection control issues (patient’s risk of infection by the visitor and visitor’s risk of infection by 
the patient);  
3. When visitation may interfere with the care of the other patients; 
4. Behavior disruptive to the functioning of the patient care unit or presenting a direct risk or threat to 
the patient, hospital staff or others in the immediate environment.  This may include but is not 
limited to disruptive, threatening or violent behavior or appearing to be under the influence of drugs 
or alcohol; 
5. Extraordinary protections because of an epidemic, pandemic or infectious disease outbreak;  
6. Substance abuse treatment protocols requiring restricted visitation;  
7. Patient’s need for privacy or rest;  
8. Need for privacy or rest by another individual in the patient’s shared room; 
9. When the patient is undergoing a clinical intervention or procedure and the treating health care 
professional believes it is in the patient’s best interest to limit visitation during the clinical 
intervention or procedure;  
10. Reasonable limitations to the number of visitors at any one time. 
PROCEDURE: 
Selection of a Support Person:  
• A patient may verbally designate a support person to exercise visitation rights on his or her behalf 
should the patient be unable to do so.   
• When a patient is incapacitated or otherwise unable to communicate his/her wishes and an individual 
provides an advance directive designating an individual as the patient’s support person, we will accept 
this designation and allow the individual to exercise patient visitation rights on behalf of the patient.   
• If the patient is incapacitated or otherwise unable to communicate his/her wishes and there is no 
advance directive, if an individual asserts that he/she is the patient’s spouse, domestic partner, parent or 
other family member, friend or otherwise the patient’s support person, we will accept this assertion 
without requiring supporting documentation.  However, if more than one individual claims to be the 
patient’s support person we will request supporting documentation from each individual to facilitate 
expeditious and non-discriminatory resolution. 
• In the event the patient has both a representative and a support person who are not the same individual, 
and they disagree on who should be allowed to visit the patient, decisions will be deferred to the  
OC 030 General Visitation and Patient Support Policy 
4 
patient’s representative.   
General Visitation Guidelines: 
• Visitors will be asked to leave the patient care unit in the event of an emergency and directed to a 
waiting room.  
• Children under 12 years of age may visit only if accompanied by and under direct supervision of a 
responsible adult. On the Mental and Behavioral Health Units is 18 years of age. Children under 12 
years of age will not be permitted anywhere on the premises unattended by an adult or responsible 
party. 
• The number of visitors and/or the length of time for visiting may be limited at the discretion of the 
patient’s nurse, doctor or Hospital Administration. If at any time the patient’s nurse or doctor 
determines that visitors are interfering with the patient’s care or need for rest, s/he may restrict visiting 
for a limited time. The patient’s nurse must discuss these concerns with the designated spokesperson 
for the patient prior to asking the visiting to be limited.  
• The patient’s physician may order specific visiting requirements at any time.  
• The nurse caring for the patient will ensure the family understands the visiting plan and may document 
education in the patient’s medical record.  
• Out of respect for patient privacy and to promote a healing and safe environment, support person and 
visitors are not to loiter in the hall, linger at the nurses’ station or go into other patient care areas. 
Mental and Behavioral Health Units Additional Visitation Guidelines: 
• All visitors must sign in.  To do this, the visitor(s) must have the patient’s identification code and photo 
identification.  
• All visitors on the adult units must be 18 years or older. 
• Only Legal Guardians are permitted for adolescent patients. 
• All visitors must sign a Confidentiality Agreement.  
• Only two visitors per patient are allowed on the unit at a time, unless it is a patient at Children’s 
Hospital- please see Children’s Hospital Guidelines. 
At any time, visitors may be asked to leave the premises under the following circumstances: 
• When it is clinically determined to be in the best interest of the patient. 
• When visitors interfere with patient care, safety, privacy and/or the confidentiality of the patient being 
visited and/or other patient(s). 
• When visitors do not comply with the Support Person and General Visitation Policy, or pose a safety 
risk to staff, physicians or others. 
• When visitors have symptoms of communicable diseases (cough, fever, rash, etc.)  
OC 030 General Visitation and Patient Support Policy 
5 
• When there are too many visitors at once standing in hospital corridors, interfering with comfort and 
care of other patients. 
• When an individual fails to comply with any hospital policy. 
• When an individual appears to be under the influence of drugs or alcohol. 
 
Children’s Hospital Additional Visitation Guidelines 
• Each person must check in at the front desk. 
• Each person will be given a badge to place on their shirt and it must remain visible at all times during 
the stay. 
• Visitors must obtain a new pass each day. 
• Parent/Guardian or Caregiver must provide a visitation list for each patient. 
• Parent/Guardian or Caregiver must sign a visitation agreement. 
• Only siblings of the child are permitted with the parent/guardian. 
• ICU visitors under the age of 18 must complete a child life assessment prior to the visit.   
• Mental and Behavioral Health patients are not permitted visitors. A safety guideline will be signed by 
the parent or guardian. 
• Each patient will have signed agreements for visitation guidelines. 
• Everyone under the age of 18 must be accompanied by a parent/guardian or caregiver at all times. 
Please note: The House Manager or designee can request Security assist with the above circumstances; 
however Security may act independently if circumstances warrant immediate action.  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and OLOL reserves the right to deviate from, 
revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Controlled Facility Access Guidelines - ECSE 018 
• Care and Management of Justice Involved Individuals (Prisoners) - (OrgClin/014) 
• Department of Health & Human Services (DHHS) Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). 
(2023) Hospital Regulations 42 CFR 482.13(b) (4), 482.13(h) (1-4). CMS Manual System Pub. 100-07 
State Operations Provider Certification.  
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
• Children’s Hospital PEC Safety Guidelines 
• Children’s Hospital ICU Unit Guidelines 
 
 