OC-037 
Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Death of a Patient/Autopsy 
Policy Reference #: OrgClin/037 
Supersedes #: 1985, 2000, 1988 
ACR 03; NNA013 
Date of Origination: June, 1985 Last Review Date: April 16, 2024 
Last Revision Date:  December 12, 2024 
  
KEYWORDS: (hold Ctrl and click on a link below to go to that information) 
Notification; Belongings; Nursing Responsibilities; Documentation; Disposition;  
Coroner's Cases; Preparation of the Body; Morgue Verification Process; Disposition of Fetus; 
Autopsy 
 
PURPOSE 
To define the process for the disposition of the deceased patient and his/her valuables and the procedure 
for handling autopsies. 
 
POLICY 
Deceased patients and their families are treated with respect, dignity, and compassion at all times. 
 
PROCEDURES 
1. Notification 
a. At the time of death of a patient, the patient’s physicians,Patient Care Services and Pastoral Care 
should be notified.  Social Services (if applicable) will be notified. 
b. In all patient deaths, contact the donor hotline at 1-800-833-3666, and complete the Notification 
of Cardiac Death/Timely Organ Referral form and place form on patient chart.  
c. In all patient deaths, notify the coroner’s office.  
 
2. Belongings 
a. Personal belonging are given to the relative in attendance (see OrgClin/004). A description of 
valuables and the name of the relative who takes these shall be entered on the nurses’ notes.   
b. If no family member is present, the articles left in the patients’ room shall be turned in to the 
nurse’s station for purpose of record, and then transferred to the Security Office for subsequent 
handling. (see OrgClin/022)Our Lady of the Lake Ascension  – belongings are turned into the 
house manager, medications turned into pharmacy  
c. Dentures should be placed in a denture cup, labeled and sent with the body. 
 
3. Nursing Responsibilities OC-037 
Page 2 of 5 
a. No life-sustaining measures are discontinued until a physician has seen the patient.  
b. The patient is not legally dead until pronounced by the physician.  Documentation of 
pronouncing physician needs to be reflected in the medical record. 
c. Every possible courtesy is extended to the family.  The body is to be handled with dignity and 
respect. 
 
4. Documentation 
The nurse should complete an Expiration Note in the electronic medical record, indicating the date 
and time of death, the physician pronouncing the patient deceased, disposition of valuables, and 
post-death arrangements. Additional documentation will be necessary if the patient’s death is 
deemed a coroner’s case (see OrgClin/004). 
 
5. Disposition 
a. The nurse should request the name of the funeral home before the family leaves.  If a funeral 
home is not known, the family is instructed to call Patient Care Services/House Manager/House 
Supervisor as soon as a decision has been made.  Disposition is charted in the Expiration Note.  
b. The attendant/House Manager/House Supervisor, nurse or ancillary staff will retrieve the morgue 
cart and morgue log book from the morgue. The morgue log book is completed by the attending 
nurse/House Manager/House Supervisor. The body is placed on the morgue cart or transported 
via stretcher or bed, the cover is replaced, and the body is transported to the morgue.  At this 
time, the funeral home chosen by the family is contacted by the nurse on the unit and 
documented in the medical record by the nurse. OLOL Livingston will utilize the body holding 
room. 
c. In the event the body is for autopsy, the nurse (Our Lady of the Lake Ascension – the coroners 
office) should notify the funeral home that the body cannot be released until an autopsy is 
performed. For OLOL Livingston, the charge nurse will contact the funeral home. At Our Lady 
of the Lake Regional Medical Center, lab personnel are to notify the funeral home and release 
the body after the autopsy has been performed.   
d. Funeral home representatives are responsible for obtaining signature of physician on death 
certificates. 
 
6. Coroner’s Cases 
Refer to policies OC004  (Coroner’s Cases and policy HIMR37 (Coroner’s Request for Medical 
Information) if a medical record is requested. 
 
7. Anatomical Donations 
Refer to Policy Org/Clin 002 
 OC-037 
Page 3 of 5 
8. Preparation of the Body 
a. After the family has left the hospital, the body is prepared and transported on the morgue cart to 
the morgue.  The body is cleansed, all personal valuables are removed, insure that an ID bracelet 
is placed on the patient, and all indwelling tubes are removed.  A paper isolation gown/hospital 
gown is placed on the body, then the body is placed in a plastic zippered body bag and tags to be 
placed on great toe, the zipper on the outside of the bag, and on any valuables. 
b. If the body is for autopsy in Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC)  
1.  An "Authorization for Autopsy” form must be completed and signed by the patient's 
next of kin before the procedure is started, except in a case where the Coroner has 
jurisdiction (see OrgClin/004). The form must be completed in full, indicate the extent of 
procedure to be done (trunk, head, partial, or total), and signed by two witnesses.    
2. A copy of the patient’s chart is sent/obtained by to pathology along with notations as to 
which funeral home the body is to be released. 
3.  All tubes, drains, IV lines, leads, etc. should be left in place.  These may be cut from 
attached equipment, but do not remove from the body. (see OrgClin/004) 
c. For infectious cases identify the infectious disease on the back of the great toe tag and body bag 
tag prior to taking the body to the morgue.  The House Manager/House Supervisor or designee 
assisting the funeral home personnel will inform them of measures necessary for precautions, if 
indicated.  For special communicable diseases that have high pathogenicity refer to the Special 
Communicable Disease policy (IC 2013) 
 Louisiana revised staute RS 40:1271.2 states that each hospital which requests a funeral director 
to transport a corpse where there is actual knowledge that the corpse is infected with a 
contagious disease be notified during the initial telephone communication. Further notification 
shall include a clearly visible, external tag that is readily discernible from other identification 
markers and a written statement that clearly indicates the name of the contagious disease or 
causative agent infecting or infesting said corpse. Such notification shall be made in a manner 
that protects the confidentiality of the deceased and the funeral director or embalmer handling 
the corpse. For Coroner’s cases no cleansing of the body should be done.   
d. OLOL Livingston/Our Lady of the Lake Ascension Director of Nursing /Designee will work 
with the House Manager/House Supervisor to assure continuity. 
9. Morgue verification process 
a. Patient body delivery to the morgue: The laboratory representative (i.e., medical technologist or 
lab assistant) will verify the ID of the patient’s body as it is delivered to the morgue. 
1. The Patient Care Services/House Manager/House Supervisor representative (attendant) 
will bring the body to the morgue and notify the lab of delivery. 
2. The laboratory representative will verify the patient’s ID by checking that all three 
identifiers (bag tag, toe tag, and patient armband) are consistent with each other. 
3. All representatives (lab, House Manager/House Superviosr and patient care services) 
must sign, date and document the time of delivery in the Morgue Log Book next to the 
name of the patient. OC-037 
Page 4 of 5 
b. Patient body release to funeral home: The laboratory representative(must be a medical 
technologist or lab assistant) /House Manager/House Supervisorwill verify the ID of the patient’s 
body as it is released to the funeral home. 
1. The Patient Care Services representative (attendant)/House Manager/House 
Supervisorwill verify the patient’s ID by checking that all three identifiers (bag tag, toe 
tag, and patient armband) are consistent with each other before release. The laboratory 
representative/House Manager will verify the ID check in order to ensure for proper 
release. 
2. All representatives (lab, House Manager/House Supervisor and patient care services) 
must sign, date and document the time of release in the Morgue Log Book next to the 
name of the patient.   
3. For OLOL Livingston, the Charge Nurse will communicate/coordinate with OLOL 
House Manager to verify consistency in process 
10. Disposition of Fetus 
a. Louisiana law states that each spontaneous fetal death of twenty (20) complete weeks gestation 
or more, calculated from the date the last normal menstrual period began to the date of delivery; 
a weight of three hundred fifty (350) grams or more; or a live birth which occurs in this state 
shall be reported within five days after delivery to the vital records registry or as otherwise 
directed by the state registrar.  This reporting will be done by the Health Information 
Management Department at OLOL.   
b. Fetal weights will be obtained by laboratory. The Nursing unit will place all of the products of 
conception into a laboratory-supplied container and will bring to Laboratory for weighing.   
c. The infant must be buried/cremated if it is 350 grams or more, is 20 weeks gestation or more, 
born with a heart rate, has respiratory action, or has movement of voluntary muscles.  The infant 
will only be examined in the Pathology laboratory if an autopsy is requested. 
d. If the fetus is born without a heart rate, is less than 350 grams, or less than 20 weeks gestation, 
burial is not required; however Louisiana state law requires notification to parents or mother the 
option to bury or cremate.   This notification will be done within 24 hours by providing The 
Disposition of Fetal Remains form # 91743 to the parent (s) with the explanation and expectation 
that the form be signed by the parent and returned  by the family to the Patient Care Services 
office within 48 hours should there be a desire to bury or cremate After inspection by the doctor, 
all products of conception of less than 350 grams, or less than 20 weeks gestation, shall be sent 
to the Pathology laboratory with a request slip for tissue examination.Should burial or cremation 
be requested Pathology Group of Louisiana histology lab compliance officer will be notified by 
Patient Care Services of the family’s intent. Within one business day the products of conception 
will be returned and logged into OLOL Morgue after routine histopathologic examination.  
Products of conception will only be released to licensed funeral homes. 
e. Failure of the family/mother to notify the hospital facility of the desire to bury/cremate the fetal 
remains within 48 hours of receiving form # 91743 will allow the hospital facility and or its 
authorized agent to dispose of the products of conception according to their customary tissue 
disposal practice. 
 OC-037 
Page 5 of 5 
11. Autopsy 
a. An "Authorization for Autopsy” form must be completed and signed by the patient's next of kin 
before the procedure is started, except in a case where the Coroner has jurisdiction (see 
OrgClin/004). The form must be competed in full, indicate the extent of procedure to be done 
(trunk, head, partial, or total), and signed by two witnesses.    
b. The nurse will notify the physician/coroners office if the family requests an autopsy.  When the 
autopsy authorization from has been properly signed, the body (with bag tag, toe tag, and patient 
armband) is taken to the morgue.  A copy of the patient’s chart and the “Authorization for 
Autopsy” will be given to the lab charge tech/House Manager/House Supervisor.  The name of 
the funeral home shall be designated on the authorization form.   
c. During hours of operation, the nurse shall notify the pathology department/House 
Manager/House Supevisor as soon as the “Authorization for Autopsy” has been signed.  After 
hours at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, the nurse shall notify the House 
Manager, who will in turn notify the lab charge tech. 
d. In Coroner’s cases, the nurse notifies the Coroner after the patient has been pronounced dead.  
The coroner’s orders concerning release of the body should be followed. (See OrgClin/004) The 
nurse should notify the Coroner if the next of kin requests an autopsy.  If the Coroner orders an 
autopsy is to be performed outside of the facility, nursing will request a copy of the patient’s 
chart from Health Information Management (HIM). A copy of the patient’s chart should be sent 
with the patient.   
 
e. The preliminary autopsy report will be completed within 2 working days and the final autopsy 
report will be completed within 60 calendar days. 
 
f. At Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, pathology sends cases to LSU Health New 
Orleans for autopsy. LSU Health New Orleans will notify the funeral home once the autopsy is 
performed. 
 
 
References   
 
 
Louisiana revised staute RS 40:1271.2.Mandatory Identification of infected corpses. (2015). Retrieved 
from: http://law.justia.com/codes/louisiana/2015/code-revisedstatutes/title-40/rs-40-1271.2 
 
Louisiana revisied statute RS 40:1191.2 Final disposition of fetal remains; rights of parents; notice 
required; exception. (2016). Retrieved from: https://law.justia.com/codes/louisiana/2016/code-
revisedstatutes/title-40/rs-40-1191.2/  