   OC-041 
 Page 1 of 1 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Clinical Practice Guidelines/Protocols Policy Reference #: OrgClin/041 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: July 24, 2003 Last Review Date: September 14, 2023 
Last Revision Date:  October 10, 2024 
 
PURPOSE 
To outline the process and oversight responsibility for the development, approval, deployment, measurement, and 
revisions to clinical practice guidelines. Clinical practice guidelines are defined as tools used to guide the delivery 
of safe, efficient, and effective health care for a specified diagnosis, procedure, or care process through the use of 
evidence-based guidelines when and where applicable. 
 
POLICY 
1. Development: 
Clinical practice guidelines will be developed by appropriate medical staff members in collaboration with 
the Chief Medical Information Officer, Clinical Information Services representatives and other key staff, 
including performance improvement department representatives.  Participants in the development may 
include all areas referenced in the clinical practice guideline.  Development of organization -wide 
diagnosis or process -driven guidelines is preferred.  Criteria used to develop clinical practice guidelines 
include, but are not limited to, current published practice guidelines, patient outcomes data, and high 
frequency/problem prone diagnoses or procedures. 
2.  Approval: 
The clinical practice guidelines/protocols will be reviewed by the Medical Executive Committee for final 
endorsement. 
3. Deployment: 
Upon endorsement from the Medical Executive Committee, clinical practice guidelines /protocols will be 
available for use through the electronic medical record (EMR) in the patient’s chart, menu/order/search of 
the Clinical Practice guideline/protocol to initiate.   Clinical practice guidelines will also be available for 
use via structured implementation of computerized physician order entry (CPOE).  When a Clinical 
Practice Guideline/Protocol is implemented, a MD order will be entered into EMR. 
4. Review/Revisions: 
All clinical practice guidelines will be reviewed and approved by the MEC every two (2) years and/or as 
practice changes occur. 
 
 