OC-040 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: 
Universal Protocol for Operative, Invasive, 
Sedation, High Risk Procedure Verification;  
(Time Out/Surgical Safety Checklist) 
Policy Reference #: OrgClin-040 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: May 22, 2003 Last Review Date: July 6, 2023 
Last Revision Date:  November 25, 2024 
 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to ensure that the correct site, correct procedure, and correct patient are 
identified and verified prior to the start of any operative, invasive, sedation, or high risk procedure.  
 
OLOL hospital licensed clinics will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Physician Group Policy OC040 
Expectations for Invasivie Procedures Performed in Provider-Based Clinics.   
 
POLICY 
A. All areas within the organization where operative and invasive procedures occur including 
procedures performed at the bedside, shall adhere to the procedure set forth below.  
 
B. The site marking is required for all cases or procedures involving right/left distinction, multiple 
structures (fingers, toes), surgical approach for cranial procedures, or levels (spine). 
 
C.  The nurse will be responsible for ensuring that the following process and documentation is 
complete. 
 
PROCEDURE 
 
Pre-operative Verification Process 
1. All patients will have an Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) patient identification armband.  All 
caregivers must identify patients using at least two identifiers.  For inpatients, verify name and date 
of birth (DOB).  For outpatients, verify name and date of birth. 
 
2. All caregivers must confirm the correct patient, correct site and correct procedure with the patient 
involved, awake and aware if possible. 
 
3. The nurse will review and ensure that the following information reflects the correct patient name and 
is available prior to the start of the procedure: 
a. History and Physical 
b. OLOL Hospital Consent 
c. MD Informed Consent 
d. Nursing assessment 
e. Pre-anesthesia assessment 
f. Pre-procedure or Pre-operative checklist 
g. Diagnostic and radiology test results with appropriate labeling 
h. Required blood products, implants and special equipment, if applicable  
 
4. The electronic Patient Pre-Operative Checklist will be used for this documentation.  For areas not 
utilizing electronic  documentation or for downtime documentation charting will be done utilizing OC-040 
Page 2 of 4 
the Patient Pre-Op/ pause procedure Checklist and Final Pause Verification Checklist form (NS-364 
(A), for areas outside the OR.   
 
Marking the Operative/Invasive Site 
1. The surgeon or physician performing the procedure will be responsible for the site marking when it 
involves incision or percutaneous puncture or insertion.  
2. The site will be marked with an "S" for Site, using a hospital approved indelible marker. Whenever a 
choice of: right/left distinction, multiple structures (fingers, toes), and surgical approach for cranial 
procedures or levels (spine) is applicable.  
a. Marking is to take place before the start of the procedure, with the patient involved, awake 
and aware, if possible.  
b. The site mark (“S”) should be marked in the area so that the (“S”) is visible in the operative 
field once the patient is prepped and draped for the procedure. 
c. When a procedure involving laterality is done through a natural body orifice to treat an 
organ that is either to the “right” or left”, then marking the skin at or near the proposed 
incision/insertion site is required.  
d. Instead of directly marking teeth- mark the tooth site or surgical site on diagram or 
radiograph image. 
e. In addition to pre-operative skin marking of the general spinal region, special intra-
operative radiographic techniques are used for marking the exact vertebral level. 
f. When surgery involves digit(s) (i.e. fingers or toes), the surgical site marking shall indicate 
the specific digit(s).  If the digit(s) is/are unable to be marked pre-operatively due to splints 
or bandages that cannot be removed prior to anesthetizing the patient, then the surgeon will 
mark the involved extremity proximal to the digit specifying the digit(s) to be incised.  
When the splint is removed in the operating room, the surgeon will mark the exact digit 
prior to draping/preparation.    
 
3. Exceptions to the requirement for site marking include: 
a. Single midline organ cases (e.g., CAB) 
b. Interventional cases for which the catheter/instrument insertion site is not predetermined 
(Cardiac Catheterization or Lumbar Percutaneous Epidural procedures). 
c. When there is an obvious wound or lesion that is the site of the procedure. 
d. Endoscopic procedures without intended laterality 
e. In situations where any delay in procedure could reasonably be expected to jeopardize the 
life or health of the patient. 
f. Minor Procedures examples: Venapuncture, foley cath, IV line placement. 
g. Premature infants, for whom the mark may cause a permanent tattoo. 
 
Alternative Marking of Operative/Invasive Site 
(This process is only for exceptional circumstances as stated herein.) 
 
1. When the patient refuses site marking the RN will document the patient’s refusal on the Pre-
Procedure Checklist. 
a. If the patient refuses site marking, the patient’s physician will review with the patient the 
rationale for site marking and the implications for refusing site marking. If the patient still 
refuses site marking, the person responsible for marking the site should implement the 
following alternative method before the case proceeds. OC-040 
Page 3 of 4 
b. The RN overseeing the patient’s care will secure and provide an Anatomical Site Marking 
Form (forms stored in SMAU/T), affix a patient identification label and have the Surgeon to 
mark the form with the location of the incision/s, date, time, and sign the form. 
2. If the patient is a premature pediatric patient the physician and nurse will complete the same process 
as stated in this section, working with the child’s parent/guardian. The completed form shall be 
verified with the parent or guardian.  
3. When surgical site marking is technically or anatomically impossible or impractical the patient’s 
physician will implement the following alternative method before the case proceeds: 
a. The RN overseeing the patient’s care will secure and provide an Anatomical Site Marking 
Form, affix a patient identification label and have the Surgeon to mark the form with the 
location of the incision/s, date, time, and sign the form. 
4. The form should be visualized by members of the surgical team during the Final Pause Verification 
process. 
5. Examples of situations involving alternative processes for site marking:  
a. Minimal access procedures treating a lateralized internal organ, whether percutaneous or 
through a natural orifice. 
b. Premature infants, for whom the mark may cause a permanent tattoo 
c. Dental extractions 
 
Final Patient ID  Verification  
Immediately prior to transporting the patient and after entering the procedure room / OR  , the patient 
identification will be verified by the  Registered Nurse through the two identification process and the 
procedure will be verified through active communication with the patient  along with review of the  
procedure consent, located in the electronic  medical record  rec (EMR) or the patient’s chart.  
 
“Time Out” Immediately Before Starting the Procedure or making the incision 
1.  The “Time Out” is prior to the start of the procedure, but after the patient has been draped, and prior 
to the incision or start of the procedure. It involves the immediate members of the procedure team. 
Based on the type of procedure this may include, but not limited to: the individual performing the 
procedure, the anesthesia providers, the circulating nurse, the operating room technician, and other 
active participants who will be participating in the procedure from the beginning. Member not 
required at the beginning will be briefed upon arrival. 
2. The  registered nurse will initiate the “Time Out” and all members of the procedure team will stop 
activities and verbally reconfirm the information specified  in the electronic medical record.  This 
includes some of the following criteria from the safe surgery checklist: 
a. Correct patient identity and allergies 
b. Confirmation of correct site 
c. Agreement on the procedure to be done 
d. Administration of pre-operative antibiotics (and beta-blockers)  
e.  Pertinent Diagnostic (lab/imaging) results are available 
f.  Any necessary Equipment, Implants, or blood products 
 
3. For procedures involving special positioning/sterile drapes, the patient’s identity will be confirmed 
by the Registered Nurse, who previously confirmed the patient’s identification using the 2-ID 
process, using the “Consent of Operation or Other Procedure” that has a patient identification label 
and has been signed by the patient. Information on this form was previously confirmed by the 
patient. OC-040 
Page 4 of 4 
 
4. In the event the patient requires two or more procedures and the person performing the procedure 
changes, a “Time Out” is performed to confirm each subsequent procedure prior to its initiation. 
 
5.  During the “Time Out”, activities are suspended to the extent possible so that team members can 
focus on active confirmation of the patient, site and procedure. 
 
6.  All involved team members msut verbally agree. The procedure will not be started until all 
questions or concerns are resolved.  
 
7. Documentation of the “Time Out” is documented electronically in EMR. For non-EMR areas or 
during computer downtime, documentation will be done utilizing the Procedure Site Verification 
Checklist (OR-217) or the (NS-27 (A) Pre-op / Procedure Checklist and Final Pause Verification.    
 
Procedures for Non-OR Settings Including Bedside Procedures 
1. Site marking must be done for any procedure that involves laterality, multiple structure or levels, 
even if the procedure takes place outside of an Operating Room. 
 
2. Verification, site marking, and the time of the “Time Out” is to be documented electronically. For 
non-EMR areas or during computer downtime, documentation will be done using the Universal 
Protocol / Pre-Procedure / Pre-Sedation and Final Verification Checklist (NS-364 (A).     
 
3. Exception for Marking the Site: Cases in which the physician/surgeon doing the procedure is in 
continuous attendance with the patient from the time of decision to do the procedure through to the 
start of the procedure may be exempted from the site marking requirements. The requirement for 
“Time Out” verification applies. However, if the physician/surgeon leaves the presence of the patient 
for any amount of time, then the site should be marked (before leaving the patient).  
 
 
REFERENCES: 
AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practice, 2025 
 
The Jiont Commision Standards Universal Ptotocol  
 
National Patient Safety Goals UP.01.01.01, UP.01.02.01, UP.01.03.01 
 
 
 