 
OC 056 Guidelines to Determine Death by Neuro Criteria in Adults 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational / Clinical 
SUBJECT:  
Guidelines for Determination of Death by 
Neurological Criteria in Adults 
PAGES: 
4 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
  May 1985 
REVISION DATE: 
November 2, 2023 
Reviewed Date: 
October 14, 2024  
 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OC 056  
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidance and supportive information to physicians charged with making a determination of death 
by neurological criteria in Adults. This policy does not apply to patients under the age of 18 years.  Please 
refer to Children’s Hospital policy Guidelines for Determination of Death of Children Due to Irreversible 
Cessation of Brain Function 
POLICY: 
The determination of death shall be made by a physician duly licensed in the state of Louisiana in accordance with 
responsible and commonly accepted scientific criteria (Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care 
Services, Fifth Edition, Directive #62). 
 
The Determination of Death by Neurological Criteria in Adults Progress Note will be used by physicians to document 
irreversible total cessation of brain function. 
 
Upon determination of death, respiratory and cardiac support can be discontinued by either a physician, or a mid-level 
practitioner or respiratory therapist with documented training, provided the patient has not been declared a candidate for 
organ donation. 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
OC 056 Guidelines to Determine Death by Neuro Criteria in Adults 
2 
DEFINITIONS: 
DEATH (Per Louisiana Revised Statute 9:111): “A person will be considered dead if in the announced opinion of a 
physician, duly licensed in the state of Louisiana based on ordinary standards of approved medical practice, the person 
has experienced an irreversible cessation of spontaneous respiratory and circulatory functions.  In the event that artificial 
means of support preclude a determination that these functions have ceased, a person will be considered dead if in the 
announced opinion of a physician, duly licensed in the state of Louisiana based upon ordinary standards of approved 
medical practice, the person has experienced an irreversible total cessation of brain function. Death will have occurred at 
the time when the relevant functions ceased.”   
 
When organs are to be used in a transplant, a second physician, duly licensed in the state of Louisiana, not a member of 
the transplant team, will document as to the candidacy of the person for the process of organ donation. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
GUIDELINES FOR THE DETERMINATION of DEATH: 
 
GUIDELINES for decision making in determining irreversible total cessation of brain function: 
A. Prerequisites for Assessment to Declare Death by Neurological Criteria in Adults: 
1) Coma, irreversible, and cause known 
2) Core body temperature at least 36 degrees Celsius 
3) Systolic blood pressure greater than 100mmHg 
4) No spontaneous respirations 
5) Patient 18 years of age or older 
6) Absence of medication or ingestant effect 
7) Absence of residual effect of paralytic drug 
8) Absence of severe acid-base, electrolyte, or endocrine abnormality 
In the presence of a confounding variable (6, 7, and/or 8 above), brain death may still be determined through 
ancillary testing. 
 
B. Neurological Examination 
1) Examination by a physician, properly licensed by the State of Louisiana who is also a member of the 
Medical Staff of Our Lady of the Lake Hospital.  
2) Presence of the following criteria 
a) Apnea - no respiratory effort as per Apnea Test (See Appendix A.) 
b) Absent cerebrally mediated motor responses 
1) Absence of facila movement to noxious stimuli to supraorbital nerve or 
temporomandibular joint 
2) Absence of motor response to noxious stimuli in all 4 limbs (spinally mediated reflexes 
are permissible) 
c) Absent brainstem reflexes: 
1) Absence of pupillary reflex  
2) Absence of corneal reflex 
3) Absence of oculocephalic reflexes (test only when cervical spine fracture or instability absent) 
4) Absence of oculovestibular reflex.  
OC 056 Guidelines to Determine Death by Neuro Criteria in Adults 
3 
5) Absence of gag reflex 
6) Absence of cough reflex 
 
If unable to complete full clinical brain death examination (including the apnea test), full documentation 
identifying both the specific test not completed and the reason why the test was not completed should be 
noted in the medical record. 
 
C. Ancillary Testing 
1)  Irreversible, total cessation of brain function is determined by clinical findings.  
2)  Ancillary testing is used to establish the absence of cerebral blood flow by cerebral perfusion scan  
                 or cerebral angiography 
3) Prerequisites 1-5 (as listed previously) must be met prior to ancillary testing. Ancillary testing is to be used, if  
     and only if: 
a) Any component of the neurological examination (including apnea test) cannot be completed 
b) There is uncertainty about the results of the neurological examination 
c) Intractable confounding variable 
This Policy replaces: 
• Guidelines for Determination of Brain Death EA0008 
• Apnea Test for Brain Death RC7-28 
• Electrical Cerebral inactivity (ECI) EEG/CL/007 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and OLOL reserves the right to deviate from, 
revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Philosophy and General Guidelines for Making Decisions Concerning Life Sustaining Procedures Policy 
(OrgOps/ET/007) 
• Advance Directives Policy  
• Code Blue / Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Policy (OrgClin/003) 
• Termination or Discontinuance of Life Support Systems Policy (OrgOps/ET/010) 
• American Academy of Neurology, (1994) Practice parameters: Determining brain death in adults. 
• Neurology (2023).  Pediatric and adult brain death/death by neurologic criteria consensus guideline: Report of 
the AAN guidelines subcommittee, AAP, CNS, and SCCM 
• Louisiana State Legislature – Regulatory Statue LA R. S. 9:111. 
• State of Louisiana Legislature, (2010). Act 937 – Uniform Anatomical Gift Act 
• United States conference of Catholic Bishops, (2020). Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care 
Services (Sixth Edition). 
• Wijdicks, E. F.M. (2011). Brain Death. Oxford University Press, New York, NY 
 
 
ATTACHMENTS:   
OC 056 Guidelines to Determine Death by Neuro Criteria in Adults 
4 
• Appendix A: Apnea Test to Determine Brain Death 
 
Appendix A: Apnea Test to Determine Brain Death. 
 
1. It is recommended that a respiratory therapist and nurse be at the bedside for the duration of the 
apnea test. 
 
2. Gather appropriate supplies (oxygen tubing, oxygen flow meter, arterial blood gas kits) 
 
3. Confirm that the patient is properly connected to a cardiac monitor. 
 
4. Prerequisites for performing the test include: 
1. Core body temperature of at least 96.8 degrees Fahrenheit 
2. Systolic blood pressure at least 100 mm Hg 
3. Normocapnia ((Paco2 35-45 mm Hg) 
4. Positive fluid balance for the last 6 hours. 
 
 If all these conditions are present, the test may be performed. A baseline arterial blood gas should 
be drawn prior to the start of the test. 
 Note: The patient must be removed from the ventilator to perform the test. 
 
5. Pre-oxygenate with 100% Fio2 for 10 minutes (Pao2 greater than 200 mm Hg)  
 
6. Connect one end of the oxygen tubing to the oxygen flow meter and turn the flow meter to 6 
liters/minute.  Cut the other of the oxygen tubing so that the narrowest part of tubing will be 
inserted into the patient’s endotracheal tube. 
 
7. Disconnect ventilator and insert the oxygen tubing into the patient’s endotracheal tube. Insert the 
tubing far enough to reach the end of the endotracheal tube. 
 
8. Observe the patient for any signs of chest wall movement or respiratory effort. Also, observe for 
any cardiac arrhythmias. 
 
9. Perform an arterial blood gas after at least 8 minutes. The test may be continued for up to 20 
minutes at the physician’s discretion. Additional arterial blood gases may be drawn throughout 
the procedure. 
 
10. Apnea is present if respiratory movement is absent and the CO2 is >60mm Hg (from baseline 
PaCO2 of 35 - 45 mm Hg) or increased by 20 mm Hg over the baseline reading.  If respiratory 
movements are observed, apnea is not present (i.e. the results do not support the clinical diagnosis 
of brain death.) 
 
11. Reconnect the patient to the ventilator during testing if the systolic blood pressure becomes less 
than 90 mm Hg or the oxygen saturation drops to less than 85 percent and there is a new onset of 
cardiac arrhythmias with hemodynamic instability present; immediately draw an arterial blood 
sample and analyze arterial blood gas.   
 
12. Post test, place the patient back on the ventilator on the previous settings. 