  
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Nursing Peer and Performance 
Evaluations 
Policy 
Reference #: OC-052 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: September 5, 2013 Last Review 
Date:  April 4, 2024 
Last Revision Date: April 4, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
This policy describes the process by which timely peer evaluations are administered for all Our Lady of 
the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) nurses, to promote growth and development through 
professional awareness. This is a confidential process and is peer protected. 
 This process helps to evaluate the employee’s work related behaviors in relation to established 
standards at OLOLRMC.  
 
POLICY: 
A criteria-based peer evaluation system is in place for all nurses at OLOLRMC.  The system is designed 
to gauge performance according to predetermined standards.  The system also aids in clarifying duties 
and/or responsibilities, improving peer communication, providing feedback to the nurse regarding 
his/her performance, and improving the quality of service rendered to patients and customers.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Peer evaluations will take place for all  nurses at all levels at time intervals determined by 
nursing administration. This is a separate process from performance evaluations.  
2. Determining who will evaluate: 
a. The employee will choose a peer whom they would like to complete the evaluation 
b. The manager will choose a peer to evaluate the employee 
c. The employee and manager will meet and agree or the employee can provide the manager 
with three possible names of peers from whom they would like evaluations and the 
manger can  select candidates from that list 
d. In the event there are not 2 peer evaluators available, one peer evaluation submitted will 
be acceptable.  
3. Managers notify staff regarding peer review process (this can be a physical meeting and/or a team 
mail to alert staff.)   
4. Peer feedback is completed by the designated peer. Data is confidentially extracted and a 
summary is provided to the appropriate manager.   
6. Managers review summaries with employees. Approximately 4 weeks following peer review a 
link is sent to the employee in order to make professional goals based on reflection of the peer 
provided feedback.   
7. Manager meets with employees for follow-up to determine progress made toward goals. This 
meeting can be at the same time as the annual evaluation.  