 
OC 051/ LaPOST  
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational / Clinical  
SUBJECT:  
LaPOST (Louisiana Physician Orders for Scope 
of Treatment) 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
6/30/2012  
REVIEW DATE: 
 March 29, 2024 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OC051 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
POLICY: 
• A LaPOST document can be completed on a qualified patient regardless of age. 
• The LaPOST document translates a patient’s end of life wishes and goals into physician’s order which can transfer 
across health care settings.  The LaPOST document is recognized as a physician order.  The treating MD will need to 
enter orders in the Electronic Medical Record (EMR) that are consistent with what is noted on the LaPOST 
document. 
• The LaPOST document must be signed by a physician, and by the patient, or if the patient lacks decision making 
capacity the patient’s personal health care representative. The form is not valid without the signature of the physician 
and the patient or the patient’s healthcare representative. 
• At each presentation to the ER and/ or hospitalization, the LaPOST document should be reviewed by the treating 
physician or mid-level provider with the patient and/or the patient’s personal health care representative.   
• When more than one version of the LaPOST exists, the most recent version will be honored. 
• The patient is to keep the original LaPOST document; a copy of the document is scanned and received in the EMR 
under the Advanced Care Planning.  If upon discharge an original of the LaPOST document is found in the medical 
record, Health Information Management will mail the original document to the patient if the patient was discharged 
alive. 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
OC 051/ LaPOST  
2 
• As a Catholic health care institution, OLOLRMC strives to be a community of respect, love, and support to patients 
and residents and their families as they face the reality of death.  The Medical Center takes guidance from the Ethical 
and Religious Directives (ERDs) for Catholic Health Care Services, 5th Edition, United States Conference of 
Catholic Bishops, 2018.  The ERDs state several spiritual and ethical priorities of taking faithful care of dying 
patients and their families, and of evaluating Advance Care Planning documents such as LaPOST.  (a) A task of 
medicine and health care is to care even when it cannot cure.  (b) Catholic health care avoids the use of non-
beneficial or burdensome technology that offers no reasonable benefit to patient or resident. (c) Staff must not 
withdraw technology with the intention of causing death. (d) Euthanasia and physician-assisted dying are not 
permitted.  (e) In principle there is the presumption for food and fluids if the benefit outweighs the burden to the 
patient or resident. (f) Patients and residents should be kept as free of pain as possible. (g) Pain suppressing or 
alleviating medicine that may indirectly shorten a person’s life is permitted so long as the intent is not to hasten 
death. (Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services.) 
DEFINITIONS: 
• Advance Directive: A patient’s written instructions that explain his/her wishes for health care if the patient has a 
terminal and irreversible condition or is in a continual profound comatose state (Living Will) and/or a document 
identifying the person who the patient desires to make medical decisions if the patient is unable to do so or chooses 
not to (Power of Attorney for Health Care.) 
• LaPOST: A standardized form which documents the qualified patient’s wishes for end of life care into a physician 
order. 
• Personal Health Care Representative: A person who has authority in accordance with Louisiana law to act on 
behalf of an individual who is an adult or an emancipated minor in making decisions related to health care because 
of incapacity. 
• Qualified Patient:  Patient diagnosed as having a life-limiting and irreversible condition by the attending physician 
or personal physician of the patient. 
PROCEDURE: 
1. For Patients Presenting to the Emergency Department with a Completed LaPOST: 
A. Health care providers are to follow LaPOST orders until the ED physician reviews the LaPOST form and 
incorporates the content of LaPOST into the care and treatment plan of the patient. 
B. The ED physician may issue new orders consistent with the most current information available about the 
patient’s health status, medical condition, treatment preferences and goals of care. The reasons for any deviation 
from the LaPOST should be documented in the EMR.  
C. Discussions with the patient and/or the patient’s personal health care representative regarding the LaPOST 
document and related treatment decisions will be documented in the EMR.   
D. A copy of the current LaPOST form will be scanned in the EMR if not already present.  The original LaPOST 
form will be returned to the patient.   
2. For Patients Admitted to the Hospital with a completed LaPOST: 
A. The nurse will document in the EMR the existence of a LaPOST during the initial patient assessment. 
B. Health care providers are to follow LaPOST orders until the admitting physician reviews the LaPOST form and 
incorporates the content of the LaPOST document into the care and treatment plan of the patient, as appropriate.   
OC 051/ LaPOST  
3 
The physician should document his review of the LaPOST in the EMR. 
C. The admitting physician may issue new orders consistent with the most current information available about the 
patient’s health status, medical condition, treatment preferences and goals of care. The reasons for any deviation 
from the LaPOST should be documented in the EMR.  
D. Discussions with the patient and/or the patient’s personal health care representative regarding the LaPOST 
document and related treatment decisions will be documented in the EMR.   
E. A copy of the current LaPOST form will be scanned into the EMR, if not already present, under ACP.  The 
original LaPOST form will be returned to the patient.   
3. Completing LaPOST with a Patient: 
A. When a patient is identified by the physician or mid-level provider as appropriate for having a LaPOST, the 
physician or mid-level provider will have the discussion with the patient or with the patient and/or the patient’s 
personal health care representative to explain the LaPOST form.  These conversations will be documented in the 
EMR. 
B. After reviewing the LaPOST document with the patient and/or the patient’s surrogate decision maker, the 
physician will sign the document along with the patient or if the patient is unable, the patient’s surrogate 
decision maker. If the patient’s personal health care representative is not readily available to sign the document, 
two licensed health care professionals can take verbal consent; both will need to document this on the form. 
C. Once the LaPOST document is completed, a copy will be scanned into the EMR under ACP and the original 
LaPOST will be returned to the patient. 
 
4. Voiding a LaPOST: 
A. If a LaPOST document is no longer valid due to a patient changing treatment preferences or a change in the 
patient’s health status or medical condition, the LaPOST can be voided.  To void a LaPOST, draw a line through 
Sections A through D and write “VOID” in large letters.  Sign and date this line.  A copy of the voided LaPOST 
will be scanned into the EMR. 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and OLOL reserves the right to deviate from, 
revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Louisiana Regulatory Statue. 40:1155.1 through 40:1155.6. 
• Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, 6th Edition; United States 
Conference of Catholic Bishops, 2018. 
ATTACHMENTS:  
• N/A 
 
 