 
OC 059 Nondiscrimination 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational/Clinical 
SUBJECT:  
Nondiscrimination 
PAGES: 
4 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
January 28, 2019 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
November 30, 2016   
REVIEW DATE: 
October 30, 2024 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OC 059  
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for addressing concerns related to discrimination on the basis of race, color, national 
origin, sex, age or disability and for prompt resolution to any grievance filed related to discrimination. 
POLICY: 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center does not and shall not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion 
(creed), gender, gender expression, age, national origin (ancestry), disability, marital status, sexual orientation, or 
military status, in any of its activities or operations. These activities include, but are not limited to, hiring and firing of 
staff, selection of volunteers and vendors, and provision of services. We are committed to providing an inclusive and 
welcoming environment for all members of our staff, clients, volunteers, subcontractors, vendors, and clients.  
DEFINITIONS: 
Sex Discrimination includes, but is not limited to discrimination based on an individual’s sex, including 
pregnancy, related medical conditions, termination of pregnancy, gender identity and sex stereotypes. 
Gender Identity means an individual’s internal sense of gender, which may be male, female, neither, or a 
combination of male and female. 
Sex Stereotypes means stereotypical notions of masculinity or femininity. 
Limited English Proficiency (LEP) means an individual whose primary language is not English and who has 
a limited ability to read, write, speak or understand English 
National Origin includes, but is not limited to, an individual’s, or his or her ancestor’s place of origin, or 
physical, cultural, or linguistic characteristics of a national origin group. 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
OC 059 Nondiscrimination 
2 
Disability means a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life 
activities of such individual, having a record of such an impairment; or being regarded as having such an 
impairment. 
Physical or Mental Impairment means any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or 
anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological, musculoskeletal, special 
sense organs, respiratory, cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic, skin 
and endocrine; any mental or psychological disorders such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, 
emotional or mental illness and specific learning disabilities.   
Auxiliary aids and services include, but are not limited to, qualified interpreters; video remote interpreting 
(VRI) services; note taking; real-time computer-aided transcription services; written materials; exchange of 
written notes; telephone handset amplifiers; assistive listening devices and systems; telephones compatible 
with hearing aids; text telephones (TTY); videophones or captioned telephones; videotext displays; large print 
materials. 
PROCEDURE: 
Auxiliary communication aids and services will be provided to individuals with disabilities free of charge and 
in a timely manner. 
Language assistance services will be provided to individuals with Limited English Proficiency free of charge 
and in a timely manner. 
A patient or a patient’s representative who feels the patient has been subjected to discrimination on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, sex, age or disability may file a grievance.  Grievances must be submitted in 
writing to the Civil Rights Coordinator within 60 days of the alleged discriminatory action.  The complaint 
must be in writing, contain the name, address and phone number of the person filing the complaint, the name 
and date of birth of the patient if the patient is not filing the complaint and must state the problem or action 
alleged to be discriminatory and the remedy or relief sought.   
The grievance process per Patient Rights, Responsibilities. Complaints, and Grievance Process policy 
(OrgClin/020) will be used to investigate the grievance.  
A written decision on the grievance will be sent within 30 days of the filing of the grievance to the patient or 
the patient’s representative.  This written decision will include notice of their right to pursue further 
administrative or legal remedies. 
The person filing the grievance may appeal the decision to the Civil Rights Coordinator in writing within 15 
days of receiving the decision.  The Chief Executive Officer, Board of Directors or Senior Executive shall 
issue a written decision to the appeal within 30 days after receipt of appeal. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and OLOL reserves the right to 
deviate from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion.  
OC 059 Nondiscrimination 
3 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Patient Rights, Responsibilities. Complaints, and Grievance Process (OrgClin/020) 
• Care of the Sensory (Hearing, Speech, Visually) Impaired Patients (OrgClin/005) 
• Foreign Language Interpreters (OrgClin/010) 
• Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act (42 U.S.C. § 18116) and Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964 (45 CFR 80). 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
• N/A 
 
 