 OC054 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Relinquishment of a Newborn- 
Safe Haven Law 
Policy Reference #: OC054 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 8/26/2013 Last Date Reviewed: February 12, 2024 
Last Date Revised:  February 1, 2023 
 
PURPOSE:  
To establish a procedure for relinquishment of an infant as directed by the Louisiana Children’s Code 
Chapter 13, Articles 1149 – 1160. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Relinquish- To give over possession or control of an infant by a parent to the care of an employee at a 
Safe Haven facility, with the intent to forgo all parental responsibilities.  
 
Infant- A child not previously subjected to abuse or neglect, who is not more than sixty (60) days old as 
determined within a reasonable degree of medical certainty.  
 
POLICY: 
The relinquished infant may be left in the care of any employee at an Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) 
Safe Haven site location as listed below. 
 
The relinquishing parent should be asked to voluntarily provide the following information:  any prenatal 
care received, medical history, the identity of the other parent, and the opportunity to complete a 
medical / genetic form regarding the infant’s background (refer to attached Form 448).   
 
The relinquishing parent should also be provided with our facility name and contact information for the 
Louisiana Department of Child and Family Services (1-855-4LA-KIDS or 1-855-452-5437; 1-888-510-
BABY or 1-888-510-2229 ) to provide medical information about the baby or learn about their parental 
rights. Parents may also text SAFEHAVEN to 313131 to learn about their rights or provide medical 
information. This information is provided on the Safe Baby Site cards and brochures which can be found 
at the registration desks at the following OLOL Safe Haven Site locations: 
• OLOLRMC Main Hospital – registration desks located at Main Entrance and Main Emergency 
Department  
• Children’s Hospital – registration desks located at Main Entrance and Emergency Department  
• Our Lady of the Lake Ascension Emergency Department and Ambulatory Surgical Center – 
registration desks are located at  Entrance A, Entrance B and centralized desk first floor MOB2 
• LSU Health Perkins Ambulatory Surgical Center 
• OLOLRMC Livingston Emergency Department 
• North Baton Rouge Emergency Department  
 
The infant should be brought to the Emergency Department (ED) so that an ED provider may perform 
any life stabilizing care. The infant should then be transferred immediatley to the OLOL Children’s  OC054 
Page 2 of 2 
Hospital ED and a physician shall promptly conduct a comprehensive medical examination and such 
tests to determine: 
 
• If the infant suffers from HIV or hepatitis, if suspected 
• If the infant suffered fetal exposure to alcohol or drugs 
• If the infant appears to have been abused or neglected 
• The infant's estimated date of birth, if not previously known 
 
The infant will be examined and admitted under an alias, established by registration.  
 
The ED staff will immediately notify:  the House Manager/House Supervisor, the Department of 
Children and Family Services, and Risk Management. 
 
When known, the hospital shall forward the infant’s birth information to the Bureau of Vital Statistics , 
for issuance of a birth certificate; unless it is determined that one has already been issued.  Unless 
otherwise known, the infant shall be presumed to have been born in Louisiana. 
 
“Safe Baby Site” information will be displayed within the hospital.   
 
Anyone with questions regarding the Safe Haven Law can call 1-855-4LA-KIDS or 1-855-452-5437or 
go to www.louisianasafehaven.com. 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
Louisiana Children’s Code, Chapter 13. Safe Haven Relinquishment. Articles 1149-1160 
 
 