 
OC065 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational / Clinical 
SUBJECT:  
Palliative Care Consultation-Inpatient 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
OrgClin-042, March 10, 2014 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
April 14, 2021 
REVISION DATE: 
March 29, 2024 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OC 065 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to all Our Lady of the Lake wholly owned and Sponsored Organizations. 
PURPOSE: 
Palliative Care Consultations are available to assist staff in caring for patients with serious illness. The 
Palliative Care Team will provide physical, psychosocial, and spiritual support to patients and families during 
a hospitalization.  
 
Pediatric Palliative care is a supportive service for patients and families facing serious illness, an unexpected 
or prolonged hospitalization, or complex decision-making in the context of underlying illness or an uncertain 
prognosis.  
 
POLICY: 
The Palliative Care Team utilizes an interdisciplinary approach to pain and symptom management for those 
with serious illness by providing aggressive symptom relief and family support. Palliative Care works with the 
existing care team to provide physical, spiritual, emotional, individualized, patient focused, family centered 
care based on the patient/family goals.  
The expressed goal of medicine is to provide care and comfort, even in situations where cure is not a 
possibility. As a Catholic healthcare institution, we must provide patients facing death with the necessary 
information needed to assist with understanding of their condition and to provide a framework for them to 
make morally legitimate choices for their care. In addition, effective management of pain in all its forms is 
critical in the appropriate care of the dying. Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Healthcare Services, 
Sixth Edition, Part Five, Issues in Care for the Seriously Ill and Dying.  
Our Pediatric Palliative Care Team will partner with the primary team to help patients live their best life 
possible. We will offer support from the time of diagnosis and throughout the illness journey, in conjunction 
with curative therapy.  
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL  
OC065 
2 
DEFINITIONS: 
Palliative care is specialized medical care for people living with a serious illness. This type of care is focused 
on providing relief from the symptoms and stress of the illness. The goal is to improve quality of life for both 
the patient and the family. 
The Palliative Care Interdisciplinary Team consists of Board-Certified Hospice and Palliative Medicine 
Physicians, Advanced Certified Hospice and Palliative Care Nurse Practitioners, Certified Hospice and 
Palliative Care RN, Chaplain and Social Worker. 
PROCEDURE:  
OLOL MAIN 
1. A request for consultation may be made by anyone. The attending physician will be notified of the request 
by staff and to obtain an order.  
2. A provider may enter an order for inpatient palliative care consultation into the electronic medical record. 
3. Patients will be assessed by a palliative care team member for symptoms of discomfort, including but not 
limited to, pain, nausea/vomiting, dyspnea, confusion/delirium, anxiety, and spiritual and emotional 
aspects of distress that interfere with the quality of life. Arrangements for family conferences to conduct 
goals of care conversations may be arranged. 
4. Palliative Care Team measures include pharmacological as well as non-pharmacological interventions 
prescribed by the physician or allied health professional and/or nursing interventions incorporated into the 
plan of care, to relieve distress and discomfort.  
5. Palliative Care Team formal consultation note, and interventions will be documented in the patient’s 
electronic medical record.  
6. A member of the inpatient palliative care team is available for consultation on-site seven days a week from                 
      8am to 4pm and twenty-four hours a day by telephone. 
 
OLOL CHILDREN’S 
 
1. A request for consultation may be made my anyone. The attending physician will be notified of the 
request by the staff and to obtain order.  
2. A provider may enter an order for inpatient pediatric palliative care consultation into the electronic 
medical record.  
3. Pediatric Palliative Care Team will partner with the primary team on the on the following: 
a. Determination of goals of care 
b. Communication and relationship repair 
c. Symptom management 
d. Advanced care planning and coordination 
e. End of life support 
f. Expertise in hospice support and concurrent care 
g. Grief and emotional support  
4. Pediatric Palliative Care formal consultation note, and interventions will be documented in the patient’s 
electronic medical record.  
 
  
OC065 
3 
OLOL ASCENSION 
 
1. A request for consultation may be made by anyone. The attending physician will be notified of the request 
by staff and to obtain an order.  
2. A provider may enter an order for inpatient palliative care consultation into the electronic medical record. 
3. Patients will be assessed by a palliative care team member for symptoms of discomfort, including but not 
limited to, pain, nausea/vomiting, dyspnea, confusion/delirium, anxiety, and spiritual and emotional 
aspects of distress that interfere with the quality of life. Arrangements for family conferences to conduct 
goals of care conversations may be arranged. 
4. Palliative Care Team measures include pharmacological as well as non-pharmacological interventions 
prescribed by the physician or allied health professional and/or nursing interventions incorporated into the 
plan of care, to relieve distress and discomfort.  
5. Palliative Care Team formal consultation note, and interventions will be documented in the patient’s 
electronic medical record.  
6. A member of the Palliative Care team is available for onsite consultation 8 am – 4 pm Monday – Friday, 
and by phone on the weekends and after hours. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and OLOL reserves the right to 
deviate from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• American Association of Colleges of Nursing and City of Hope National Medical Center. (2016). End-
of-Life Nursing Education Core Curriculum. City of Hope, CA, USA. 
• CAPC. (2023, May 30). Palliative care. Retrieved from Center for the Advancement of Palliative Care: 
https://www.capc.org/about/palliative-care/ 
• Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, Sixth Edition. (2020, April 1). 
Retrieved from United States Conference of Catholic Bishops: 
https://www.usccb.org/about/doctrine/ethical-and-religious-directives/upload/ethical-religious-
directives-catholic-health-service-sixth-edition-2016-06.pdf 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
• N/A 
 