 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 13 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy 
Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Controlled Substance Monitoring 
Policy Reference #: OC060 
Supersedes #: 
PH0901; PH0902; PH0903; PH0904; 
PH0906; PH0907; PH0910; PH0911;  
PH0912, PH0908 
Date of 
Origination: 02/10/2017 Last Date 
Reviewed:  05/15/2024 
Last Date Revised: 5/10/2021 
  
SCOPE: 
All Company-affiliated facilities including, but not limited to, hospita ls, ambulatory surgery centers, physician 
practices, outpatient imaging  centers, service centers and all Corporate departments, Groups and Divisions where 
controlled substances are utilized.   
PURPOSE: 
To establish controls related to ordering, receiving, prescribing, dispensing and administering controlled 
substances and documenting such activities. The term “controlled substance” means a drug or other substance, or 
immediate precursor, included in schedule II, III, IV, or V (including IIN and IIIN) of the Controlled Substance 
Act.  The facility will continue to follow federal and state controlled substance laws and regulations.  Additional 
drugs of concern that have the potential for diversion may be id entified at the facility level for monitoring 
purposes. 
POLICY: 
In order to detect intentional or unintentional breach of procedure in controlled substance handling, the facility 
must establish a process for monitoring compliance with its policies and procedures that relate to ordering, 
receiving, prescribing, dispensing and administering controlled substances and documenting such activities. 
 
Facility Administration must designate a person in writing to be responsible for insuring  that the monitoring 
described herein is performed, monitoring results are collected, and trending data is analyzed to detect variances 
in practice.  
 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy at Our Lady of the Lake will responsible for overseeing policy compliance. 
 
The facility must have a procedure to ensure that any discrepancies identified in ordering, receiving, 
administering, or reconciling the inventory of controlled substances is investigated immediately.  Similarly, the 
manager of the department or designee w ith such a discrepancy must investigate any situation that indicates a 
breach in product integrity ( e.g., broken or cracked containers, broken seals) or a failure to follow appropriate 
policies related to controlled substances. 
DEFINITION: 
Outpatient practices , for purposes of this policy, are not hospital -based or included within a hospital or 
Ambulatory Surgery Center license, certification or accreditation. 
 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 13 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A.  Ordering and Receiving Controlled Substances, Schedule II  
Ordering and receiving of C-II controlled substance may be completed by either of the two processes outlined 
in Section 1 (preferred) or Section 2 or a combination of both processes.   
 
 
Section 1: Use of the Controlled Substance Ordering System to Purchase Controlled Substances, 
Schedule II.  
Effective May 2005, the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) implemented the Controlled Substance Ordering 
System (CSOS) which allows for a secured electronic transmission of controlled substance orders (e222) 
without the supporting paper DEA Form 222.  Company-affiliated facilities are encouraged to adopt the CSOS 
process for ordering controlled substances.  The efficiencies of the electronic ordering system make the system 
easy to use for most Schedule II (C-II) transactions while maintaining security requirements.  Use of the paper 
DEA Form 222 will continue to be allowed for the foreseeable future and will even be required for certain 
processes, including the return of C-II controlled substances to the wholesaler. 
a. The DEA Registrant, authorized CSOS Coordinator(s), and Powers of Attorney (POA) which grant 
ordering authority by the DEA Registrant may apply for CSOS Certificates. A CSOS Coordinator is 
required for each organization as the main point of contact for CSO S. The CSOS Coordinator must be 
enrolled in CSOS before a POA application is processed; however, the CSOS Coordinator and POA 
applications may be submitted at the same time.  
 
b. The CSOS regulations require the following persons to be identified: 
1) DEA Registrant – This is defined as the physical location applying for CSOS access and is 
represented by the individual who last signed/renewed a DEA 224 application. Henceforth, the 
term “DEA Registrant” or “Registrant” refers to the aforementioned individual.  
a) For hospitals – FMOL affiliates are required to specify the Chief Executive Officer (CEO).  
b) For ASCs – States that permit, will have the Practice Manager or Administrator of the 
facility as the DEA Registrant. Some states may require the Medical Director. 
c) For Physician Practices - An individual practitioner will be designated.  
 
Further duties associated with controlled substance ordering/management may be delegated by the 
Registrant CEO, Administrator, or Practice Manager using a POA.  Facilities may specify the Director of 
Pharmacy or designee be delegated this duty with a POA i n an inpatient setting and the Administrator in 
an outpatient setting.  Outpatient physician practices will have a practice DEA Registrant for ordering 
controlled substances for use in the practice setting.   
2) CSOS Coordinator – A CSOS coordinator is required for each DEA Registration number enrolled in 
the CSOS program. The role of the CSOS Coordinator may be served by the Registrant, as mentioned 
above. If the Registrant does not serve the role of CSOS Coordinator then the CSOS coordinator may 
be any individual in the DEA Registrants organization and must have his/her CSOS application signed 
by the Registrant. Only one Principal CSOS Coordinator and one Alternate CSOS Coordinator may 
be enrolled in CSOS for any one DEA Registration number.  Each DEA Registrant identifies a person 
to hold the DEA number, monitor license renewal, designate those employees eligible to order 
controlled substances electronically, retain all digital certificates, and to manage these activities.  The 
Company recommends that the Director of Pharmacy be the CSOS Coordinator for the hospital.  The 
DEA Registrant shall convey this responsibility through a POA.  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 13 
 
3)  POA Designees – The Company recommends that a named individual be identified as the primary 
person to order C-II controlled substances for the facility (primary designee). The DEA Registrant or 
CSOS Coordinator may assume this duty of ordering C -II controlled substances.  Alternatively, the 
CSOS Coordinator may identify another employee as the primary designee. The primary designee 
must have a POA submitted to the DEA for final authorization to order C -II controlled substances.  
Additional staff may also be identified to order C-II controlled substances in the absence of the primary 
designee, but the number of POAs will be limited based on the need of the facility.  Such ‘secondary 
designees’ must also have a POA submitted to the DEA to be fully authorized to submit orders. 
 
c.   The CSOS Coordinator must submit all required documents to the DEA for issuance of digital signatures 
to the individuals granted POAs and maintain a copy of each document submitted in a secure area in the 
Pharmacy or a secured location in areas without a Pharmacy. 
 
d.   Each individual granted a POA will be e-mailed his or her access code and the password delivered by U.S. 
mail.  POA access codes and passwords must not be shared with any other persons.  
 
e.   With the digital signatures, the CSOS Coordinator must download the digital certificates from the DEA 
website to the facility-based computer.  One computer should be used for placing and receiving all CSOS 
orders.  This is important as records will be  downloaded from the drug supplier website to the facility -
based computer. This will include the order placed for the C -II controlled substances and the receipt 
acknowledgment of the order.  The digital certificate files, order acknowledgment files, and re ceipt 
acknowledgment files must be saved to a secure server with limited access.     
 
f.   The CSOS Coordinator is responsible for notifying the facility’s drug supplier that the facility will place 
orders electronically for C-II controlled substances.  This includes account setup for CSOS ordering at the 
drug supplier website.  It includes the creation of access to the drug supplier website for all staff with POA 
privileges. 
 
g.    Separation of Ordering/Receiving Functions – Ordering and receiving of controlled substances must be 
performed by different individuals unless mitigating circumstances prevent this from occurring.  In such 
instances, compensating controls shall be im plemented ( e.g., additional independent reviews, outside 
audits).  The facility shall consider limiting the ordering and receiving authority of any controlled 
substance product to designated staff members, not all Pharmacy Department staff members. As part  of 
CSOS use, both ordering and receiving must be done in the drug supplier website where available/ 
applicable.  
 
h.   The receiving process must include a reconciliation of controlled substances received against the packing 
slip or invoice.  The printed invoice must be signed and dated by the receiver indicating completion of this 
phase of receipt of product.  With the invoice signed and dated, the receiver or another staff member with 
POA access must receive the C -II controlled substances in the w holesale vendor website system when 
available. Completion of this activity will allow downloading of the receipt record in to the facility 
computer for permanent storage.  A backup must be performed after each C-II controlled substance receipt 
into the facility pharmacy.  Note:  The receiver’s signature and dating of the invoice must be a separate 
action from the signing of the invoice by the  Director or authorized person approving payment for 
Accounts Payable. 
 
i. Record Keeping –the following four documents must be saved electronically to an external secure 
server.   Policy Reference Number 
Page 4 of 13 
 
1. e222 - When placing the CSOS order requisition (electronic 222) print and save the form to the 
server before closing out  
2. Receipt of Invoice - When product is received in CSOS print and save to server the Receipt of 
Invoice to the server  
3. Vendor Invoice - Save a copy of the vendor invoice to the server.  
4. C-II Safe Inventory Report - Only applicable for facilities that have automated controlled 
substances vault (C-II safe) 
 
Section 2: Use of DEA Form 222 to Purchase Controlled Substances, Schedule II  
Authority to Purchase Controlled Substances.  Company-affiliated facilities are required to specify the CEO, 
Administrator, or Practice Manager of the facility as the DEA registrant.  For outpatient practices, an 
individual practitioner who is an agent or employee of another practitioner (other than a mid-level practitioner) 
registered to dispense controlled substances may, when acting in the normal course of business or employment, 
administer or dispense (other than by issuance of prescription) controlled substances if and to the extent that 
such individual practitioner is authorized or permitted to do so by the jurisdiction in which he or she practices, 
under the registration of the employer or principal practitioner in lieu of being registered him/herself.  Further 
duties associated with controlled substance ordering/management may b e delegated by the CEO, 
Administrator, or Practice Manager using a POA.  Facilities may specify the Director of Pharmacy or designee 
be delegated this duty with a POA in an inpatient setting and the Administrator in an outpatient setting.  
Outpatient physician practices should have a practice DEA Registrant for ordering controlled substances for 
use in the practice setting.  
 
a. Control of and Access to DEA Form 222 (Schedule II Order Forms) – DEA Form 222 is the official 
form used to order controlled substances in Schedules II from manufacturers, drug suppliers, or other 
sources.  Upon receipt of DEA Form 222 ordering forms from the Drug Enforcement Agency, the 
Pharmacy Director or designee must record each DEA Form 222 number onto a control log to 
document all forms received into the facility.  Unused DEA 222 forms shall be stored in a secured 
area, (e.g., in the controlled substances vault or a locked drawer) accessible only by those individuals 
authorized to order controlled substances in Schedules II.  By Federal regulation, controlled substances 
in the Schedules III, IV, and V do not require a DEA Form 222 for ordering.    
 
b. Pre-Signing DEA Form 222 – DEA Form 222 shall be signed by the authorized agent/attorney only as 
orders are placed.  Blank forms shall never be pre-signed in anticipation of future use. 
 
c. Execution of DEA Form 222 – In completing DEA Form 222, care should be taken so that no erasures 
or alterations are made anywhere on the form.  If a mistake is made, void all copies of the form and 
maintain the voided copy in your records.  Only one item s hall be ordered on a single line and the 
number of different items ordered shall always correspond to the “number of items ordered” entry on 
the form.  The  original order form is sent to the drug supplier and a copy of the order form  shall be 
retained in the pharmacy. 
 
d. Separation of Ordering/Receiving Functions – Check and balance systems shall be in place so that the 
ordering and receiving of controlled substances is performed by different individuals unless mitigating 
circumstances prevent this from occurring.  In such instances, compensating controls shall be 
implemented ( e.g. additional independent reviews, outside audits).  The facility should consider 
limiting the ordering and receiving authority of any controlled substance product to designated staff 
members, not all staff members.  
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 5 of 13 
 
e. Reconciliation of Invoices/Packing Slips for Controlled Substances – The receiving process must 
include a reconciliation of controlled substances received against the packing slip or invoice 
accompanying the order as well as the copy of the original DEA Form 222 ordering form.  The supplier 
retains the original DEA order form. On the  copy of the original  DEA Form 222, the number of 
packages (sale unit of measure) received and date received must be filled in.  Both the DEA Form 222 
and the invoice must be signed and dated by the receiver.  Stapling the DEA Form 222 to the invoice 
or packing slip is permitted, if stapled together, the attached documents must be stored together in a 
different location from all other DEA 222 ordering forms.  If the DEA Form 22 2 is not affixed to the 
invoice or packing slip, store the DEA Form 222 in a separate and independent location from the 
invoice copy signed and dated by the receiver, and the packing slip signed by the receiver for Schedule 
II controlled substances.  Note:  The receiver’s signature and dating of the invoice must be a separate 
action from the signing of the invoice by an authorized person approving payment for Accounts 
Payable. 
 
Section 3: Receiving of Controlled Substances 
a. Direct Delivery of Controlled Substances – All controlled substances shall be delivered directly to the 
Pharmacy Department in an area with camera surveillance. In areas that are not under camera 
surveillance, the receiving area must be accessible only to those authorized to handle controlled 
substances. Controlled substances shall never be delivered through an intermediary, such as the 
Purchasing Department.   
 
b. Only authorized personnel shall be allowed to “receive” such orders.  Exception: non DEA designated 
controlled substances can be delivered with other non -controlled substance medications.  Once the 
delivery reaches the pharmacy it must be received and entered into the non-DEA designated controlled 
substance inventory. 
 
c. Immediate Resolution of Order Discrepancies/Shortages/Breakage – In case of any order discrepancy, 
shortage or breakage, the drug supplier must be notified immediately and the incident documented on 
the packing slip/invoice. 
 
d. Inventory System for Controlled Substances – An inventory system that assures accuracy of all 
controlled substances is required.  For all controlled substances, an inventory system must be 
maintained.  The inventory system may be either manual or computerized as long as the disposition of 
all controlled substances ( e.g., all controlled substances received, dispensed to nursing units, or 
returned to reverse distributors) is accurately tracked. 
 
e.  Annual Physical Inventory – the Louisiana Board of Pharmacy requires a minimum annual inventory. 
For controlled and non -DEA designated controlled substances, a full manual inventory must be 
conducted. The inventory shall be signed and dated by the person conducting the inventory . This 
annual inventory can be used for the DEA biennial inventory requirement.  
 
a. Monthly Record of Controlled Substance Purchases –  The Pharmacy Director or Administrator must 
maintain the purchasing summary available from drug suppliers, or a written history of all controlled 
substance purchases made by the facility for the month, sorted by date. 
 
b. Monitoring Procedure for Ordering and Receiving Controlled Substances – The Pharmacy Director or 
Administrator must employ the following methods for monitoring the ordering and receipt of controlled 
substances.  Policy Reference Number 
Page 6 of 13 
 
1) Check off all DEA Form 222 (e222) numbers on Wholesaler Customer Narcotic Purchase Record 
against inventory; and   
2) Randomly select three deliveries per month and confirm the presence of proper documentation on 
the DEA Form 222 (e222), match units received as documented by invoice and receiving personnel 
notation on the DEA Form 222, and match units received against the inventory. 
 
 
B. Transferring Controlled Substances 
a. A DEA Form 222 is required for each transfer of a schedule II controlled substance.   
 
b. Schedule III-V controlled substances must be documented in writing to show the drug name, dosage form, 
strength, quantity, and date transferred.  The document must include the names, addresses, and DEA 
registration numbers of the parties involved in the transfer of the controlled substances.   
 
c. Non-DEA designated Controlled Substances must be documented in writing to show the drug name, 
dosage form, strength, quantity, and date transferred.  The document must include the names, and 
addresses of the parties involved in the transfer of the controlled substances. 
 
d. Transfer can occur only for the purpose of general dispensing to patients.   
 
e. The receiving facility/practitioner must be registered with the DEA.  
 
f. The distribution is recorded by the distributing party and by the receiving party.   
 
g. The total number of dosage units of all controlled substances distributed by the facility/practitioner during 
each calendar year does not exceed five percent of the total number of dosage units of all controlled 
substances distributed/dispensed by the facility/practitioner during the same year. 
 
C. Prescribing Controlled Substances 
Prescribing of controlled substances is limited to a Licensed Independent Practitioner (LIP) or APP (Advanced 
Practice Professional) with controlled substance prescribing privileges that have been granted only if the 
practitioner has a verified and current  DEA registration with an in -state address, as defined in Compliance 
Alert #028.  Additionally, an LIP or APP with controlled substance prescribing privileges must have verified 
and current state controlled substance registration when practicing in a State that requires registration. 
 
D. Medical Staff 
a. Hospitals and ASCs shall have medical staff bylaws or a policy that shall specify the requirements for an 
LIP or APP with controlled substance prescribing privileges to have a verified and current DEA 
registration with an in-state address, as defined in Co mpliance Alert #028.  Additionally, an LIP or APP 
with controlled substance prescribing privileges must have verified and current state controlled substance 
registration when practicing in a state that requires it. 
 
b. DEA registration and State controlled substance registration shall be verified with the primary source 
agency that issued the registration. Verification shall be done by designated facility staff (e.g., the medical 
staff services department, the human resources department, an authorized centralized credentials 
verification service, or other designation).  Policy Reference Number 
Page 7 of 13 
 
1. DEA registration shall be verified through the National Technical Information Service (NTIS) 
website: http://www.deanumber.com/. 
2. State controlled substance registration shall be verified with the appropriate State agency. 
 
c. Primary source verifications of DEA registration and state controlled substance registration, if applicable, 
shall be done at the following times: 
1. At the time of an initial request for privileges, including temporary privileges. 
2. Prior to the expiration date(s) so that verification can be completed by the expiration date(s).   
i. A practitioner whose registration cannot be verified through primary source verification 
(i.e., through NTIS for DEA) by the expiration date(s) must have controlled substance 
prescribing privileges suspended until the primary source verification can be completed.  
ii. A secondary source of information (i.e., the paper copy of registration from the practitioner) 
shall not be accepted. 
iii. There are no grace periods. Registration is recognized only when primary source is verified. 
Registration will be considered expired on the date of expiration. 
3. It is also required that registration must be re -verified from the primary source at the time of 
reappointment. 
4. It is additionally required that registration must be re -verified from the primary source when new 
controlled substance prescribing privileges, or an increase in controlled substance prescribing 
privileges, are requested. 
 
d. Primary source verifications of DEA registration and state controlled substance registration shall: 
1. Confirm the registration number. 
2. Confirm the date verified and the expiration date. 
3. Confirm in-state registration for DEA registration (reference Compliance Alert #28). 
4. Confirm that the authorized schedules of controlled substances match the prescribing privileges 
of the practitioner. 
 
e. If the practitioner is an APP, the following will also be confirmed before controlled substance prescribing 
privileges are granted: 
1. That the scope of State licensure for the APP allows prescribing controlled substances in the 
schedules requested (note: check state laws and regulations). 
2. That if the APP is allowed to prescribe only under LIP supervision, and/or with a delegated service 
agreement, and/or with approved protocols, then confirmation has been made to ensure this is in 
place (i.e., the agreement or protocol is on file in the APP’s credentials file at the facility). 
3. That if the APP is allowed to prescribe only under LIP supervision, then the supervising LIP has a 
verified and current in -state DEA registration and State controlled substance registration for the 
schedules of controlled substances to be prescribed by the APP. 
 
f. If DEA registration or state controlled  substance registration cannot be verified as outlined above, then 
prescribing privileges for controlled substances shall not be granted or continued. The medical staff bylaws 
or medical staff policy shall be followed regarding privileging actions to be taken. 
 
g. DEA registration and state controlled substance registration shall be obtained by each individual 
practitioner. An individual practitioner shall not be allowed to prescribe controlled substances under a 
hospital’s DEA registration. Exception: Residents prohibited from obtaining their own DEA permit with  Policy Reference Number 
Page 8 of 13 
 
a suffix issued by the GME office. The GME office will provide Pharmacy a list of these residents and the 
assigned suffix number. 
 
h. When DEA registration and state controlled substance registration (when required) is confirmed through 
primary source verification, and controlled substance prescribing privileges are granted, the information 
regarding registration shall be entered into the MSO Provider Dictionary. 
 
i. The MSO Provider Dictionary (or any health information management system provider dictionary utilized 
by the facility) shall be immediately updated by the medical staff office with DEA registration and state 
controlled substance registration information when that information changes. “Immediately” is defined as 
the same business day as notification of a change.    ALL privileges are immediately suspended when a 
CDS or DEA is expired and providers will no longer have access to order any medications in the EHR. 
 
E. Controlled Substance Distribution and Dispensing  
Ordering, distributing, and dispensing controlled substances must conform to all facility Policies and 
Procedures as well as all State and Federal regulatory requirements. 
a. Manual System Monitoring 
1. Floor Stock – Controlled substances distributed to the unit and recorded on the nursing Controlled 
Substance Administration Record (CSAR) must match  the items  distributed by the pharmacy and 
recorded on the pharmacy  Master Control Dispensing Log.  Monitoring must be performed for two 
random days selected each month to determine quantity issued matches quantity   received Monitoring 
must also confirm that quantity administered/ wasted matches the inventory documentation for the 
withdrawals. 
 
2. Patient Specific – There must be signed documentation of the receipt of controlled substances by the 
receiving personnel and delivery personnel which will be maintained in pharmacy. Monitoring must 
be performed on all receipts signed on two random days sel ected each month to confirm that items/ 
units received match the items dispensed as documented on the pharmacy Master Control Dispensing 
Log. 
 
3. Two licensed individuals must reconcile controlled medications in the CSAR at the beginning of each 
shift.  
 
4. Physical Key Access – The existence and current location of all physical keys must be determined and 
an inventory log shall be maintained. Full key inventory shall be performed on a monthly basis.  
 
b. Automated Dispensing Cabinet (ADC) System Monitoring  
1. A process must exist for matching controlled substances distributed to the ADCs with the inventory.  
For example, the quantity of controlled substances distributed to each ADC, as documented in the 
cabinet system reports, shall be reconciled with the amoun t signed out on the Controlled Substance 
Perpetual Log in the pharmacy vault. Monitoring of this process must be performed on two randomly 
selected days each month. Reconciliation of the controlled substances ADC removal report with the 
ADC loaded/stocked report will suffice. In the case of facilities utilizing an automated controlled 
substance vault, this step would be replaced with daily monitoring of the ADC comparison report (e.g. 
Pyxis C-II Compare Report). If you have a hybrid system ( i.e., pharmacy ADC to manual nursing 
documentation system) a process must be implemented to reconcile back to the automated system.   Policy Reference Number 
Page 9 of 13 
 
2. Nursing should perform a weekly physical inventory of all controlled substances in all ADCs including 
those pockets that were not accessed, or for cause.  
 
c. Security of ADCs 
ADCs can be accessed electronically through logon , BioID, and passwords and also physically through 
traditional locks and keys.   
 
1. Electronic Access – Only patient care staff members who have completed an authorization/access form, 
and have had the form approved by the individual designated to approve such forms may remove 
controlled medications from the ADC.  The following healthcare providers may request access to 
controlled substances based on their job description and competencies: LIPs, APPs, RNs, LPNs/LVNs, 
Registered Pharmacists, Pharmacy Technicians, and other qualified staff as authorized by the facility.  
Access shall be limited to areas that are needed to perform assigned duties and for the designated time 
period of the contra ct.  Any access to medications may be terminated at any time if policy infractions 
occur.  All individuals with access will protect their access to ADCs.  ADC pin numbers shall be changed 
every 90/180 days, as appropriate, or when the user suspects the int egrity of their access has been 
compromised.  Other locking mechanisms will be changed routinely based on the facility policy.  This 
does not apply to facilities using bioID. 
2. Physical Key Access –The existence and current location of all physical keys shall be determined and 
an inventory log must be maintained. Full key inventory should be performed on a monthly basis.  
a. Pharmacy Management team shall retain all physical keys and log to the ADCs in a locked/secured 
location within the pharmacy. 
b. The physical keys shall only be issued to a staff member of the pharmacy department at the time of 
need for the purpose of opening the ADC for department use or maintenance by authorized 
personnel.  
c. Pharmacy staff shall remain with the ADC during the entire time the cabinet is unlocked, unless all 
medications have been removed.  At no time is the pharmacy staff to relinquish possession of the 
key(s) to any other person outside of those staff within th e pharmacy authorized to use the key.  
Keys shall not be given to maintenance/service personnel.   
d. Pharmacy shall take appropriate action to take possession of any ADC keys found to be in the 
possession of anyone other than authorized pharmacy personnel immediately.   
d. Patients’ Medications Brought from Home:   
 Each facility should have a policy that addresses how the facility will handle a patient’s own medication 
that is a controlled substance brought form home.  A patient’s own medication will only be used for cases 
where the medication is not available from the local wholesaler and continuation is imperative for patient 
care.  Patient-owned controlled substances, which are sent to the pharmacy to be stored, will be logged 
and kept in the vaulted room or the pharmacy ADC. 
 
F. Controlled Substance Administration 
 
1. Count Verification 
Count verification will be performed any time a controlled substance medication is accessed  and there 
will be a weekly count of the ADC controlled substances. 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 10 of 13 
 
2. Wastage Documentation 
a. Any controlled substance packaged in an amount larger than the dose being administered must be 
wasted immediately and documented in the Automated Dispensing Cabinet (Pyxis).    
 
b. Wastage documentation will be performed by two (2) licensed individuals, preferably one of whom is 
an employee of the Organization or Hospital. 
 
c. Signatures of each individual involved with the wastage of a controlled substance medication must be 
performed electronically or ascribed on the manual documentation form. 
 
3. Order Verification on Chart 
1. All controlled substance medication administration must  be supported by a provider order contained 
in the patient’s medical record.  STAT or NOW verbal orders issued by the provider during emergency 
situations, operative or other procedures ( e.g., Endoscopy, cardiac cath) must be documented in the 
patient’s medical record as soon as possible after the procedure.  In such cases, it is recommended that 
the medication orders be documented as separate events with individual dose orders rather than one  
event with a totaled dose. 
2. Controlled substances that are removed from the ADC via the override functionality must be 
reconciled with the medication order within 24 hours. 
 
4. Administration Documentation 
1. Documentation of administration of a controlled substance must occur at the time of administration or 
at the conclusion of a procedure. 
2. Controlled medication drips / PCA pumps, etc. need to have on -going clinical documentation 
representing the amount of medication administered and the amount being transitioned to the next 
clinician.  
G. Diversion Surveillance 
a. Diversion Surveillance Monitoring:  Each facility must have access to utilization and  standard 
deviation reports to be provided on a monthly basis to nurse managers or other department leaders.   
Based on established criteria actions should be taken to evaluate controlled substance activity further 
for suspected diversion. 
b. Diversion Surveillance Committee:  Each facility must have a diversion surveillance committee that 
meets regularly to review controlled substance utilization  and suspected diversion.   The committee 
should be led by a member of pharmacy and should include nursing leadership, nurse manager(s) and 
human resources as well as employee health and risk management on an adhoc basis.  The committee 
should review drug utilization and standard dev iation reports monthly.   While audits should be 
routinely performed by  nurse managers, the committee can recommend further audits and reviews 
based on the reports and other evidence of suspected diversion or impairment.   Meeting minutes and 
findings should be maintained and reported up to the ethics committee.  (Reference Procedure) 
c. Training:  Education will be provided on an annual basis regarding diversion a wareness to all team 
members and nurse managers should  receive initial training by the Director of Pharmacy on 
surveillance procedures and audit expectations.  Policy Reference Number 
Page 11 of 13 
 
d. Risk Assessment:   Annually, the committee should perform a risk assessment on processes pertaining 
to the receipt, storage, handling, administration and monitoring of controlled substances.    
 
H. Theft or significant loss of Controlled Substances  
a.  Theft –Discovery of any theft regardless of amount  must be reported to DEA, local law enforcement, 
and State regulatory agencies ( e.g., board of nursing, board of pharmacy, board of medicine, etc.) 
immediately. 
 
b. Where circumstances of the theft are immediately known, a DEA Form 106, Report of Theft or Loss of 
Controlled Substances, shall be used to detail the circumstances of that theft. When details concerning the 
specific circumstances surrounding the theft are unknown at the time of discovery, initial notice should 
be provided by faxing a short statement to local DEA advising of the theft  
 
I. Significant Loss  
a. Where circumstances of significant loss are known, a DEA Form 106, Report of Theft or Loss of 
Controlled Substances, must be used to detail the circumstances of that significant loss. When details 
concerning the specific circumstances surrounding the loss are unknown at the time of discovery, initial 
notice must be provided by faxing a short statement to local DEA advising of the significant loss. 
b. When determining a loss is significant a registrant must consider among others the following factors: the 
actual quantity of controlled substances lost in relation to the type of business, the specific controlled 
substance(s) lost, whether the loss can be associated with access by specific individuals, whether the loss 
can be attributed to unique activities that may take place involving the controlled substance(s), a pattern 
of losses, the potential for diversion, and local trends.  
 
c. Breakage, damage or spillage does not constitute a “loss of controlled substances.”  In such situations, any 
recoverable controlled substance must be wasted following appropriate wasting procedures.   
 
d. Any loss deemed significant must be reported to the facility’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO). 
 
 
J. Prescription Monitoring Program (PMP) 
Each facility will comply with the Prescription Monitoring Program Act by submitting information of all 
outpatient prescriptions filled for controlled substances or drugs of concern in order to improve the state’s 
ability to identify and inhibit the diversion of these substances while not diminishing their appropriate use for 
legitimate medical purposes. 
a. The information will be submitted electronically through the use of the pharmacy outpatient 
dispensing software no later than the next business day after the date of dispensing and will include 
1. Prescriber information 
2. Patient information 
3. Prescription information 
4. Controlled substance or drug information 
5. Dispenser information 
b. The pharmacist in charge or designee is responsible for corrections to the PMP report and resubmission 
of those corrections through the pharmacy outpatient dispensing software. 
c. A facility may apply for an exemption from submission if the facility does not purchase or dispense 
any controlled substances or drugs of concern.  If an exemption is granted by the Louisiana State Board  Policy Reference Number 
Page 12 of 13 
 
of Pharmacy, that facility will post the exemption notice in a visible location and will be exempt from 
submission until the facility begins dispensing controlled substances or drugs of concern or if the 
exemption is rescinded by the board. 
d. The pharmacist in charge (PIC) of a facility may access the records of the PMP after successful 
completion of the required educational courses.   
1. The PIC, acting as supervisor, may authorize pharmacists as delegates to access PMP records. 
2. The PIC as well as all authorized delegates will maintain individual account credentials which 
are linked to the PIC/supervisor’s account. 
3. The PIC and delegates may review PMP records of patients, at their professional discretion, 
during the dispensing process. 
4. All policies regarding PHI will apply to access of the PMP records.  
 
K. Reverse Distribution/Destruction  
a. When controlled substances must be returned to the manufacturer, distributor, or source of supply, a 
DEA approved contract service will be used for the destruction/disposition of controlled substances.  
A DEA form 222 and/or other records shall be provided  by the contract service regarding the 
destruction/disposition of the drugs and shall be retained in the pharmacy files, preferably attached to 
the original receiving document. 
b. When controlled substances cannot be returned to the manufacturer, distributor or other source of 
supply, the Pharmacist-in-Charge or designee shall destroy or dispose of the controlled substances in 
accordance with current destruction or disposition proce dures as outlined by the DEA and Louisiana 
Board of Pharmacy. 
c. Records must be kept on file detailing the date, time and  the exact controlled substance and quantify 
that was disposed of on-site as well as the names and signatures of the two pharmacists.   If any 
additional information is available such as patient name and/or prescription number, this should be 
documented as well on the log. 
d. Controlled substances must be wasted in a commercially approved waste disposal system such as 
Cactus Sink or other equivalent system. 
e. DEA Form 41, Registrant's Inventory of Drugs Surrendered, (or alternate form designated by the DEA 
and this state) shall be used to record the destruction or disposition of controlled substances.  Copies 
of these records shall be retained in the pharmacy files for a period of 5 (five) years. 
 
L. Required Records 
a. Official order forms (DEA Form 222 and e222). 
 
b. Power of Attorney authorization to sign order forms. 
 
c. Receipts and invoices for controlled substances. 
 
d. All inventory records of controlled substances, including the initial and annual inventories. 
 
e. Records of controlled substances transferred. 
 
f. Report of Theft or Loss (DEA Form 106). 
 
g. DEA registration certificate.  
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 13 of 13 
 
h. CSOS digital certificates  
 
ACRONYMS AND DEFINITIONS 
 LIP – Licensed Independent Practitioners (physician, dentist, podiatrist, with a valid DEA registration specific 
to the State of which the facility is located and a State controlled substance registration is applicable). 
 APP – Advance Practice Professional (physician assistant [PA] or advanced practice registered nurse [APRN, 
CRNA,CNM]) 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
1. Drug Enforcement Administration. Title 21 United States Code (USC) Controlled Substances Act [section 
802 of the Act (21 U.S.C.802)]. https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title21-
section802&num=0&edition=prelim   (accessed February 3, 2025). 
 
2. Louisiana Board of Pharmacy. Louisiana Administrative Code, Title 46: Professional and Occupational 
Standards, Part LIII – Pharmacists. Louisiana Division of Administration. 
https://www.doa.la.gov/media/cbkbh4zj/46v53.pdf (accessed February 3, 2025) 
 
3. Louisiana Legislature. Louisiana Revised Statutes, Title 37: Professions and Occupations, Chapter 14 – 
Pharmacy Practice Act. Louisiana State Legislature. https://legis.la.gov/ (accessed February 3, 2025) 
 
4. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. (2024). Conditions of participation (CoPs) and conditions for 
coverage (CfCs). U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-
Guidance/Legislation/CFCsAndCoPs (accessed February 3, 2025) 
 
5. American Society of Health-System Pharmacists. (2022). ASHP guidelines on preventing diversion of 
controlled substances. In American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy, 79: 2279-2306.  
 
 
 
 