POLICIES  AND PROCEDURES  MANUAL  MANUAL:  PATIENT ACCESS   
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER  CHAPTER :   
SUBJECT : OCCURRENCE CODE POLICY & PROCEDURE  SECTION :   
DATE OF ORIGINATION :  MAY MAY 2014 SUPERCEDES:       
DATE LAST 
REVIEWED : JAN 2018 
 
 
 
   
SERIAL 
CODE:  
 
 
 
SCOPE:  
OLOL Account Billing & Patient Access Departments. 
PURPOSE:  
To ensure that appropriate occurrence codes are utilized at the point of registration to 
define significant events, insurance coverage conditions, monetary, or clinical data that may 
affect payer processing and payment of the claim. 
POLICY:   
Each Access Associate will obtain the nature of the visit from each patient and/or patient 
representative and utilize the appropriate occurrence codes.  
PROCEDURE: 
Access Services personnel will obtain information during the interview process to determine the 
applicable Occurrence codes and input this information into the patient account via Cerner. 
 
Occurrence Codes – These fields define a specific event relating to the claim that may affect 
payer processing.  The codes are used to determine liability, coordinate benefits, and administer 
subrogation clauses in benefit programs. 
 
 
Occurrence Code 01 – Accident WITH Liability Coverage – this code and corresponding date 
indicate the date of any accident for which there is primary liability coverage.  This code 
identifies an injury or illness that resulted from an accident.   
 
Do not use occurrence code 01 -  Louisiana Law [LRS 22:1871] requires the 
healthcare provider bill the patient’s available healthcare coverage or if no 
coverage, list as Private Pay.  
 
Please refer to Occurrence Code 05 for all motor vehicle accidents (MVA). If 
the patient states that he/she has auto insurance, enter the auto insurance 
information in comments field. The ASR can scan the front and back of auto insurance card in the documents as a reference.  The auto insurance is NOT 
selected as the insurance plan. 
 
 
Occurrence Code 02 – No-Fault Insurance Involved-including auto accident/other – this 
code and corresponding date refer to any accident, in a state with no-fault liability laws; i.e., 
there is a legal basis for settlement without admission or proof of guilt.  This code indicates that 
the injury or illness involves primary liability coverage.   
 
Do not use 02 - Louisiana is not a No-Fault state. 
 
 
Occurrence Code 03 – Accident-Tort Liability – do not use 
 
 
Occurrence Code 04 – Accident-Employment-Related – this code and corresponding date 
indicate that the accident relates to a verified work related accident.   
 
 
Occurrence Code 05 – Accident WITHOUT Liability Coverage –  
This code identifies an injury or illness that resulted from an accident.    
This code and corresponding date indicate the date of any accident for which 
there is NO primary liability coverage or when liability coverage is prohibited 
by state law.   
Louisiana Law [LRS 22:1871] requires the healthcare provider bill the 
patient’s available healthcare coverage or if no coverage, list as Private Pay.  
 
The use of an accident code (05) also requires that the accident hour be reported. 
NOTE*** During the registration process, if the registrar selects the Medicare I-
plan as primary and uses Occurrence code 05, then the UB Comment fields will be 
required. The MSP Questionnaire (MSPQ) will need to be completed correctly.  
 
 
Occurrence Code 06 – Crime Victim – this code and corresponding date indicate that the 
patient’s medical condition resulted from an alleged criminal action committed by one or more 
parties and must be accompanied by the date of the occurrence. 
 
 
Medical Condition Codes 
09 – Start of Infertility Treatment Cycle – this code and corresponding date 
indicate the start of the infertility treatment cycle. 
10 – Last Menstrual Period – this code and corresponding date indicate the last 
menstrual period and apply only when the patient is being treated for a maternity 
related condition. 
11 – Onset of Symptoms/Illness – this code and corresponding date indicate the 
date the patient first became aware of the symptoms or illness being treated.  This code is required in conjunction with the billing of all outpatient therapies, such as 
OT, PT, ST, and CR. 
 
Insurance Related Codes 
17 – Date Outpatient Occupational Therapy Plan established or last reviewed 
– this code and corresponding date indicate the date a plan was established or last 
reviewed for Occupational therapy 
18 – Date of Retirement of Patient/Beneficiary – this code and corresponding 
date indicate the date of retirement for the patient/beneficiary.  Use of this code 
notifies Medicare that the patient/beneficiary is not a working-aged person, and 
that Medicare is the primary payer. 
19 – Date of Retirement of Spouse – this code and corresponding date indicate 
the date of retirement for the patient’s spouse. Use of this code notifies Medicare 
that the patient/beneficiary’s spouse is not a working-aged person, and that 
Medicare is the primary payer. 
29 – Date Outpatient Physical Therapy Plan Established or Last Reviewed – 
this code and corresponding date indicate the date a plan of treatment for 
outpatient physical therapy was established or last reviewed. 
30 – Date Outpatient Speech Therapy Plan Established or Last Reviewed - 
this code and corresponding date indicate the date a plan of treatment for 
outpatient speech therapy was established or last reviewed. 
32 – Date Beneficiary notified of intent to bill (procedures or treatments) – 
this code or corresponding date indicate the date the patient was notified by the 
hospital that the requested level of care (diagnostic procedures or treatments) is not 
considered reasonable and necessary by Medicare.  If you are submitting a claim at 
the beneficiary’s request, in addition to this occurrence code, report condition code 
20, Beneficiary requested billing. 
35 – Date Treatment started for Physical Therapy – this code and 
corresponding date indicates the date services were initiated for physical therapy. 
41 – Date of first test for preadmission testing – this code and corresponding 
date indicate when the first outpatient diagnostic test was performed as a part of 
the preadmission testing.  This code may be used only if a date of admission was 
scheduled prior to the administration of the test(s). 
44 – Date treatment started for Occupational Therapy – this code and 
corresponding date indicate when Occupational therapy services were initiated. 
45 – Date Treatment started for Speech Therapy – this code and corresponding 
date indicate when Speech therapy services were initiated. 
46 – Date Treatment started for Cardiac Rehabilitation – this code and 
corresponding date indicates when cardiac rehabilitation services were initiated. 
 
 
Occurrence Span Codes and Dates – UB04/92 Form Locator 36. These span codes and dates 
identify an event relating to the claim that may affect payer processing.  These codes 
identify occurrences that happen over a span of time.  Report the code, the beginning 
(“from”) date and the ending (“through”) date associated with the reported occurrence 
span code.  
70 – Qualifying Stay Dates – this code and corresponding dates indicate the “from” and 
“through” dates of at least a 3-day hospital stay (excluding the day of discharge or death) 
that qualifies the patient for Medicare payment of the SNF services billed on the claim.  
This code is required on a SNF or Swingbed claim and the dates in this statement period 
must indicate at least a 3-day hospital stay. 
 
71 – Prior Stay Dates – this code and corresponding dates indicate the “from” and 
“through” dates provided by the patient for any hospital stay that ended within 60 days of 
the current hospital or SNF admission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
REFERENCES: CMS, MSP Billing instructions 11/3/2006. 
 