  
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE: Identification and Addressing of Broken 
Equipment 
DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOLRC-SOP# 
AUTHOR: Tim Cordes 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 5/1/2024 Last REVIEW DATE:  
 
                                                                                                                                                                         
No: OLOLRC-SOP# 
 Page 1 of 2 
 
Purpose:  To ensure prompt resolution of broken equipment issues and maintain equipment readiness for 
operational use. 
 
Procedure:   
 Identification of Broken Equipment: 
• Any malfunctioning equipment must be addressed immediately. Broken equipment refers to 
any device not functioning as intended. 
 
Preparation for Reporting: 
• Ensure equipment is cleaned before Trimedx notification. Equipment that cannot be used 
should be placed in the designated Broken Equipment Bin with a note attached with the team 
members' names, a description of the issue, and a date. Damaged equipment that will not fit in 
the Broken Equipment Bin will be brought to the respiratory department. 
• If respiratory equipment malfunctions while on a patient, it will be bagged and NOT 
disassembled before bringing it to the respiratory department. In addition to reporting the 
malfunctioning equipment to Trimedx, a safety event must be entered, which must include the 
CEID # of the malfunctioning equipment.  
 
Handling Equipment: 
• Place broken equipment in designated Broken Equipment Bin located in the following 
areas: 
• HVI 6 ABG Labs 
• HVI 9th Lab 
• PCU Equipment Storage Room 
• ER Trauma ABG Lab 
• Respiratory Office 1st Floor 
RT Assistance is responsible for bi-weekly rounds to collect equipment from areas with Broken 
Equipment Bins. The broken equipment will be brought to the dirty equipment room in the respiratory 
department, and RT Assistance will notify the charge supervisor of the damaged equipment that has 
been collected.  
 
Reporting Procedure: 
• The therapist must contact Trimedx (https://service.trimedx.com/tcp) or call the Trimedx 
operators at 225-765-7900 to report equipment issues.  The supervisor will ensure that this 
process is completed.  
Staff will be required to provide the following information: 
1. CEID# (Equipment #) located on the Trimedx sticker affixed to the equipment.   
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE: Identification and Addressing of Broken 
Equipment 
DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOLRC-SOP# 
AUTHOR: Tim Cordes 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 5/1/2024 Last REVIEW DATE:  
 
                                                                                                                                                                         
No: OLOLRC-SOP# 
 Page 2 of 2 
 
2. Description of the equipment issue. 
3. State that the equipment is located in the respiratory department, where Trimedx 
can pick up the equipment. 
4. Confirm whether Trimedx can address the issue the next day based on the time of 
report. 
5. Attach the provided reference number from the Trimedx website or the operator 
to the equipment.    
 
  
Logging and Tracking Equipment 
1. The Supervisor or Charge RT will enter the following information into the 
Equipment Service Log located on the t-drive (T:\Data\Respiratory 
Supervisors\Forms\Assignment Sheets\Main OLOL Assignment Sheet).  
a. Date 
b. Time 
c. Item to be serviced (i.e., Ventilator, Vapotherm…) 
d. CEID # of the respiratory equipment 
e. Brief description of the equipment issue 
f. Safety Event ID (if applicable) 
g. Initial of the Supervisor or Charge RT 
h. When the equipment is returned from BioMed and deemed suitable for 
service, the supervisor or charge RT will initial and date the equipment's 
return.  
 