OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
 
SUBJECT:  Cleaning and Disinfection of Respiratory 
Equipment 
PAGE 1 OF 3 
 
DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care Effective 
4/1/2018 
APPROVED BY:  Shantelle Graves, Director Respiratory Care 
                            Tim Cordes, Manager Respiratory Care 
Last review 
6/17/2024 
 
1. PURPOSE 
1.1 The purpose of this process is to outline general cleaning and disinfection principles for 
Respiratory equipment in order to maintain a clean, sanitary, and safe environment. 
 
2. PROCEDURE 
2.1 All Respiratory equipment will be cleaned, disinfected and/or sterilized on a routine basis and per 
single patient use.   
2.2 All items will be cleaned as per manufacturer instructions.   
2.3 Items will either be cleaned in the Respiratory Department or in the Sterile Processing 
Department (SPD).   
2.4 Respiratory Equipment refers to the following items but is not limited to this list: Ventilators, 
bipaps, gas delivery systems, monitors, airway clearance devices, blood gas instruments, gas 
regulators, Respirometers, diagnostic equipment, nebulizers, carts, infusion pump, devices used 
for intubation, oxygen cylinders, stethoscope, and phones. 
2.5 “Reprocessing of reusable equipment” refers to specific items which must be reprocessed either 
by the members of the Respiratory department following manufacturers guidelines or by SPD. 
   
3. CLEANING AND DISINFECTION OF RESPIRATORY EQUIPMENT  
3.1 Respiratory equipment should be cleaned and disinfected prior to leaving the patient room. 
3.2 Process for cleaning equipment: 
3.2.1 Wash hands and put on gloves. 
3.2.2 All items must be cleaned prior to leaving the patient room.   
3.2.3 All exterior surfaces of items must be cleaned. 
3.2.4 All movable and removable parts must be inspected for visible soiling.   
3.2.5 Clean all visible soiling with a general-purpose cleaner or disinfectant 
cleaner or towelette.  
3.2.6 Once visible soiling has been removed, apply disinfectant to all 
contaminated surfaces.  Follow the manufacturer’s recommendations 
for contact time based on the type of cleaning wipe used.  This 
means the disinfectant must stay wet for the specified amount of time 
(see table below).   
3.2.7 Do not reuse soiled cleaning wipes. 
3.2.8 Allow the disinfectant to fully dry before putting supplies back on the 
surface of the equipment. 
3.2.9 Always wear gloves when handling soiled items or blood/body fluids 
3.2.10 Change gloves if they become soiled.  Never wash and reuse gloves. 
3.2.11 Always wash hands or use alcohol foam between glove changes and 
after glove use.    
                      Contact time specific to type of wipe 
Product Contact Time 
(Wet Time) 
Contact Time 
for C.diff 
Super Sani-Cloths 
(PURPLE top) 
      2 minutes Do Not Use 
Super Sani-Cloths with 
Bleach (ORANGE top) 
      .4 minutes          4 minutes 
Sani-Cloth AF3 Wipe      
(GREY top) 
      3 minutes        Do Not Use 
 
 
 
4. PROCESS FOR REPROCESSING OF REUSABLE RESPIRATORY ITEMS: 
4.1 Reusable Respiratory Items refers to but is not limited to the following: Glide scope stylet, Glide 
scope baton, Drager neonatal flow sensors (OLOLCH only), Drager neonatal expiratory 
valve(OLOLCH only), Neoblock for PB840 (OLOL LIV only) 
4.2 After patient use, dirty reusable items will be cleaned as described per the Cleaning and 
Disinfection of Respiratory Equipment process and then placed in a sealed bag or container prior 
to leaving the patient room.   
4.3 Items will be transferred from the patient room to the Soiled Utility room on the patient care unit 
where they will be placed in the “dirty” bin. 
4.4 Items in the “dirty” bin will be removed, placed in a puncture-proof container, and carried to the 
cleaning room in the Respiratory Department or to SPD.   
4.5 When items are removed from the “dirty” bin, the emptied bin will be disinfected using a Super 
Sani cloth, observing the appropriate wet time.  
4.6 Items will be brought to SPD and cleaned according to the manufacturer’s guidelines.   
 
 
 
5. PROCESS FOR REPROCESSING  ITEMS CLEANED IN THE RESPIRATORY DEPARTMENT: 
 
5.1 Items cleaned in the Respiratory Department include but is not limited to the following: Drager 
Flow sensors, Oxygen analyzer & T piece, Nitric Oxide injector module, Nitric oxide drain cup 
5.2 Reprocessing of Drager expiratory flow sensors: 
5.2.1 The supervisor, charge therapist, or designee will pick up Drager expiratory 
flow sensors from the clinical care areas once per 12-hour shift.   
5.2.2 Flow sensors will be transferred to the cleaning room in the Respiratory 
Department.   
5.2.3 Expiratory flow sensors will be placed in bru tab disinfectant solution. 
5.2.4 The day shift charge, supervisor, or designee will prepare the Bru tab disinfectant 
solution once per day before noon.   
5.2.4.1 A disinfectant solution will be prepared at a concentration of 4306 
ppm using four 3.3g tablets and 1 quart of H2O. 
5.2.5 A water bath will be prepared for rinsing of the sensors.   
5.2.6 Once the sensors have been submerged in the bru tab solution for four minutes, 
they will be removed and placed into the water bath. The sensors will be swirled for at least one minute in the water bath, ensuring all cleaning solutions have been 
removed. 
5.2.7 Once the water bath is complete, sensors will be taken out and placed in a bin 
lined with a clean pad and allowed to air dry. 
5.2.8 Once sensors have air dried, they will be placed in a bag labeled “clean” and taken 
to the appropriate storage locations in the Respiratory department and/or supply 
location on the patient care unit. 
5.3 Reprocessing of Oxygen analyzer & T piece 
5.3.1 To clean the oxygen analyzer T-piece, submerge it in isopropyl alcohol (70%) 
for 30 minutes and allow it to air dry. 
5.3.2 Once cleaned, it will be placed in a bag labeled “clean” and taken to the 
appropriate storage locations in the Respiratory department and/or supply location 
on the patient care unit. 
 
6. Cleaning guidelines for reusable items at the Children’s Hospital 
 
a. This applies to all reusable, non-disposable items that require cleaning via SPD, including but 
not limited to Drager flow sensors, Drager expiratory valves, Glidescope stylet, and C-mac 
video laryngoscopy equipment. 
b. All items should undergo disinfection as described in “B” of this procedure and be maintained 
in the decontamination room in the respiratory department until they are taken to SPD for 
reprocessing. 
c. If the item is used and requires reprocessing outside of the “business hours” for SPD, then the 
item must be disinfected and sprayed with Pre Klenz and placed in and sealed in a plastic bag.  
All items must be sprayed and kept moist until reprocessing can be completed in SPD. When 
handling Pre Klenz, the team member will wear eye protection and gloves. The charge therapist 
or designee will be responsible for taking soiled items to SPD prior to the end of the night shift.  
The day shift charge therapist will retrieve items daily prior to the close of SPD. 
 
7. Identification of Clean Respiratory Equipment  
a. Once equipment has been cleaned according to manufacturer instructions, it will be set up as 
appropriate.   
b. Equipment will be placed in an appropriate storage room or storage area. 
c. Equipment will be identified as “clean” if a bag is covering the equipment. 
 
8. Review of Cleaning Guidelines 
a. Respiratory equipment IFUs will be reviewed annually by the respiratory therapy department 
with the review of this procedure. Updates to the procedure will be made accordingly. 
b. Team member training will be done, and competencies will be assessed with the annual IFU 
review. 
c. New team members will receive the training, and competency will be assessed during 
orientation.  
 
 
 
 
 