OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
 
SUBJECT:  Procedure for Invasive Mechanical Ventilation PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care Effective 7/30/2018 
APPROVED BY:  Shantelle Graves, Director Respiratory Care Last review 
11/03/2023 
 
PURPOSE: To establish a standard operating procedure for respiratory therapists to remain 
consistent in caring for patients with respiratory disorders when invasive positive pressure ventilation 
is used in the treatment of the patient.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A. Invasive ventilation: 
1. Upon receiving the order, the respiratory therapist will deliver the equipment to the patient’s 
room, set the patient up on the device, conduct a complete respiratory assessment, and 
document it in the EMR. 
i. The respiratory therapist will ensure network integration of the ventilator and test 
audible and visual alarms upon placement of a patient on the ventilator and at the 
start of each shift.  
ii. The respiratory therapist will document in the patient’s EMR that audible and visual 
alarms were tested and passed.  
iii. If there is an interruption in the network integration in which the respiratory 
therapist cannot quickly troubleshoot the resolution, then the shift supervisor will 
be notified to enter a footprint ticket, and the respiratory therapist will enter a 
safety event in the RLDatix system.  When the footprint ticket is entered by calling 
the Help Desk, the RT will state that it is a patient effecting event and should be 
escalated.  
iv. The respiratory therapist will remove and replace the ventilator if the network 
integration issue cannot be resolved or the ventilator fails audible and visual alarm 
testing. Follow up with IS team and the bedside nurse is essential when failed 
integration has occurred.   
2. Assessment of patients on Mechanical Ventilation will occur within the frequencies listed 
below: 
i. ICU – every 2 hours 
ii. PCU – every 4 hours 
iii. ED – every 2 hours 
iv. PACU – every 2 hours 
3. Location for Invasive Mechanical Ventilation use: i. Mechanical ventilation will be initiated and monitored in the ED, ICU, PACU or 
progressive care units. 
ii. If patient is admitted to the acute floor from the ED on a home ventilator, the 
supervisor will be notified and work with the nurse and/or house manager to have 
the patient transferred to the PCU.  
iii. When protocols are ordered within the Mechanical Ventilator order set, they will be 
followed as written.  All protocols are approved by the respiratory leaders, 
Respiratory Medical Director and Medical Executive Committee prior to being 
utilized. 
4. Transporting a patient on Mechanical Ventilation:   
i. Patients will be transported on a transport ventilator with a respiratory therapist. A 
patient may be transported on an ICU ventilator if the patient condition is critical 
requiring high levels of FiO2 and/or PEEP and/or on continuous inhaled medications.  
This will be at the discretion or respiratory therapist for the transport.  
ii. The respiratory therapist will ensure proper amounts of oxygen is available during 
transport.  The oxygen cylinder should have a minimum of 1000psi on the pressure 
manometer at the start of the transport.  
iii. When a patient is transitioned from any mode of ventilation and placed on a 
different ventilator (ex: ICU vent to a transport vent; from a transport vent to an ICU 
vent; from a transport vent to a different transport vent) the respiratory therapist 
will conduct a respiratory assessment to ensure proper ventilator function.  The 
assessment will be documented in the EMR with the following values: HR, RR, SpO2 
and Breath Sounds. The transport ventilators should be functioning properly prior to 
placing on the patient and the respiratory therapist will follow manufacturer 
guidelines for testing the function.  
iv. The respiratory therapist will communicate with the nurse regarding the transport. 
The coordination and process for transporting patients is described in the SOP for 
Transporting Patients on Advanced Oxygen Devices.  
 
5. Reprocessing the ventilator after discontinuation: 
i. All disposable parts will be removed from the ventilator while in the patient’s room 
and discarded appropriately. 
ii. The ventilator will be wiped down according to manufacturer recommendations for 
cleaning. Refer to the cleaning and disinfecting procedure for more details.  
iii. The non-disposable parts will be placed in a biohazard bag and brought to the soiled 
utility room.   
iv. Once disinfected, the ventilator will be brought to the clean supply room.  The 
respiratory therapist will set up the ventilator circuit and complete a system check 
for proper functioning. When the system check has passed, a bag will be placed over 
the ventilator which identifies the ventilator as clean and ready for patient use.  v. If the ventilator system check fails, the ventilator will be brought to the respiratory 
department and the supervisor will be notified. A work order will be placed for 
biomed to evaluate the ventilator.  
 
 
 
Note: 
• As with any order, if the order is unclear, the respiratory therapist should call the 
physician for any order clarification.   
• The respiratory therapist should communicate with the nurse and physician when 
condition changes or there is a change in therapy delivered.  
• If there are any questions regarding this procedure or the protocols mentioned, the 
respiratory supervisor may be contacted at 225-202-4578.  
 
 