  
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE: ETCO2 and Continuous Pulse 
Oximetry Monitoring 
DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOLRC-SOP# 3 
AUTHOR: Tim Cordes 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/1/2023 Last REVIEW DATE:  
 
                                                                                                                                                                         
No: OLOLRC-SOP#3 
 Page 1 of 5 
 
Purpose:   
To establish a standard operating procedure for respiratory therapists and nurses to safely monitor end -
tidal CO2 (ETCO2) and continuous pulse oximetry (CPO). 
 
Procedure:   
1. The process starts with a physician's order for CPO in NON-ICU areas/ED/OR areas and 
ETCO2 in all areas.  
A. Indications for continuous monitoring may include the following. 
a. The patient has a PCA pump – the order should be for CPO and ETCO2  
b. The patient is on continuous BiPaP or VPT – the order should be for CPO. 
c. The patient may be continuously monitored for other medical conditions impairing 
respiratory function.  
 
B. Continuous Pulse Oximetry Monitoring 
a. All acute floors, except for PCU, HVI 7th, and HVI 8th (Spacelab with incorporated Masimo 
technology), will be using Masimo Root Monitors for pulse oximetry.  
b. ICU, PCU, HV7, HV8, ED, OR, and other procedural areas will utilize other monitoring 
systems (Spacelab, Philips, GE, etc) with incorporated Masimo pulse oximetry 
technology.  
c. Evaluation of the waveform can give the clinician additional insight. During motion of 
the extremity where the sensor is located, the waveform may appear to have “artifact” in 
the waveform, and this is indicative of movement.  For patients with low perfusion at the 
sensor site, the waveform may appear to be dampened from the normal height.  
d. Poor Perfusion – SpO2 not detected 
i. When the bedside pulse oximeter cannot consistently detect SpO2, the following 
procedural steps can assist the clinician in monitoring the patient. The respiratory 
therapist should be contacted when a nurse is unable to obtain a SpO2. 
ii. Step 1 – Sensor Placement 
Check the following things for proper placement: 
1. Verify that the sensor emitter and detector are parallel to each other and 
directly opposed on the digit. Either the butterfly sensor or Neo (wrap 
around) sensor may be used for this step.  For patients with long nails or 
nail jewelry the Neo wrap around sensor should be selected.  
2. Ensure there is no additional ambient light that the sensor could be 
detecting. If this is believed, correct the placement of the sensor and unplug 
then replug the sensor to the cable to recalibrate the sensor.   
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE: ETCO2 and Continuous Pulse 
Oximetry Monitoring 
DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOLRC-SOP# 3 
AUTHOR: Tim Cordes 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/1/2023 Last REVIEW DATE:  
 
                                                                                                                                                                         
No: OLOLRC-SOP#3 
 Page 2 of 5 
 
3. Ensure the sensor is not applied too tightly, this could be restricting blood 
flow to the distal part of the digit compromising the pulse oximetry 
measurement.   
iii. Step 2 – Perfusion Index 
Evaluate site blood flow and Perfusion Index (PI) to determine if the site has 
appropriate perfusion. The perfusion index site signal strength is displayed 
graphically on the Sensorwatch bar on the Spacelabs monitor and on the Masimo 
Root monitor.  The shading amount on the Sensorwatch bar indicates site perfusion. 
If the Perfusion index is less than 0.02, a message will be displayed on Space: “Low 
Perfusion” and “Low Signal Strength.” When these messages are on the monitor, 
The sensor should be moved to an alternate digit at this time.  
iv. Step 3 – Max Sensitivity 
Increase to Sensitivity to Max if a low Perfusion index (PI) persists on multiple 
digits.  
v. Step 4 – Specialty Sensor  
If the SpO2 is still unobtainable, the respiratory therapist will attain a specialty 
sensor (Forehead Sensor or Ear Sensor).  
1. The Forehead Sensor is positioned just above either the right or left eyebrow with 
the center lines in line with the center of the eye (pupil). The headband must be 
used to shield the sensor from ambient light. The headband should be secure 
enough to apply slight pressure to the sensor and should completely cover the 
sensor. 
2. The disposable Ear Sensor is placed securely in the cavum conchae (the deep 
hollow near the ear canal opening) 
3. The non-disposable Ear Sensor is clipped to the earlobe. 
vi. Step 5 – Portable Radical 7 Monitor 
If an SpO2 is still unobtainable despite the use of a specialty sensor, the respiratory 
therapist will retrieve a portable Radical 7 Masimo Pulse Ox and place it on the 
patient.  
vii. Step 6 – Alternative Monitoring with ETCO2 
Despite all the efforts, if the patient’s SpO2 is still unobtainable, the respiratory 
therapist will notify the physician of the persistent issue with obtaining the patient's 
SpO2 consistently; therefore, the patient's ventilatory status will be monitored via 
end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2). An order for ETCO2 monitoring will be placed 
by the respiratory therapist as “per protocol” as stated in this procedure, and the RT 
will set the patient up on ETCO2 monitoring. Patients on Non-Invasive Ventilation 
or Heated High Flow Nasal Cannula would not be able to be monitored on ETCO2, 
as this is a limitation of ETCO2 monitoring. The physician will be informed of this, 
and further patient assessment would need to be made. 
viii. Patient Assessment for poorly perfused patients   
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE: ETCO2 and Continuous Pulse 
Oximetry Monitoring 
DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOLRC-SOP# 3 
AUTHOR: Tim Cordes 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/1/2023 Last REVIEW DATE:  
 
                                                                                                                                                                         
No: OLOLRC-SOP#3 
 Page 3 of 5 
 
When the SpO2 is unobtainable due to poor perfusion, the clinical team would 
continue to perform clinical assessment such as skin color, heart rate, respiratory 
rate and pattern, ventilator pressures and volumes and an arterial blood gas may be 
ordered by the physician to evaluate the oxygenation and ventilation status of the 
patient.  
 
C. End-Tidal CO2 Monitoring 
a. Root Monitor use for ETCO2 
All acute floors using the Root Masimo device will utilize the ISA module (which is 
located on the back of the Root Monitor) for ETCO2 monitoring.  This process will be as 
follows: 
i. ISA module will be located on all Root Monitors in each patient room for the nursing 
units that utilize more ETCO2 monitoring. These units are listed below: 
1. 6th South (STU) 
2. 5th South (Neuro) 
3. 5th West (Oncology)  
4. 4th North (Med1) 
5. 3rd East (NEPH) 
6. 2nd North (CCDU) -Will have five transportable units 
ii. All other floor units that is not listed above needing ETCO2 monitoring will call the 
respiratory therapist assigned to the unit to obtain an ISA module to connect to the 
Masimo Root Monitor.  
iii. Additional ISA will be kept in the RT equipment room on the following units 
1. PCU 
2. 6 North (Surg) 
3. 4 West (Med5) 
b. Discontinuation of ETCO2 When the ETCO2 order is discontinued, the RN or RT will 
disconnect the cannula from the patient and discard all disposable lines and cables. The 
RT may collect the ISA modules from the nurses station after they have been removed 
from the patient’s room and disinfected.  The RT will then return the ISA module to the 
proper storage location.  
c. Other monitors used for ETCO2  
i. PCU, HVI 7th & 8th will be using Spacelabs’ Capno Pods to monitor ETCO2 at the 
bedside.    
1. PCU will have two Capno Pods available at the nurse’s station.  
2. HVI 7th & 8th will have five Capno Pods available in total to be deployed on each floor; they 
will be stored at the nurse’s station on the A and B sides on both floors.   
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE: ETCO2 and Continuous Pulse 
Oximetry Monitoring 
DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOLRC-SOP# 3 
AUTHOR: Tim Cordes 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/1/2023 Last REVIEW DATE:  
 
                                                                                                                                                                         
No: OLOLRC-SOP#3 
 Page 4 of 5 
 
3. The charge RN will ensure the availability of an additional Capno Pod whenever ETCO2 
monitoring is ordered and the Capno Pod is deployed. 
4. The nurse or the respiratory therapist can set the patient on the ETCO2 monitor when an order 
is received. 
ii. Patients will be monitored continuously using the Capno Pods during the patient's hospital stay or until 
the monitoring order is discontinued.   
iii. When ETCO2 monitoring has been discontinued, the RN or RT can disconnect the Capno Pod from 
the Spacelab monitor, thoroughly disinfect it according to the manufacturer recommendations. The 
device will then be bagged and stored in the afore mentioned location.  
 
D. Patient SafetyNet  
a. All Root Monitors will be centrally monitored at the nurse’s station for each perspective unit. 
These patients will be monitored via Patient SafetyNet.  
b. Once the patient is set up on the bedside monitor, the patient must be linked to the SafetyNet 
central monitoring system. 
i. The Root monitor and the Radical 7 Masimo Pulse Ox must be powered on in the 
patient’s room.  
ii. A SafetyNet central monitoring system tile will have a number corresponding to the 
patient’s room number for the clinician to link. 
iii. The clinician will click on the correct tile corresponding to the patient’s room 
number.  This opens the “admit patient” screen. 
iv. The clinician will enter the patient’s MRN in the MRN field and select the import 
icon. Patient SafetyNet is linked to EPIC and will auto-populate the patient’s name. 
v. The clinician will verify all information has been uploaded correctly and select the 
primary assignment supervisor, then select “Admit.”   
vi. Once the process described above is complete, the patient information will be 
viewable on Patient SafetyNet.  
vii. The respiratory therapist will verify that the patient is being properly monitored at 
least twice per shift.  Nursing will be responsible for making sure that the patient is 
continuously connected and viewed on their Patient SafetyNet central monitor in the 
nursing station. 
viii. Alarm limits will be defaulted to the hospital’s determined alarms. Physician 
communication will occur prior to widening the alarm limits.  
2. Daily RT Tasks:  
1. At the start of the shift, the oncoming RT will get a report from the off-going RT.  
2. The following information should be passed on in the report: 
a. Any Patient SafetyNet central monitoring system issues. 
b. Ensure orders are correct and current for all patients being monitored.   
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE: ETCO2 and Continuous Pulse 
Oximetry Monitoring 
DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOLRC-SOP# 3 
AUTHOR: Tim Cordes 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/1/2023 Last REVIEW DATE:  
 
                                                                                                                                                                         
No: OLOLRC-SOP#3 
 Page 5 of 5 
 
c. Monitoring the status of each patient tile on the monitor.  Ensure all patients 
with orders are linked and being monitored. 
d. Report the last time the patient was assessed. 
e. Ensure correct patients are linked to the correct room. 
f. Report any other issues identified with the Patient SafetyNet system. 
3. RT will monitor the Patient SafetyNet system at least once every 6 hours at each 
designated unit assigned to verify proper functioning tiles with an updated status for 
each patient. 
a. Verify that all patients with current CPO or ETCO2 orders are properly 
monitored and linked. 
b. RT should communicate to the charge RN if a patient is linked to a tile 
WITHOUT an order. 
c. Patients who are discharged are removed from the tiles on the SafetyNet 
central monitoring system. 
d. Evaluate any tiles that are unlinked or connectivity is lost. 
e. RT should communicate/notify the nursing unit to correct monitoring issues 
when identified.   
 
  Additional notes: 
1. The RT assigned to the patient care area is responsible for verifying that the patient's name and room 
number are correct.   
2. Removal of discharged patient tiles is the responsibility of the assigned therapist and/or the RN. 
 
For any issues with the monitor connectivity in the nursing station call the HELP DESK 765-4957 
 
For any issues with the Masimo monitor call 1-800-326-4890 OPTION #2    