OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 3 
AU.110 
 
SCOPE 
 
All staff who may handle the deceased radioactive patient. 
 
 
PURPOSE 
 
To address radiation levels which may be hazardous to funeral directors, coroners, and 
others who may handle the body of the deceased. Deceased patients with large amounts 
of radionuclides will be encountered only rarely since radionuclide therapy is not given 
to moribund patients. If several days intervene between treatment and subsequent death, 
the radiation hazard is usually considerably reduced. 
 
 
POLICY 
 
The identification of patients undergoing radionuclide therapy by ingestion or injection 
as “radioactive” is the responsibility of the attending physician, radiologist, or facility radiation 
safety officer.   
 
The procedure for handling radioactive specimens will follow universal precautions for all 
specimen types. Because of the low risk of radiation exposure to lab staff, universal precautions 
adequately cover most aspects of specimen handling. 
 
 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
  
1. Recent administration of diagnostic radioisotopes poses no radiation hazard. 
 
2. The attending physician, radiologist or facility radiation safety officer is responsible for 
identifying a patient as being radioactive.  The autopsy consent form will state the isotope 
used, dosage and time of administration.   
 
3. If the body to be autopsied contains appreciably more than 5 millicurie of radioactivity, 
the tissues and fluid must be handled according to the direction of the facility radiation 
safety officer.  
MORGUE/AUTOPSY MANUAL 
AU.110 
AUTOPSY CONSIDERATION FOR RADIOACTIVE CONTAMINATED BODIES 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D. Leger 8/19/22 11/2/2022 11/2/2022 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 10/14/22 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 10/12/22 8/8/1998 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 3 
AU.110 
 
4. The personnel moving the radioactive body to the morgue should wear gloves and a 
gown unless instructed otherwise by the facility radiation safety officer.  
 
5. If there are interstitial or intracavitary radioactive implants in the body, these implants 
and associated tissues should be removed first and placed in a properly labeled shielded 
container prior to the autopsy. 
 
 
PROCEDURE 
 
1. If a patient who has received radionuclide treatment expires while in the hospital, 
the Physician who pronounces the patient shall be responsible for attaching a 
“RADIOACTIVE PRECAUTIONS” tag to the body. 
 
2. The Physician in charge of the case and the Radiation Safety Officer shall be 
notified at once. 
 
3. These guidelines should be followed: 
 
o All persons in contact with the body or body tissues and fluids should wear gloves 
and gowns. 
 
o Patients who have received tracer amounts of radioactive materials for diagnostic 
test are not considered to represent a hazard to those persons involved in handling 
deceased patients. No precautions are required. 
 
o Bodies containing less than 5 mCi need no precautions of any type  
 
o If the body is subject to autopsy, the Radiation Safety Officer will designate any 
special precautions.  
 
 
HANDLING RADIOACTIVE SPECIMENS  
 
 Use “universal precautions” handling procedures for tissue specimens used in pathology 
laboratories in order to keep radiation exposure to laboratory and other hospital workers as low 
as reasonably achievable.  Handling these specimens following universal precautions established 
for all specimen types. Because of the low risk of radiation exposure to lab staff, universal 
precaution adequately covers most aspect of radioactive specimen handling. 
 
 
STORAGE AND PROCESSING 
 
1. The tissue sample sections required to perform laboratory analysis should be removed 
from the body and stored in specifically identified containers.  
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 3 
AU.110 
2. Due to the extremely low radioactivity present in sample sections, Universal Precautions 
are sufficient for handling, storage and disposal of radioactive specimens. 
 
 
DISPOSAL 
 
1. Radiation levels of 99m Technetium will have decreased to background levels after 60 
hours. Specimens and other related surgical materials can be disposed of through 
ordinary medical waste disposal methods 60 hours after the time of surgery. Dispose of 
specimens in standard biohazard waste. 
 
2. If specimen containers have been labeled, “Radioactive Materials”, regulations require 
that these labels be removed or rendered entirely illegible before disposal with regular 
medical waste. 
 
3. The radiation safety office should direct cleaning of the autopsy suite after completion of 
the postmortem, and then indicate when the room is safe for routine use.   
 
 
 
NOTES 
 
• 99mTechnetium-sulfur colloid  
Doses of 0.4 to 1.0 mCi are typically used in sentinel lymphadenectomy for melanoma 
and breast cancer. The half-life of 99mTechnetium is 6 hours. Radiation levels decrease 
to background levels after 10 half-lives (60 hours). 
 
• I-131 (radioactive iodine)  
Dosage for treatment of hyperthyroidism will constitute no hazard. 
 
Dosage for thyroid carcinoma may exceed 100 milicurie. 
o For the first 24 hours the blood and urine will contain a large amount of 
radioactivity.  They should be placed into containers and allowed to decay 
in an out of the way location. 
o After 24 hours radioactivity will be high in the thyroid gland area and 
possibly any sites of metastasis. Remove this tissue and place in out of 
way location or shield those areas of the body 
 
 