  
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE:  Respiratory Short-Staffed Triage Plan  DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care/PFT Labs 
SOP No:  OLOLRC-SOP15 
AUTHOR:  Shantelle Graves 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  1/25/2021 REVIEW DATE: January 12,2023 
 
                                                                                                                                                                        SOP 
No: OLOLRC-SOP10 
 Page 1 of 3 
 
Purpose:   
This document describes the process in which the respiratory care department will prioritize respiratory care 
procedures for patients when the workload is too high to reasonably manage with the amount of work for the 
number of productive team members working.  NOTE: At any time that Triage Level staffing has been 
implemented, the respiratory therapists will conduct care in the manner as defined by the guidelines, SOPs 
and policies within the respiratory department and hospital.  The respiratory therapist will use the content of 
this SOP to define the method in which prioritization of treatment will be carried out in the event there is not 
enough time within the shift to complete all tasks and duties. 
 
Procedure:   
The respiratory care department will enforce the Emergency Triage Staffing Plan as listed below when the 
workload per RT has been determined to exceed the designated hours.  The workload per RT will calculated 
using the worksheet for assignment making that uses units of time to allot for each procedure.  These units of 
time have been developed and approved by the respiratory leadership teams using the AARC as a resource as 
well as department process and procedures. The procedure will provide a consistent way to operate and 
communicate the plan during implementation of emergency triage respiratory staffing.  This plan will be 
followed as described below on a shift-by-shift basis.  The emergency staffing level will be implemented in a 
Tiered approach and will be evaluated at the beginning of each shift.  During Emergency Staffing, supervisors 
and manager may be used in the staffing model as needed and applicable.  Approval and communication will 
be required when the emergency staffing plan is utilized.  
 
1. Determination of Emergency Staffing – at the beginning of each shift, the charge supervisor/RT will 
review the Workload Hours/RT using the Day Assignment Sheet and Night Assignment Sheet found in 
the following location: T:\Data\Respiratory Supervisors\Forms\Assignments.  The Emergency Triage 
Plan will be implemented in the following levels: 
1.1. Level 1 – Hours per RT > 14.0 
1.2. Level 2 – Hours per RT > 15.5 
1.3. Level 3 – Hours per RT > 17.0 
1.4. Level 4 – Hours per RT > 18.1 
 
2. Triage Levels – below is a description of each procedure that will be altered from regular 
policy/procedure during each triage level.  Also, each triage level will be approved by the designated 
positions listed below and the communication of such triage staffing should be carried out. 
2.1. Level 1 – Hours per RT 14.1 – 15.5  
2.1.1. Procedure Changes   
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE:  Respiratory Short-Staffed Triage Plan  DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care/PFT Labs 
SOP No:  OLOLRC-SOP15 
AUTHOR:  Shantelle Graves 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  1/25/2021 REVIEW DATE: January 12,2023 
 
                                                                                                                                                                        SOP 
No: OLOLRC-SOP10 
 Page 2 of 3 
 
2.1.1.1. Ventilator assessments – Change from Q2 to Q4 for routine checks.  Based on patient 
condition and severity, patients requiring more frequent assessments will be considered and 
discussed with the attending physician if the workload cannot be managed.  
2.1.1.2. Implement Emergency Documentation Plan – minimal documentation for information 
needed for consistent care. Separate document will outline the emergency documentation 
requirements.  
2.1.1.3. Capnography and Continuous Pulse Ox monitoring – For units that have been trained in 
the setup of the monitors, nursing will assume all responsibility for ETCO2 and SpO2 set up, 
discharge from system and continuous monitoring for any patient not receiving other 
respiratory therapy.  
2.1.2. Approval of Plan – Supervisor and manager approval required 
2.2. Level 2 – Hours per RT 15.6 -17.0 
2.2.1. Procedure Changes  
2.2.1.1. All listed in Level 1 
2.2.1.2. PEP and Flutter treatment on the acute floors (Non-ICU/PCU/ED) will be triaged for 
necessity of treatment.  
2.2.1.3. Trach Patient Assessments – For units on the acute med/surg floors (not ICU or PCU), 
nursing will call the RT for any trach care needs.  The RT will assess a trach patient only when 
called for patient condition or concerns.  
2.2.1.4. Nebs ordered with Hypertonic saline only will not be completed on floors. 
2.2.2. Approval of Plan – Respiratory Director approval required 
2.3. Level 3 – Hours per RT >17.0 
2.3.1. Procedure Changes 
2.3.1.1. All listed in Levels 1 and 2 
2.3.1.2. Nebulized medications on the acute floors will be changed to MDI or While Awake.  
Nurses should call the respiratory supervisor for patients in distress.  This will not be 
applicable in the ICUs, PCU or Eds. The supervisor will determine whether specific 
patients/units will be triaged at this level for inhaled medications.  
2.3.1.3. SMAU and SMAT perioperative will not have a respiratory therapist assigned to these 
areas. In the event of a code blue or MET, the respiratory supervisor will respond. –  
2.3.1.4. Respiratory Supervisor will review the medical record of all patients with Airway 
Clearance Protocol orders and apply protocol to each (not ICUs or PCU) 
2.3.1.5. EKG (when applicable) will become the responsibility of the nursing staff 
2.3.2. Approval of Plan – Respiratory Director will contact the VP of Operations for approval  
   
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE:  Respiratory Short-Staffed Triage Plan  DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care/PFT Labs 
SOP No:  OLOLRC-SOP15 
AUTHOR:  Shantelle Graves 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  1/25/2021 REVIEW DATE: January 12,2023 
 
                                                                                                                                                                        SOP 
No: OLOLRC-SOP10 
 Page 3 of 3 
 
2.4. Level 4 – Hours per RT > 18.1 
2.4.1. Procedure Changes 
2.4.1.1. All listed in Levels 1,2 and 3  
2.4.1.2. Respiratory Therapists will only be assigned to patients in ED, ICU and PCU. In the event 
of a code blue or MET, the respiratory supervisor will respond.  
.   
2.4.1.3. Approval of Plan – Respiratory Director will contact VP of operations and Respiratory 
Medical Director for approval.   
3. Communication of Emergency Staffing - as soon as a Triage Plan is implemented, communication will 
occur in the following manner:  
3.1. Assignment Sheet will list the Triage level – emailed and/or faxed to nursing units 
3.2. Manager, Director, VP of Operations and Medical Director of Respiratory Care will be notified via 
email 
3.3. Nurse House Manager will be notified via Voalte Text or call 
3.4. Leaders will be notified on the Tiered II leader huddle 