OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 6 
AU.105 
MORGUE/AUTOPSY MANUAL 
AU.105 
AUTOPSY PROCEDURE 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D. Leger 8/4/22 11/2/2022 11/2/2022 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 10/13/22 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 10/12/22 5/12/1992 
 
THE AUTOPSY 
Pathology Group of Louisiana (PGL) will provide post -mortem examination services (either on -
site or through contracted services.)   
 
Autopsies are generally carried out during normal working hours with adequate assistance.   The 
prosector should be alert, not fati gued, and taking particular care not to rush through the 
procedure.  One person at a time should work on the body or block as two pa irs of hands 
removing organs or dissecting in close quarters is one of the major causes of cuts and puncture 
wounds.  Wash a ll cuts or puncture wounds immediately and vigorously with facility approved 
disinfectant. Follow facility Exposure protocols.    
 
All autopsies are considered infectious and Standard Precautions must be followed.  The entire 
Autopsy Suite is designated as  a Biohazard Area. When encountering more serious infectious or 
chemical contaminated cases, the prosector may wish to apply more stringent precautions than 
those recommended herein.  The goal is to obtain maximum useful information from the autopsy 
while minimizing exposure risk to the autopsy team and the environment. 
 
The following guidelines are used for all cases and are considered suitable for routine medical 
autopsies.   
 
 
FIXATIVES 
 
Ten percent formalin (3.7% formaldehyde) present in at least ten ti mes the volume of tissue 
which has been properly sectioned and adequately permeated, will inactivate all important 
infectious agents EXCEPT Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) and M. Tuberculosis (TB).     
 
A tuberculocidal fixative may be prepared with 10% Fo rmalin in 50% ethyl alcohol and should 
be used when M. Tuberculosis is expected.   
 
Decontamination after an autopsy should utilize an appropriate chemical germicide for the 
agents(s) suspected to be present, e.g., HIV, CJD, M. Tuberculosis, anthrax or Coccidomycosis.  
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 6 
AU.105 
 
BEDSIDE PROTECTION 
 
Preparation of the body should follow general recommendations for cases on blood and body -
fluid precautions.   
• The handling of nasogastric tubes, endotracheal tubes, catheters,  electrical impulse 
devices, soiled bandag es, and clothing must follow the medical center’s policies and 
Standard Precaution Procedure. 
• All open lesions, cut-downs, and all unnatural openings in the skin should be bandaged. 
• The genitalia should be covered with a sanitary napkin if oozing is present.  
• The penis may be ligated if appropriate. 
• If rectal sphincter tone has relaxed, the anus should be covered with a sanitary napkin. 
• The body is to be covered with a plastic leak proof body bag for transportation to the 
morgue.  
 
 
MORGUE PERSONNEL 
 
Morgue personnel must successfully demonstrate competency in autopsy procedures and the 
laboratories’ OSHA Exposure Control Plan.   
 
Personnel present during an Autopsy should be limited to a prosector, an assistant, and a 
circulator if available.  Standard Prec autions and good laboratory practices must be followed.  If 
observers are permitted at an autopsy they must observe all required precautions.  
 
Persons with uncovered wounds or dermatitis should not actively be engaged in the autopsy 
unless the skin defect s can be completely covered with a water impermeable occlusive dressing 
or other acceptable barrier (e.g., gloves).   
 
 
CIRCULATOR 
 
The circulator , if available , is a trained individual who remains uncontaminated, assists the 
prosector and generally facili tates the performance of the autopsy while limiting any 
contamination to the autopsy room, equipment and containers. The circulator: 
• Prepares the room and equipment for the autopsy. 
• Assists in photography, collection of specimens and cultures to avoid cont amination of 
equipment not on the autopsy table. 
• Acts as a communicator, handling all telephone or written communication and recording 
data during the autopsy.  A foot-activated recorder may be used if dictation is required.  
• Wears protective clothing incl uding a gown and gloves.  If these become contaminate d 
they are to be changed immediately. 
 
 
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 6 
AU.105 
 
BARRIER PROTECTION 
 
Barriers are especially important during an autopsy because of the exposure of personnel to large 
amount of blood and the high frequency of  accidents.  The following protective devices, all of 
which should be disposable or easily decontaminated, are recommended for persons participating 
in the autopsy: 
 
• Caps or hoods that completely cover the hair. 
• A plastic face shield covering the entire fa ce and neck region best provides face 
protection.  A personal respirator should be worn under the shield to prevent inhalation of 
airborne organisms, (e.g., M. Tuberculosis which commonly present in HIV infected 
bodies). 
• Personal respirators, chemical cartridge respirators, and goggles to cover the mouth, nose, 
and/or eyes are available in the laboratory sections when encountering uniqu e barrier 
needs during autopsy. 
• Wrap-around safety glasse s, which fit over ordinary prescription glasses, are available.  
Ordinary glasses do not offer adequate eye protection.  Contact lenses must not be 
manipulated in the autopsy suite.  
• Protective clothing:  Jump suits which cover the body from neck to feet may be preferred.  
A long-sleeved fluid resistant surgical gown and  plastic aprons are also available.  The 
circulator and observers may wear surgical gowns.   
• Double gloves are recommended.  The outer gloves are to cover the cuffs of the sleeves.    
The circulator may wear single gloves.  
• Stainless steel mesh gloves are available and protect the prosector from large cutting 
objects, but do not offer protection f rom needle sticks.  These gloves should be use d 
during hazardous portions of the procedure such as: blind removal of the larynx, rectum, 
and pelvic contents; removal of the rib cage, vertebrae, or calvarium; or other times when 
saws, chisels, or bone cutters are used.  The mesh gloves should be used with gloves to 
provide slip resistance and protection from fluids.  
• Fluid-proof foot covers are available. 
 
 
AUTOPSY PROCEDURE 
 
Routine procedures may be modified as needed to diminish risks of contamination.  The 
possibility of CJD must be considered in any patient with progressive dementia, with or without 
typical EEG findings, and at le ast 2 of these 4 clinical feature s:  (1)  myoclonus, (2)  visual or 
cerebellar disturbances, (3)  pyramidal/extrapyramidal dysfunction, and (4)  akinetic mutism.  In 
practical terms, any progressive intellectual deterioration without established organic cause must 
be carefully considered to exclude CJD, especially if the process is rapid.  See CJD Policy. 
 
1. Evisceration may be modified to avoid splashing of blood or blind dissection.  For 
example, if a Rokitansky evisceration is used, the  trachea may be  transected and blind 
removal of the l arynx omitted if the risk is considered too high.  If blind evisceration of 
the pelvis and neck is performed, stainless steel mesh gloves should be worn. 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 6 
AU.105 
 
2. A Virchow evisceration with the removal of individual organs may offer less opportunity 
for an accident or splashing of blood.  
 
3. A single disposable scalpel should be the only sharp instrument  present on the autopsy 
table.  Only the prosector should use the  scalpel.  Additional scalpels are prepared prior 
to the autopsy so that no blade changes will be needed during the autopsy.     
 
4. Instruments should not be passed by hand during the autopsy.  All  instruments should be 
placed on the table, picked up only by the prosector and returned to the table after being 
used.  The prosector is to announce any moveme nts which involve the repositioning of a 
sharp instrument.  
 
5. Do not bend or sheath needles after use; place in sharps container immediately.   
 
6. All tissues and contaminate d instruments should be retained on the  autopsy table. Any 
tissue that must be removed from the autopsy table, as for photography, should be placed 
into a tray for transport within the morgue o r placed into a container for storage  or 
disposal.  The outside of the container must be disinfected.   
 
7. A respirator should be worn  when cutting bo ne to prevent inhalation of potentially 
infectious airborne particles. The saw may also be wrapped in plastic with only the blade 
exposed in an effort to prevent the dispersal of bone dust by exhaust air from the motor.  
Bone surfaces should be wet with water prior to being cut to reduce aerosols. 
 
8. The skull should be opened at the end of the autopsy to minimize  exposure                         
to airborne bone dust and droplets.   
 
9. When removing the sternum, jagged rib edges should be avoided.  The cut ends of the rib 
cage should be covered by towels to prevent accidental scratches or cuts. 
 
10. Bone marrow specimens should be taken by crushing the cut end of a rib and expressing 
the marrow contents.  Vertebral marrow should not be obtained unless the clinical 
information warrants it, since significant  spattering of blood may occur.  A rigid plastic 
shield may be fashioned to contain spatter when removing vertebral bodies.  
 
11. If the calvarium has been removed, the spinal cord may be removed  from above with a 
spinal cord extractor to avoid the removal of multiple  vertebral bodies.  Since damage to 
the cord is possible only an experienced prosector should attempt this procedure. 
 
12. Tissue specimens should be placed into fixative on the autopsy table. The outside of the  
specimen containers should be  decontaminated before  being removed from the autopsy 
table. Any unfixed tissue or other  specimens sent from the morgue to the  laboratory for 
testing (e.g., cultures, chemistry) should be placed into a sealed leak proof container,        
which is placed into a re -sealable secondary container for transport. The  specimen should 
be labeled as a biohazard.  
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 5 of 6 
AU.105 
13. Frozen sections should not be cut on unfixed tissue unless there is  pressing need for public 
health reasons, because cuts of the hand are common and adequate decontamination of the 
cryostat is difficult.  If frozen sections are cu t, gloves should be worn.  Freez ing 
propellants under pressure should not be used as th e cause the scattering of droplets of 
infectious material.  If t he autopsy has revealed pathologic fin dings consistent with an  
HIV, HBV or other bloodborne infections or if tissue contain ing M. tuberculosis has been 
cut; the cryostat should be defrosted and decontaminated immediately with an  EPA 
approved tuberculocidal  disinfectant.  Otherwise, the cryostat should be decontaminated 
immediately after use with 70% alcohol.  This will include removal of all tissue sections 
and trimmings.  Stainless steel mesh gloves should be worn when handling the microtome 
blade or cleaning the cryostat. 
 
14. Photographs may be taken at the autopsy using a hand held  camera or the tissue may be 
fixed before being photographed to  avoid removing  unfixed tissue(s) from the autopsy 
table.  
 
15.  Large specimens (organs) should be cut into multiple thi n slices (bread loafed) before 
fixation to ensure adequate permeation of fixative.  Organs and tissues that will be retained 
unfixed should be minimized.  These are placed into sealed leak-proof containers. These in 
turn, should be  placed into a secondary,  sealable leak proof container s. All unfixed  
retained materials are conspicuously labeled as biohazard.  When these tissue(s) have 
served their purpose, they are shipped to  a licensed  pathological waste incinerator for 
disposal.  
 
16. At the end of the autopsy the body should be sutured carefully with a sharp needle.  When 
suturing the body wall the skin flaps should no t be held with  the hands, as needle sticks 
may occur. A large toothed forceps or toothed clamp should be used. 
 
17. The closed body should be washed  with a detergent solution,  followed by  an antiseptic 
solution or diluted household bleach, and rinsed with water  before being covered with a 
leak proof shroud or body ba g.  The body tag  and shroud/bag are to be labeled with a 
biohazard label stating the n ature of any potential biohazard.  When autopsies are done on 
patients known to harbor bloodborne pathogens, the mortician must be notified directly.  
 
18. At the conclusion of the autopsy, the circulator ma y perform duties that include contact 
with blood or contaminated surfaces; under these circumstances the circulatory should use 
the barrier protection recommended for the processor during the autopsy.  
 
19. Review of autopsy organs may preferably be done on fixed organs to minimize exposure to 
contaminated blood  and tissues.  Any review of  unfixed autopsy specimens should be 
carried out using all of the  recommended precautions as if a full autopsy was being 
performed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 6 of 6 
AU.105 
ROUTINE DECONTAMINATION OF AUTOPSY SUITE   
(Follow Crutzfeldt-Jakob Disease policy if indicated) 
 
1.  The table and all pans, trays, buckets, etc. are washed wi th a detergent solution, rinsed 
with water, wet thoroughly with a 1:10 dilution of house hold bleach.  A brief exposure 
of 10 minutes should be sufficient; longer periods may corrode instr uments.  Aluminum 
instruments may require 2% aqueous glutaraldehyde, as bleach damages aluminum.  
Scalpels with blades attached are decontaminated before removing an d disposing of the 
blades.  New bottles of bleach must be labeled with the date when opened .  Bleach in its 
original container is stable f or 3 months at room temperature  and should be discarded 
after 3 months.  Diluted bleach solutions will deteriorate at room temperature and light 
exposure.  Diluted bleach solutions must be dated when prepar ed and discarded after 24 
hours. 
  
2. Care is to be taken at all times not to splash water, blood, or body  fluids from the autopsy 
table.  All drains , vacuum breakers, and vacuum lines are to be monitored to prevent 
backup of liquids.   
 
3. All disposable clothing and supplies are to be placed into biohazard containers for disposal 
all biohazard containers are incinerated in a pathological rated incinerator.)   If reusable 
clothing and towels are  used they must be placed into a leak proof biohazard bag for 
transport.  
 
4. All surfaces adjacent to work areas should be cleaned with  detergent solution and flushed 
with water at the conclusion of the  autopsy.  This includes reusable aprons, goggles, 
respiratory devices, the floor and areas surrounding the autopsy table, and dressing room.   
 
5. After the body has been removed by the funeral home, the morgue  cooler tray is 
decontaminated by using appropriate materials. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Protection of Laboratory Workers from Infections Disease Transmitted by Blood, Body Fluids, 
and Tissue. NCCLS Document M29.T3 Vo. 11 no. 14 