OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
 
SUBJECT:  Non-Invasive Positive Pressure Ventilation (NPPV) 
and Heated High Flow Nasal Cannula (HFNC) Procedures 
PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care Effective 
11/1/2018 
APPROVED BY:  Shantelle Graves, Director of Respiratory 
Care 
Last review 
11/3/2022 
 
PURPOSE: To establish a standard operating procedure for respiratory therapists to remain consistent 
in caring for patients with respiratory disorders when non-invasive positive pressure ventilation or 
heated high-flow nasal cannula is ordered by the physician or other provider.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
PROCEDURE FOR NON-INVASIVE POSITIVE PRESSURE VENTILATION (NPPV): 
 
A. Non-invasive ventilation: 
1. Upon receiving the order, the respiratory therapist will deliver the equipment to the patient’s 
room, set the patient up on the device, conduct a complete respiratory assessment, and 
document it in the EMR. 
i. The respiratory therapist will ensure network integration of the ventilator and 
test audible and visual alarms upon placement of a patient on the ventilator and 
at the start of each shift.  
ii. The respiratory therapist will document in the patient’s EMR that audible and 
visual alarms were tested and passed.  
iii. If there is an interruption in the network integration in which the respiratory 
therapist cannot quickly troubleshoot the resolution, then the shift supervisor will 
be notified to enter a footprint ticket, and the respiratory therapist will enter a 
safety event in the RLDatix system. 
iv. The respiratory therapist will remove and replace the ventilator if the network 
integration issue cannot be resolved or the ventilator fails audible and visual 
alarm testing.  
 
2. Assessment of patients on NPPV will occur within the frequencies listed below: 
i. ICU – every 2 hours 
ii. PCU – every 4 hours 
iii. Continuous floor – every 4 hours 
iv. ED – every 2 hours 
v. OSA floor – every 6 hours while in use 
3. Location for NPPV use: 
i. NPPV will be initiated in the ED, ICU, PACU or progressive care units. ii. NPPV will be ordered as QHS or continuous with or without protocol (depending 
on the location of the patient). 
iii. If the patient is admitted to the acute floor from the ED, the protocol will be 
followed in an effort to wean the patient from NPPV.  
iv. Patient should not be admitted to the acute floor on continuous NPPV if FiO2 
requirements exceed 0.5. 
v. For patients on the acute floors with continuous NPPV, the following will apply: 
a. A pulmonary consult will be needed if the patient cannot be weaned within 
12 hours of admission to the floor. 
b. A pulmonary consult will be needed if continuous NPPV is reapplied after 
initial discontinuation on the floor. 
4. Transporting a patient on NPPV:  Patients with a continuous order of NPPV will be 
transported on the device by a respiratory therapist.  The respiratory therapist will ensure the 
proper amount of oxygen is available during transport.  Communication will occur prior to 
the transport with the patient’s nurse and the team in the accepting location (for example, 
CT, MRI, PCU, ICU, etc.). The process for transport is defined in the SOP for Transporting 
Patients on Advanced Oxygen Devices.  
5. The physician will be notified at any time of the following reasons: 
i. patient condition deteriorates during the weaning process  
ii. a pulmonary consult is required as stated above 
iii. the patient is weaned and removed from the BiPAP  
 
 
PROCEDURE FOR HEATED HIGH-FLOW NASAL CANNULA (HFNC): 
 
A. High Flow Nasal Cannula Order Care 
1. Upon receiving the order, the respiratory therapist will deliver the equipment to the 
patient's room, set the patient up on the device, conduct a complete respiratory 
assessment, and document it in the EMR.  
2. Patients on High Flow Nasal Cannula should be assessed every 4 hours regardless of 
location in the hospital. 
3. Location for HFNC use: 
i. HFNC may be utilized in the ICU, ED, or progressive care units at max settings 
ii. HFNC may be initiated on the acute floors not to exceed 20 lpm flow rates. 
iii. If the patient requires more support than 20 lpm but less than 30 lpm for 4 hours, 
contact the physician.  If the patient requires more support than 30 lpm, contact 
the physician immediately, as the patient should be transferred to a higher level of 
care. A pulmonary consult may be requested by the attending physician.  
iv. HFNC may be ordered as continuous with or without the protocol. 
4. Transporting a patient on HFNC:   
i. Patients with an order for HFNC will be transported on a transport Vapotherm unit 
when on flowrates of 20 lpm or greater, and for all pediatric patient transports.  
The process for transporting patients on HFNC is defined in the SOP for 
Transporting Patient on Advanced Oxygen Devices.  ii. The respiratory therapist and nurse will work with the receiving department 
(radiology, special procedures, another nursing unit, etc.) to prepare for a mode of 
safe transport. 
iii. The respiratory therapist will accompany all patient transports that require the VPT 
transport device on HFNC.  
 
 
Note: 
• As with any order, if the order is unclear, the respiratory therapist should call the 
physician for any order clarification.   
• The respiratory therapist should communicate with the nurse and physician when 
condition changes or there is a change in therapy delivered.  
• If there are any questions regarding this procedure or the protocols mentioned, the 
respiratory supervisor may be contacted at 225-202-4578.  