OO-HR-S-004 
Page 1 of 2 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Human Resources / 
Schedules & Pay 
Title: Hours of Work Policy Reference #: OrgOps/HR/S/004 
Supersedes #: HR/C/002 
Date of Origination: October 1, 1982 Last Review Date: June 8, 2012 
Last Revision Date: December 28, 2018 
 
 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to define work schedules, meal periods, and breaks for Our Lady of the 
Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) employees to provide for effective staffing of Medical Center. 
 
POLICY 
1. OLOL complies with all applicable Federal and State labor laws regarding hours of work, meal 
periods, and work breaks.   
2. It is the policy of OLOL to compensate all employees equitably and fairly for hours worked. 
3. The standard work day for full-time employees at OLOL is eight and one-half hours; this includes 
one 30-minute unpaid meal period. 
4. All full-time employees are expected to work eight hours, including breaks.  
a. The OLOL work day begins at 12 midnight and ends at 11:59 p.m.. 
b. Hours of work are determined by the employee’s supervisor and are subject to change at the 
supervisor’s discretion.  
5. Compensatory time will not be granted. 
 
Work breaks 
1. OLOL provides work breaks for all employees when feasible.  However, the patient needs and 
workload of a department must be considered prior to any employee being granted a break. 
2. Work breaks must be scheduled by an employee's supervisor. 
3. Employees who work shifts where the greater part of the work day is not divided by the lunch period 
may be allowed one 15 minute break within the longest period of their shift. 
4. Employees who work four hours before noon and four hours after noon may be allowed two breaks 
of ten minutes each (morning and afternoon). 
5. Employees leaving campus for non-work related purposes at any time during their shift should clock 
out and in when returning.  
 
Meal periods 
1. Employees working over five hours in a given work day may be granted one unpaid 30-minute meal 
period. 
2. Team members should clock out for meal periods and in when returning.  
3. Meal times may not be adjusted by coming in late or leaving early. 
4. Meal times should be coordinated with the employee’s supervisor and in accordance with the work 
requirements of the unit/department.   
5. In the case of an emergency, an employee may be requested to perform his/her regular duties during 
the meal period. In this case, the team member should clock in if possible and / or notify the OO-HR-S-004 
Page 2 of 2 
manager of the time with which he or she returned. Meal periods of less than 20 minutes should be 
removed from the timecard and shall be paid time.  
  
 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO 