OO-HR-P-013 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Human Resources/Personnel 
Actions 
Title: Procedures for Team Member 
Separation 
Policy Reference #: OrgOps/HR/P/013 
Supersedes #: HR/A/005 
Date of Origination: October 1, 1982 Last Review Date: June 8, 2012 
Last Revision Date: June 21, 2005 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to describe the termination of employment process at Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center (OLOL).   
 
POLICY: 
A. Human Resources will maintain a system of documentation to satisfy legal requirements, promote 
equitable treatment, and provide statistical analysis of the termination process.  
B. This policy is to be administered in conjunction with OLOL policy OrgOps/HR/E/030 – Employment at 
Will (the “Employment at Will” policy) and nothing contained herein shall change the employment at 
will status of any employee. 
C. Should there be any conflict between this policy and the Employment at Will policy, the terms of the 
Employment at Will policy shall control. 
D. Failure on the part of OLOL to complete one or more of the steps described below will not preclude the 
right of OLOL to dismiss any employee who has violated the standards of the institution.  
E. In accord with Louisiana law, Payroll will process the employee’s final paycheck following the end of 
the pay period in which he/she terminated employment.  
   
PROCEDURE: 
Voluntary termination of employment 
1. Staff employees voluntarily terminating their service with OLOL are expected to provide a written two 
week notice of their resignation.  Management employees are expected to provide a four week notice.  
However, OLOL reserves the right to waive the notice period at any time and for any reason.   
2. Accrued Paid Time Off (PTO) will be paid at time of employment termination and may be used in lieu 
of notice.   
3. Upon receipt of the resignation notice, the manager completes a Personnel Action Form (PAF) 
indicating termination of employment using the Lawson manager self-service tool.   
4. Employees may schedule an exit interview by contacting Human Resources.   
5. Human Resources is also available to assist employees leaving the organization with benefit conversion 
and retirement benefit options. 
 OO-HR-P-013 
Page 2 of 2 
Involuntary termination of employment 
1. Specific disciplinary steps regarding involuntary termination are described in OrgOps/HR/P/002 - 
Discipline/Counseling Action System.   
2. When the decision has been reached to involuntarily terminate a person’s employment with OLOL, that 
decision will be communicated to the employee by his/her manager, or, on occasion, by Human 
Resources.  This communication will occur in a timely manner. 
3. The HR Business Partner will initiate all involuntary termination PAFs. 
4. A discharged employee may request an exit interview with Human Resources. 
 
Securing Equipment/Property 
1. The manager makes arrangements with the employee to return keys, electronic devices, ID Badge and 
any other materials and/or property of OLOL.  
2. If circumstances warrant, Human Resources may assist with the collection of these items. 
 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO 
 