Revised: 01/12/2017  OO-HR-E-011 
Reviewed: 01/12/2017  Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Human Resources/Employment 
Practices 
Title: Employee Parking Policy Reference #: OrgOps/HR/E/011 
Supersedes #: HR/B/011 
Date of Origination: November 9, 1987 Last Review Date: January 12, 2017 
Last Revision Date: January 12, 2017   
 
KEYPOINTS (Hold Ctrl & Click on link to go directly to that section of policy) 
Parking Cards, Garage Parking, Evening/Night/Weekend Staff Parking, Exceptions, Disabled 
Employees, Handicap Parking, Departmental Parking Cards, Physician Parking, Violations & Fines, 
Boots 
 
PURPOSE 
The guiding philosophy of this policy is to extend the courtesy of convenient parking to our customers.  
The purpose of this policy is to outline appropriate employee parking areas and the procedure for 
obtaining parking cards for the parking garages located on the campus of Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center (OLOL). For purposes of this policy, contract/temporary staffs are considered OLOL 
employees but are not able to purchase parking garage cards.  
 
POLICY 
A. Free parking is available to all employees of OLOL in lighted and patrolled surface parking lots 
surrounding the OLOL campus and in the garages during specified time periods.  
B. Only those employees who have purchased garage parking access are allowed to park in the parking 
garages. All others are to use the surface parking lots designated for employees.  
C. Employees are not allowed to park in surface parking lots designated for patients and visitors. 
D. Fire lanes, entrances, driveways, curb sides and other designated restricted areas to the facility 
cannot be used for parking or blocked at any time. 
E. Compliance inspections of the parking areas are made routinely by OLOL Security. 
 
 
PROCEDURES 
Parking Cards 
1. To sign up for parking garage access, application must be made with Security Services.   
2. As space permits, OLOL employees who have purchased parking are allowed card access based on 
the garage chosen as follows: 
GARAGE LEVELS PARKING FEE 
Garage 2 Levels 3, 4 and 5 only. (These levels are limited to less than 
300 spaces and may require a waiting period for availability.) 
$15.00/Pay Period 
Garage 3 Levels 2, 3, and 4  $10.00/Pay Period 
Garage 4 Levels 2, 3, and 4 $15.00/Pay Period 
 Revised: 01/12/2017  OO-HR-E-011 
Reviewed: 01/12/2017  Page 2 of 5 
3. For the benefit of evening, night and weekend shift employees, free parking will be available daily 
as listed below: 
Garage 2  Levels 3, 4, and 5 between 11:00 p.m. – 9:00 a.m. All hours on weekends.  
Garage 3  Levels 2, 3, and 4 between 2:15 p.m. – 12:00 a.m. All hours on weekends 
Garage 4  Levels 2, 3, and 4 between 2:15 p.m. – 12:00 a.m. All hours on weekends 
4. The parking fee will be withheld from the paycheck of each subscriber on a bi-weekly basis based 
on the garage chosen. 
5. Parking cards issued for a particular garage will only allow the employee to park in that garage.  
6. Individual parking cards may not be shared. 
7. Employees identified as sharing a parking card will be subject to progressive discipline including 
loss of garage parking privileges and termination. 
8. Employee garage access will be loaded onto the employee’s ID badge. 
9. The employee is responsible for maintaining his/her badge to ensure it works properly. Do not bend 
or punch holes in the badge. Keep the badge secure at all times. 
10. With a fee payable by the employee, lost badges will be re-issued by the Security Services. 
Employees may only have one active badge in the system at a time. 
11. Parking access will be removed when the person is no longer employed at OLOL, or if the employee 
discontinues garage access payment. 
12. Employees are responsible for registering new vehicles not previously registered with Security 
Services. 
13. Employees are not to use the parking garage on a sporadic basis by paying a daily fee. 
14. Please view the current OLOL Employee Parking Map available on Lake Link or contact Security 
Services for a copy. 
LOCATION DESIGNATION 
GARAGE 2 PHYSCIANS / VISITORS / STAFF 
GARAGE 3 VALET / STAFF 
GARAGE 4 PHYSICIAN / STAFF 
LITTLE HENNESSY- BEHIND WALGREENS  STAFF 
BIG HENNESSY PATIENTS / VISITORS 
HENNESSY- PLAZA I & II PATIENTS / VISITORS 
COLLEGE PARKING (O’DONOVAN LOT 5) STUDENTS / STAFF 
HENNESSY & DIJON (LOT 4) STAFF 
SERVICE RD (Near the Mechanical Building) STAFF 
SERVICE RD - DESIGNATED PARKING VENDORS 
LOCATION DESIGNATION 
BEHIND MOB - ZONE 3 EMPLOYEE  
EMERGENCY LOT PATIENTS/PHYSICIANS 
PATIN BUILDING- DIJON  BUILDING OCCUPANTS ONLY Revised: 01/12/2017  OO-HR-E-011 
Reviewed: 01/12/2017  Page 3 of 5 
ESSEN- HCI  STUDENTS / FACULTY 
PICARDY - SCHOOL OF NURSING STUDENTS / FACULTY 
BRITTANY - LAB/ALLIED STUDENTS / FACULTY 
HENNESSY - SON STUDENTS / FACULTY 
 
Exceptions  
1. Disabled Employees: Requests for special parking access for employees to accommodate a physical 
restriction or disability will be reviewed and approved by Employee Health in consultation with 
Parking Services before preferred parking access will be granted. 
2. Preferred parking access will be removed when the employee’s disability status is resolved.  
3. Employees must have an Office of Motor Vehicles (OMV) Tag indicating they meet OMV criteria 
for handicap parking. 
4. Employees with an OMV Tag who wish to park in a Garage may purchase access to Garage 2, 3 or 4 
at the current parking rate per pay period.   
5. The employee must present proof a valid OMV Tag that is registered in their name. 
 
Handicap Parking 
1. OLOL Security mobile patrol unit is responsible for policing handicap parking.  
2. Rounds should be made throughout the day to ascertain whether or not there are vehicles parked in a 
handicap parking space without the proper plate or hang tag.  
3. If a vehicle is found to be in violation, a boot will be placed on the vehicle and $50.00 will be 
collected before the boot is removed. 
4. If the violator continues to violate or fail to comply with the Louisiana Statue on Handicap Parking, 
local law enforcement may be summoned to issue a ticket and their parking privilege may be 
revoked. 
5. Under no circumstance will OLOL Security grant permission to anyone to park in Handicap Parking 
without the proper tags. 
6. Any employee with more than 2 handicap violations will be turned in to their Department’s Vice-
President and Human Resources for disciplinary action. 
 
Departmental Parking Cards 
1. Parking cards for departments may be created for departments that meet the following criteria: 
a. Offsite departments that attend frequent meetings within the hospital. Example: Performance 
Improvement  
b. On campus departments that respond to after hours service calls or who perform maintenance 
in the garage. Example: Plant Services 
2. Approval from the department’s Vice President is required before the department card will be Revised: 01/12/2017  OO-HR-E-011 
Reviewed: 01/12/2017  Page 4 of 5 
issued.  
3. Requests for additional cards for a Department must be reviewed and approved by a member of the 
SMT (Senior Management Team).  
4. Divisional Directors are responsible for ensuring departmental cards are used properly and kept 
secure. 
5. Parking access for Department Cards will be limited to Garage 2 - Level 1 and Garage 4 - Levels 2-
4. 
6. Plant Services and Security departmental garage cards will be granted access to all garage areas due 
to their job function.  
7. Parking cards for special situations (Board Members, others) will be issued at the discretion of SMT, 
Executive Administration. The manager of Property Management will oversee cards issued in this 
manner.  
 
Physician Parking 
1. Physicians may park in Garage 2 - Level 1 or Garage 4 - Level 1.  
2. Physician parking access will be loaded onto his/her ID badge.   
3. Requests for additional parking access for members of the physician’s office will be reviewed by the 
Medical Staff Office.  
4. Residents and Medical Students may be granted parking access to Garage 2 - Levels 2-4 for the 
duration of their rotation at OLOL. 
5. Parking access will be loaded onto the resident/students OLOL ID badge by GME. 
6. The GME is responsible for terminating access when the student’s rotation is complete.  
Any parking cards that fail to meet the above criteria will be deactivated and removed from the 
system. 
 
Medical Office Plaza Parking 
1. Medical Plaza Office is responsible for granting Parking to Tenants of each Plaza.  
2. These tenants are granted access to Garage III and their office Manager is given access to Garage II.  
3. Plaza Management Office Staff are responsible for de-activating cards when Plaza Tenants are 
terminated. 
 
 
Violation and Fine Schedule 
1. Employees and contract staff not complying with these guidelines may be subject to disciplinary 
action as set forth by the President/Chief Operating Officer.   
2. Not following the parking practices of OLOL will result in the following: Revised: 01/12/2017  OO-HR-E-011 
Reviewed: 01/12/2017  Page 5 of 5 
1st offense Vehicle immobilized and $25 parking fine imposed 
2nd offense Vehicle immobilized and $50 parking fine imposed 
3rd offense Vehicle immobilized and $100 parking fine imposed for 3rd offense & each 
offense thereafter.  
(The violator will also be subjected to disciplinary action from their department 
director and/or Vice-President of their division.) 
 
Boots 
1. Vehicle immobilizers (Boots) are used by OLOL Security Parking Services to discourage employees 
and students from parking in unauthorized areas thereby causing an inconvenience to our customers 
and other staff members.  
2. All fines are deposited with the cashier’s office. Payment of parking fines and fees will be required 
to have the vehicle immobilizer removed. 
3. Citations for violations of campus parking need not be issued directly to owner/operator of a motor 
vehicle. 
4. Failure to receive a legally-issued citation does not relieve the individual of responsibility for any 
fines resulting from the citation.  
5. Any employee with more than 2 handicap violations will be turned in to their Department’s Vice-
President and Human Resources for disciplinary action. 
 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO  
 