OO-HR-B-008 
Page 1 of 2 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Human Resources/Benefits 
Title: Tuition Reimbursement Policy Reference #: OrgOps/HR/B008 
Supersedes #: HR/D/009 
Date of Origination: July 17, 1989 Last Review Date: July 9, 2007 
Last Revision Date: March 24, 2011 
 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines assistance offered to employees in furthering their education in an effort to enhance 
current skills as well as improve future potential. 
 
POLICY: 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) will provide a tuition reimbursement plan to all 
employees meeting eligibility requirements for the purpose of either improving patient care or meeting 
the mission, vision, strategic goals and objectives of the organization. 
 
ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS: 
1. Employee must have maintained full -time employment (1.0 FTE) or part -time employment (.5 
FTE - .9 FTE) at OLOL for 12 continuous months prior to filing the application and beginning 
coursework or certification for which reimbursement is requested. 
2. The employee's most recent performance evaluation must indicate an overall rating of  “Meets 
Expectations” or  a  “2.0”. 
3. The employee must maintain good standing during the semester in which he/she applies for 
Tuition Reimbursement.  Tuition Reimbursement will not be retroactively applied to an employee 
who was in the disciplinary process. 
4. The employee's course work must lead to a graduate or undergraduate degree at an accredited 
college or university, certification that is clinically pertinent, or involve course work that will 
directly enhance the employee's future skills in relation to continued employment at OLOL. 
5. The Employee receiving the reimb ursement must be an active OLOL  employee at the time of 
reimbursement. 
 
APPROVAL PROCESS: 
1. It is the employee's responsibility to complete an application for Tuition Reimbursement on -line. 
The electronic application can be found on the Human Resources home page of LakeLink. It must 
be completed prior to the first day of class or before taking a certification exam. 
2. Before an employee registers for the first course in a degree program or in a certification course, 
his/her long-range goals should be discussed with his/her direct supervisor. 
3. Final approval for postgraduate coursework must be obtained from the employee's Vice President, 
the Assistant Vice President Human Resources and the COO. 
5. If the request is denied, Human Resources will inform the employee of the decision and the 
reason for denial. 
6. Initial approval of a course of study does not obligate OLOL to future/continued approval of 
reimbursement in that course of study. Approvals are only valid for the course and semester 
agreed upon in advance. 
 
 OO-HR-B-008 
Page 2 of 2 
 
REIMBURSEMENT FOR INDIVIDUAL COURSEWORK: 
 
Course work available at OLOL College and other academic facilities: 
GRADE OLOL COLLEGE OTHER OUTSIDE 
ACADEMIC FACILITIES 
A, B, or Pass 100% 90% 
C  50% 50% 
D Incomplete, D or Fail 0% 0% 
 
Course work only available at outside academic facilities: 
GRADE REIMBURSEMENT 
A, B, or Pass 100% 
C  50% 
D, Incomplete, or Fail 0% 
 
Certification course work/exam only available outside of OLOL facilities: 
GRADE REIMBURSEMENT 
Pass 100% 
Fail 0% 
 
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE REIMBURSEMENT:    
1.  OLOL will reimburse tuition/program costs for employees who meet the eligibility criteria and 
adhere to the approval process, according to the schedule delineated above, not to exceed $1,800 
per academic year (August – July) for full time employees, and $900 for part time employees. 
2. If the employee receives any funds from any other source (i.e., scholarships, grants, etc.), the 
amount of those funds will be deducted from the gross tuition expense before reimbursement 
formula is applied (loans are not deducted). 
3. OLOL will provide reimbursement for paid tuition only.  This policy does not apply to university 
fees, books, registration fees, parking fees, etc. 
 
REIMBURSEMENT PROCESS: 
1. Reimbursement is made at the end of each successfully completed semester, session or 
certification course/exam. No reimbursement is made for audited or incomplete courses. 
2. The employee must submit his/her grades and itemized fee bill (indicating tuition paid) with in 30 
days of course completion or completion of certification exam to Organizational Development. 
3. After the grades and itemized fee bill copies are submitted, the reimbursement will be included on 
the employee’s next bi-weekly paycheck. 
4. Grades and fee bills must be turned in to Organizational Development no later than 3:00 pm on 
Thursday before Payroll Monday. 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO 