OO-HR-E-020 
Page 1 of 1 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Human Resources/Employment 
Practices 
Title: Reinstatement of Benefits Policy Reference #: OrgOps/HR/E/020 
Supersedes #: HR/B/023 
Date of Origination: November 19, 1997 Last Review Date: 6/8/2012 
Last Revision Date: July 7, 2005 
 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to describe available benefits for eligible employees who have been reinstated 
or rehired into open positions through normal hiring practices as described by the Employment Selection 
Policy, OrgOps/HR/E/012. 
 
POLICY 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) reinstates benefits for qualified employees who 
have previously been employed or who have previously transferred to a non-benefit status (including PRN 
or employees with an FTE less than .5). 
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. Reinstatement will occur for former employees who are being rehired or current employees who have 
transferred to a PRN or less than .5 FTE status and are transferring back to at least a .5 FTE. Credit for 
service will be reinstated provided the following eligibility conditions are met: 
a. The employee was previously employed at OLOL for at least one (1) year in a benefit eligible 
status (greater than or equal to .5 FTE). 
b. The employee left or transferred to PRN or less than .5 FTE status in good standing. 
2. All employees who meet the above criteria will be given credit for all years of previous service as it 
relates to benefit hour accruals. The employee’s adjusted hire date will be adjusted by the number of 
months he/she has been absent from employment or in a PRN or less than .5 FTE status. 
3. Benefits the employee receives: 
a. The employee will be eligible for health, life, long-term disability and dental insurance in 
accordance with the policies and eligibility period in effect at time of reinstatement.  
b. Retirement benefits will remain intact and will be calculated using pension plan procedures and 
the employee’s original hire date at OLOL. 
4. Rehire 
a. If an employee does not meet the above criteria for reinstatement, then the employee will be 
considered a new hire for the purpose of benefit accruals. 
5. In no case, either reinstatement or rehire, will forfeited Extended Illness Time (EIT) be reinstated. 
 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO 