 
OO/ET/003 Do Not Resuscitate 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational  
SUBJECT:  
Do Not Resuscitate Order 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
OO/ET/010 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
May 20020  
REVISION DATE: 
February 28, 2022 
REVIEW DATE: 
May 1, 2024 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OO/ET/003  
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
The task of medicine is to care even when it cannot cure.  As a Catholic health care institution, OLOL is a community of 
respect, love and support to patients and their families as they make decisions about accepting or refusing medical 
treatments, interventions, and services. Life is a precious gift from God, and we have a duty to preserve life.  This duty is 
not absolute.  Life -prolonging procedures that are not wanted by patients or insufficiently beneficial or excessively 
burdensome may be refused, and not provided. (Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, 
Issues in Care for the Seriously Ill and Dying, Sixth Edition). 
POLICY: 
1. A physician's order stating "Do Not Resuscitate" or "DNR" or "No Code" shall be interpreted to mean: 
a. The patient will not have cardiopulmonary resuscitation initiated or a Code Blue called by any health care 
provider who has knowledge of the existence of such an order. 
2. The decision to issue a DNR order is within the scope of standard medical judgment and practice. In general a DNR 
order is considered at the request of patients and/or legitimate surrogates, and also when the physician assesses that 
CPR would have no curative effect, would merely prolong artificially the dying process, and could be harmful. 
(Issues in the Care of the Dying, Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, Sixth Edition) 
3. Physicians may consider writing a DNR order upon request by and consent from a decisionally capacitated patient or 
the legitimate surrogate of a decisionally incapacitated patient.  The order shall be written when the patient (or 
surrogate) and physician agree that CPR is not indicated.   
4. The physician has an obligation to honor and abide by any living will made by the patient or those legitimately 
representing him/her in accordance with Louisiana Law and the Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health 
Care Services.  (See Advance Directives: Living Will / Declaration Concerning Life Sustaining Procedures, Power 
of Attorney for health Care Policy – OrgClin-001.) 
5. When entering the DNR order into the medical record, the physician must ensure that all other orders pertaining the 
medical therapies to be carried out are clearly written. 
 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
OO/ET/003 Do Not Resuscitate 
2 
6. A DNR order should always be included in a comfort measures plan of care.  This care plan elicits all facets of 
supportive care by all health care professionals for the patient and family. The purposes of care at this time are to 
improve quality of life and to minimize suffering.  This plan includes providing physical, spiritual and psychological 
care for the patient and family as appropriate.   (See Guidelines for Providing Comfort Care Policy - 
OrgOp/ET/011). 
7. A DNR order should be reviewed by the attending physician. The order may be rescinded by the same process as it 
was initiated. 
8. Before a surgical procedure on a DNR patient, the attending physician and/or anesthesiologist should discuss 
retaining or rescinding the order with the patient or their surrogate decision maker if complications occur during the 
anesthetized state.  This discussion/decision shall be documented.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
DNR: Do Not Resuscitate  
PROCEDURE: 
1. Before an order is written, the patient or person legitimately representing him/her will be consulted. If a 
competent patient or representative disagrees, the order should not be written until resolution of conflict of 
opinion.    
a. In general, the legal guidelines for informed consent govern the information provided by the physician 
to the patient or representative as a basis for their decision-making process.  
b. Disagreements among patient/family/ treatment team may be referred to the relevant Ethics Committee. 
2. The attending or physician designee will enter the DNR order in the electronic medical record.   
a. Verbal orders are not acceptable.   
b. Telephone orders are not routinely taken but may be accepted by two licensed nurses of which one is a 
Registered Nurse. In these instances, the DNR order must be signed by both licensed nurses receiving 
the DNR order.  
3. The circumstances surrounding the DNR order shall be documented in the Physician’s Progress Note when the 
order is written.   
4. Documentation should include, but is not limited to:  
a. Date, time, and attending physician’s signature.  
b. A summary of the patient’s condition and prognosis. A statement documenting the patient’s decision-
making capacity is advisable.  
c. Statement summarizing the outcome of any consultation with other physicians about the DNR order. 
Consultations are valuable to confirm the patient’s informed consent and condition, to clarify the 
patient’s competence to understand and evaluate one’s situation, and to confirm that the patient’s best 
interests are being served.  
d. A statement summarizing the outcome of consultations/conferences with the patient, family guardian, 
conservator, or other health care providers. The statements should also reference any living will by the 
patient or representative.  (See Advance Directive Policy)  
5. All nursing personnel will be informed at the time the order is written.  The order will be communicated at each 
shift report and to other involved health care workers as needed. 
  A DNR order does not imply that any other treatment will be discontinued.  Treatment orders should be reevaluated 
as a patient’s condition changes. 
  
OO/ET/003 Do Not Resuscitate 
3 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and OLOL reserves the right to deviate from, 
revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Louisiana State Legislature – Regulatory Statue 40:1299.58.1 et seq.  
 
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, (2018), Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care 
Services (Sixth Edition). 
 
Organizational Policy: Guidelines for Providing Comfort Care - OrgOps/ET/011 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
• N/A 
 
 