 OO-FN-005 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Finance 
Title: Physician Contract timekeeping and 
Payment 
Policy Reference #: OrgOps/FN/005 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 3, 2011 Last Date Reviewed:  
Last Date Revised: June 1, 2016 
 
PURPOSE:  
To ensure payments to physicians are appropriate and supported by the required documentation as stated in the 
respective contract.   
 
DEFINITIONS:   
When used in this policy, these terms have the following meaning: 
A. Auto-pay: Contract payments of the same amount each month that are automatically generated by the 
Accounts Payable system on a monthly basis. 
B. By-timesheet: Contracts whose payments are generated based upon a calculation of the actual hours of 
services provided on a supporting timesheet multiplied by an hourly rate.   
C. Other Supporting Documentation:   Contracts whose payments are generated based upon services 
supported by monthly invoices, spreadsheets containing calculations based on data for services provided, 
or statements for services based on rates other than hourly.  Some examples are daily rates, percentage of 
fees, fees less an amount of collections, ftes calculations, etc.  The respective Vice President (VP) must 
approve the Other Supporting Documentation by providing their dated signature.  
D. Physician Contract Compliance Sheet: A document required for payment approval to any physician/group 
contract that is covered under this policy, requiring the signatures of the Financial Review Specialist and 
the VP Finance.   
E. Physician Payment Log: A spreadsheet maintained by Accounts Payable with payments pending approval 
and serving as a master document for all payments made after receipt of approval. 
F. Timesheet: A document completed by the physician/group reflecting the time period and the hours spent 
by the physician/group to provide a specific service as required by the terms of the contract.  The 
appropriate vice president and party named in the contract must attest to the accuracy of each timesheet 
by providing their signature.     
G. Contract Terms:  The document submitted to compliance must contain the portion of the contract that 
shows the payment terms, and have the contract dates and number on it. 
 
POLICY: 
Any physician/group providing services through a contractual agreement with Our Lady of the Lake RMC  
(OLOL) or subsidiary must meet compliance standards for payment. This policy outlines the process for the 
approval of payments prior to being paid . Payments will be supported by the Physician Contract Compliance 
Sheet and required timesheet or documentation for services provided in accordance to the duties outlined in the 
respective contracts. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. The VP Finance  or CFO  and the Reimbursement Director  must approve any payment before Accounts 
Payable releases the funds.  In the event of one or both the VP Finance and the Reimbursement Director are  OO-FN-005 
Page 2 of 3 
absent, the CEO, CFO, or COO may conditionally approve payment.   The VP Finance and Reimbursement 
Director will review and accept the approval for compliance retrospectively.   
2. FMOLHS Legal Services notifies the Compliance Team when a physician/group contract is completed and 
sent to OLOL Executive Administration for execution.  Compliance Team verifies execution of contract with 
respective VP or FMOLHS Legal Services upon receipt of timesheet or other supporting documentation and 
prior to approval of payment. 
3. The contracted physician/group must submit a timesheet or other supporting documentation, as required in the 
contract, each month for services provided in order to receive payment.  This includes both Auto-pay and By-
timesheet, and Other Supporting Documentation  contracts.  Timesheets must include the printed name of the 
physician/group and must be signed and dated by the physician and the respective VP before submitting to the 
Compliance Team  each month.   Other supporting documentation must include the name of the 
physician/group, the date services were provided, contain the data details of services provided as stated in the 
contract, and dated approval signature of the respective VP before submitting to the Compliance Team each 
month. 
4. The Compliance Team and VP Finance may withhold payment to any physician or group that is determined 
to be deficient in hours or duties outlined in the respective contract.   
5. The Compliance Team  will maintain a spreadsheet tracking monthly hours submitted and will have the 
following responsibilities: 
a. Tallying total hours submitted and tracking year-to-date hours required vs. actual hours provided. 
b. Track dollars paid vs. dollars allowed per contract. 
c. A high level review of the duties provided against the duties permitted in the contract terms with 
regards to the timesheet. 
d. Completion of the Physician Contract Compliance Sheet: 
i. Must be signed by the VP Finance and the Reimbursement Director, either physically or 
digitally in WebNow.  
ii. Payments will not be released by A ccounts Payable without this signed document and its 
corresponding timesheet(s) or other supporting documentation. 
e. Meeting with the VP Finance to discuss any compliance issues and coordinate payment approval. 
f. Submitting approved Physician Contract Compliance Sheet with the original timesheets to Accounts 
Payable to permit the release of payment. 
g. Maintaining files with the copies of the Physician Contract Compliance Sheet, timesheets,  other 
supporting documentation,  and A/P vouchers, provided by the physician/group and respective VP  
using Webnow and A/P processes. 
6. In the event all controls should fail and an overpayment inadvertently occurs, corrective action is as follows: 
a. if the contract has not expired , then the amount of overpayment will be withheld from the next 
subsequent payment; or 
b. if the contract has expired , a request for reimbursement  will be required  by the VP Finance in the 
amount of the overpayment. 
 
  OO-FN-005 
Page 3 of 3 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
 
A. Forms: Timesheets 
 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO 