   
 
 
OO/GN/042_Service Animal 
1 
 
 
       
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT 
Organizational - General 
SUBJECT:  
Service Animals for Patients / Visitors 
PAGES: 
4 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
N/A 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
October 2020   
REVISION/REVIEW 
DATE: 10/30/2023 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OOGN042 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for service animals for a patient or visitor with a disability at Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center (OLOLRMC) that are consistent with the American’s With Disabilities Act (ADA) and Louisiana 
State Law. 
POLICY: 
A. Hospital staff may only make the following two inquiries when a person with a disability brings a 
service animal into the facility:   
1. Is the animal required because of a disability, and  
2. What work or task the animal has been trained, or is being trained, to perform 
Note: If the need for the animal and/or its required task is obvious, no such questions may be asked. 
B. Hospital staff may not make the following inquiries when a person with a disability brings a service 
animal into the facility:   
1. The nature or extent of the person’s disability 
2. Proof that the animal has been certified, trained or licensed as a service animal 
C. Only dogs and miniature horses will be considered service animals providing they meet the definition 
provided in the previous section. The following are not considered service animals: 
1. Other species of animals, whether wild or domestic, trained, or untrained 
2. Pets.   
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL    
 
 
OO/GN/042_Service Animal 
2 
3. Emotional support animals, comfort animals, and therapy dogs.  
4. Animals exclusively providing owner -protection or crime -deterrence as these are not 
considered “work” or “tasks 
D. Service animals do not need to wear a special vest, identification tag or specific harness. 
E. Service animal accompaniment will be permitted through the guidelines established in this policy in 
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and state law.  
1. Persons with disabilities are permitted to be accompanied by their service animals in all areas 
of the facility where the individual is lawfully permitted to go, provided the following: 
a. The service animal is kept under control by the person with a disability or the 
designated handler at all times while on the premises, and 
b. The service animal remains on a harness, leash or other tether, unless these devices 
interfere with the service animal's safe and effective performance of work or tasks or 
the person's disability prevents use of these devices in which case the service animal 
must be under the control of the person with a disability or the designated handler by 
some other means (hand, voice or other effective means) of control. 
2. Service animals will not be allowed in the following areas: 
a. Operating rooms and special invasive procedural areas (including but not limited to 
cardiovascular lab, radiology procedure rooms, endoscopy procedure rooms) 
b. Intensive care unit 
c. Recovery room 
d. Medication preparation and storage areas 
e. Storerooms or where sterile and clean supplies and line are kept 
f. Areas where food is being prepared 
F. If a service animal exhibits “unacceptable behavior” or “poses a direct threat to the health and safety 
of others” (as defined above) and if the person with a disability or the designated handler does not 
control the animal, the individual may be asked to remove the animal from our premises.   
1. The service animal must demonstrate unacceptable or threatening behaviors to be removed.   
2. Service animals cannot be removed based on assumptions or speculation.  
3. If a team member feels the service animal’s behavior is unacceptable or threatening, they are to 
seek guidance from their supervisor. 
G. The person with a disability or the designated handler is responsible for caring for, supervising, and 
maintaining control of the service animal while on the premises, which includes toileting, feeding, 
grooming and veterinary care.      
 
 
OO/GN/042_Service Animal 
3 
1. The service animal should be vaccinated and licensed in accordance with state/local law.   
2. The service animal should be cleaned and well groomed and be free of signs and symptoms of 
infection. 
H. If the service animal has any accident regarding urine, feces or vomit during a visit, the person with a 
disability or designee responsible for the service animal will be responsible for the clean -up with a 
hospital approved disinfectant.  
I. If the person with a disability is unable to care for the service animal, they need to make arrangements 
for the animal to be removed from the facility. 
J. Staff should be aware of the following while caring for a person with a disability who is 
accompanied by a service animal: 
1. Staff should not provide care for the service animal.  This includes but is not limited to 
feeding, toileting, or exercising the animal.  
2. Staff should not touch or pet a service animal without permission. 
3. Staff should not distract the service animal from the task at hand. 
4. Staff should not deliberately startle a service animal.  Staff should avoid making noises at 
the animal (barking, whistling etc.) 
5. Staff should converse with the person with the disability, not the service animal.  Staff 
should avoid eye contact with the service animal. 
6. Staff should not attempt to separate a person with a disability from his/her service animal. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Service Animal: any dog or miniature horse that is individually trained or is being trained to do work or perform 
a task for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or 
other mental disability. The work or task(s) performed by a service animal must be directly related to the 
individual’s disability.   
• Service dogs: A service dog may include a hearing dog, guide dog, seizure alert dog, mobility dog, autism 
service dog, or provide assistance to person, including veterans with traumatic brain injury or post -
traumatic stress disorder. Any breed of dog can serve as a service animal. 
• Miniature horses: Miniature horses that have been individually trained to do work or perform tasks for 
people with disabilities may be considered service animals.  Miniature horses are generally 24 to 34 inches 
in height (measured to the shoulders) and generally weigh between 70 and 100 pounds.  
    
 
 
OO/GN/042_Service Animal 
4 
Emotional support animals, comfort animals, and therapy dogs : These animals provide companionship, 
relieve loneliness, and sometimes help with depression, anxiety, and certain phobias, however, do not have special 
training to perform tasks that assist people with disabilities.  These dogs are not considered service animals 
according to the ADA. 
Unacceptable behavior: behaviors that may result in the animal being excluded from the premises, including 
uncontrolled barking, jumping on other people, running away from the handler, or is not housebroken. 
Behavior that poses a direct threat to the health and safety of others:  behaviors such as snapping, biting, 
scratching and lunging at others as well as signs of fleas, lice, parasitic infection or other infection that may result 
in the animal being excluded from the premises. 
Person with a disability: a person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more 
of such person’s major life activities and who has a record of such impairment or who is regarded as having such 
an impairment, including military veterans with traumatic brain injury or post-traumatic stress disorder. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• American Disability Act National Network, (2014) Service Animals and Emotional Support Animals. 
Downloaded on October 30, 2023 from 
https://adata.org/sites/adata.org/files/files/Service_Animal_Booklet_2014(2).pdf  
• Louisiana Regulatory Statue: RS 46:1951 -1956. Downloaded on October 30, 2023  from 
http://www.legis.la.gov/legis/Law.aspx?p=y&d=100501 
• U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division (2010), Service Animals.  Downloaded on October 
30, 2023 from ADA Requirements: Service Animals | ADA.gov 
• U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division (), Frequently Asked Questions about Service 
Animals and the ADA.  Downloaded on October 30, 2023 from Frequently Asked Questions about 
Service Animals and the ADA | ADA.gov 
• ADA Requirements: Service Animals | ADA.gov 
• Animal Visitation and Pet Therapy (IC2001) 
 
 