  OO-GN-017 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Operational 
Title: Subpoenas, Summons, Search Warrants Policy Reference #: OrgOps-GN-017 
Supersedes #: AD/A/003 
Date of Origination: October 15, 1985 Last Review Date:  June 5, 2023 
Last Revision Date: November 2, 2017 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to prevent interference with the rendering of quality patient care and the 
performance of a person's hospital duties for purposes of service of subpoenas, summons, or search 
warrants and to ensure that no employee acts for the Hospital in any legal matter, unless specifically 
authorized to do so. This policy delineates the procedures to be followed in handling Hospital related 
legal matters which involve hospital employees and service of employees’ personal affairs. 
 
POLICY: 
A. Hospital related legal matters affecting Hospital patients, the Hospital, or any staff member, should 
be referred to the Legal Services Department and/or Risk Management immediately. 
B. The process server shall not be permitted access to any Hospital area not open to the general public 
unless the process server is escorted by a hospital employee.  
C. Depositions of Hospital employees should only be permitted after authorization by the President, or 
designee/Risk Management, and consultation with Legal Counsel. 
D. In all cases, efforts to maintain the confidentiality of the patient's records will be made. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
A. Summons/Subpoena for Hospital related legal matters: 
1. All subpoenas, other than subpoenas for personal affairs, will be handled through Executive 
Administration. 
 
B. Summons/Subpoenas for "Personal" Affairs: 
1. Personal summons/subpoenas should not be served on the premises of Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center (OLOL) or its affiliates. It is the employee's responsibility to make 
arrangements for all subpoenas relating to personal business to be served off Hospital 
property and not on Hospital time.  
2. If, however, an authorized agent of the Court presents him or herself to Administration with a 
subpoena, as a courtesy to the court, the employee will be contacted through his/her manager 
and if the employee is on duty, will be expected to come to Administration and accept the 
subpoena.   
3. The Hospital will not accept a personal subpoena on behalf of an employee. 
4. Absent a valid court order or subpoena requesting the Hospital to disclose an employee's 
personal information, the employee's home address is not to be given out to process servers. 
 
C. Search Warrants 
1. Because it is an order signed by a judge, the search warrant must be complied with, but at the 
same time the confidentiality of any patient information must be maintained. 
   OO-GN-017 
Page 2 of 2 
 
2. When the order is to search for confidential patient information, the Hospital will advise the 
officer serving the search warrant that this is being complied with on an involuntary basis 
and the patient will be advised of this act. 
 
D. Hospital related legal matters:                
1. Employees involved in Hospital related legal matters will be contacted through the Risk 
Management Department. 
2. Employees receiving calls and/or letters from attorneys or others, whether at the Hospital or 
at home, shall respond by: 
i. Ascertaining name and phone number of attorney or other person. 
ii. Not providing the requested information unless directed to do so by Risk 
Management. 
iii. Advising Risk Management of the call/letter and providing requested information 
and other additional data as may be required. 
3. Depositions by Hospital personnel should not be given under any circumstances until 
authorized, by the President or his designee, and until after consultation with Risk 
Management/Legal Counsel. 
4. Employees appearing in court for matters directly related to the interest of the Hospital shall 
be reimbursed for travel expenses.  An exempt employee will be paid for a day of work (8 
hours) and a non-exempt employee will be paid for time in court. 
 
RESPONSIBILITY 
1. Each employee is required to refer any summonses, search warrants, complaints or subpoenas, or 
any contacts with attorneys regarding Hospital affairs to Executive Administration and/or Risk 
Management in accordance with the above procedures. If these offices are closed, notify the  
administrator on call. 
     
2. Risk Management 
a. Advise Department Heads and/or employees involved of pending inquiries. 
b. Refer questions to appropriate outside legal counsel. 
c. Verify, as necessary, the need for assistance or representation with an employee who has 
been involved in a Hospital related legal matter. 
d. Advise appropriate personnel as to the status/resolution of cases/inquiries pending. 
 
 
 