 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT:   
Materials Management 
SUBJECT: 
Vendor Access and Interaction Policy 
NUMBER OF PAGES: 
 
LAST REVIEW DATE: 
December 14, 2020 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
July 1, 2017 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER: 
OOGN033 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System, Inc. (FMOLHS) and its 
wholly owned, and sponsored organizations (collectively referred to herein as “Entity”).     
PURPOSE: 
To establish a uniform protocol for any interaction between Franciscan Missionaries of Our 
Lady Health System (FMOLHS) staff and Vendor Representatives seeking to market or sell 
any Material Goods or Services, and to establish guidelines which govern the activity of 
Vendor Representatives within the Entity facilities. To promote patient safety, increase 
effective communication and timeliness of processing requests and reduce variation of 
material goods and services throughout the Health System. 
POLICY: 
It is the policy of FMOLHS that any and all vendors, and their designated representatives, 
follow the Vendor Access and Interaction guidelines, in place, prior to any interaction with 
FMOLHS staff and/or access to any FMOLHS facility. Only those vendors, and their 
designated representatives, that are approved may gain access to an FMOLHS facility for 
service and support purposes. Active sales of material goods and/or services is not permitted 
outside the FMOLHS new product process. 
DEFINITIONS:  
Entity - means FMOLHS and its wholly owned sponsored organizations.  
 
Value Analysis - the only approved method for material goods or services to be evaluated, 
trialed, acquired, and/or implemented in any FMOLHS entity.  This process incorporates the 
identification of clinical and business requirements by key stakeholders, which drive the 
decision making, and the vendor selection process. Clinical and/or business teams are created 
to define system wide requirements, assess vendor offerings, validate appropriateness, and 
determine organizational solutions for each area of assessment. 
Material Goods and Services - means non-clinical/non-professional and clinical supplies, food, 
pharmaceuticals, equipment, maintenance parts, tools, medical devices and components, and 
consumable items  
 
Supplier – Any organization able and willing to enter into agreement to provide specific 
material goods and/or services. 
Certified Supplier – A market share leader, who eliminates non-value added activity, is 
focused on lowest total cost, measures outcomes, pursues best practice, strives for continuous 
improvement and long term (win-win) relationships. Certified suppliers must meet established 
Supplier Certification measurement criteria. 
Preferred Supplier – A supplier focused on lowest total cost, which meets FMOLHS 
specifications/requirements, performs satisfactorily in a long term (win-win) relationship and 
meets at least 50% of the established Supplier Certification measurement criteria.  
Approved Supplier – A supplier, which meets all regulatory and governmental approval and 
provides proprietary products which meet FMOLHS specifications/requirements and performs 
satisfactorily.  
PROCEDURE: 
FMOLHS uses a standardized guideline to insure all vendor interaction follows organizational 
guidelines.  
• Access to any FMOLHS facility requires pre-scheduled appointments and registration 
in the FMOLHS Vendor Credentialing System;  
• ‘Cold Calls’ or vendor visits without appointments are forbidden in any FMOLHS 
facility. All appointments need to be coordinated through the local Material 
Management or designated departments;  
• The pre-acquisition phase of assessing and selecting vendors to supply material goods 
or services follows a value analysis review and vendor selection process;  
• Acquisition of all material goods and services requires an authorized purchase order or 
approved contract as defined in the Purchase of Material Goods and Services policy; 
• Purchase Orders may be required as defined by Materials Management and Accounts 
Payable; 
• Return of any material goods requires a Returned Goods Authorization and proper 
disposal documentation, before any material good can be removed from an FMOLHS 
facility; 
• Payment of all material goods and services invoices is done centrally through Accounts 
Payable based on either Net60 terms or agreed to terms in an approved contract. 
 Vendor Credentialing and Certification: 
All vendor representatives entering FMOLHS facilities must be approved by Materials 
Management or the designated department. Vendor representatives will be required to be 
registered in the FMOLHS vendor tracking system. Those vendors who may interact or enter 
any clinical or patient areas, must be credentialed through and maintain compliance with the 
Vendor Credentialing System. All appropriate clearance in relation to training/competency 
assessment, immunizations, and administrative credentialing is warranted by the Vendor 
Credentialing System.  
1. The role of the Vendor Representative is to provide essential clinical and/or technical 
education related to material goods and services for patient care or Entity operation. .  
As FMOLHS offers access to its facilities and clinical areas, as such, access is 
considered a privilege and therefore contingent on the Vendor Representative’s 
compliance with the FMOLHS policies. 
2. Product Training: Acceptable documentation includes letters/certificates from 
employers stating completion of product and/or Operating Room (OR)/Clinical 
Protocol training with completion dates for the product/ service represented in the 
participating hospital. 
3. Changes in Employment / Product Line: It is the responsibility of the Vendor 
Representative to notify FMOLHS Materials Management of any changes in 
employment status or representation in product line. A new Vendor Representative 
Profile must be completed any time employment status changes. Failure to do so may 
result in the inability of the Vendor Representative to conduct business within 
FMOLHS.  
 
Vendor Visitation and Expected Behavior: 
1. Prior to visiting any FMOLHS department, Vendor Representatives must sign in 
through the Vendor Kiosk and sign out when exiting the facility. Failure to log in or 
out may jeopardize further business with the facility. 
2. Badges and Attire.  All Vendor Representatives will wear a hospital issued 
identification badge visible at all times within any FMOLHS hospital and must comply 
with specific department’s dress code standards while in the facility.   
3. If the Vendor Representative is acting as an independent contractor operating patient 
care equipment, adjusting devices, or otherwise providing direct patient care services 
he/she must have an independent contractor agreement executed and on file with 
FMOLHS Materials Management. 
4. Vendor Representative Visitation will be limited in the clinical and procedural areas 
and only permitted when requested.  
a. Vendor Representatives will notify the appropriate Nurse Manager / 
Department Head/Supervisor / designee to provide training and education to the 
staff.  If the Vendor Representative is introducing a new product, the vendor must adhere to the new product process for introducing new products or 
equipment to the department.   
b. Vendor Representative should notify the appropriate Nurse Manager / 
Department Head/Supervisor / designee of a Physician’s request for his/her 
presence in the procedure in advance.  If the product, equipment or service 
requested by the Physician for utilization in the procedure is a new product, the 
vendor must adhere to the new product process for introducing new products or 
equipment to the department.  
a) All biological products requested by a Physician for utilization in a procedure 
will comply with FDA requirements. 
b) Vendor Representatives are not permitted in the procedure until the patient is 
prepped and draped or at the appropriate time in the procedure. Once the 
Vendor Representative enters the procedure room he/she must remain until the 
completion of the procedure or until released by the Physician.  Traffic should 
be minimized and all Vendor Representatives must refrain from using 
telephones or cell phones in the procedural areas. 
c) The Vendor Representative may not scrub in the procedure or open sterile items 
directly. 
d) Documentation of a Vendor Representative’s presence during the procedure, 
with the exact in and out time, must be included in the permanent medical 
record.  
e) The Operating Room or procedural area is not an arena for “sale of product”. 
f) Vendor Representatives are not permitted to lounge or wait in the physician or 
staff lounges.  If the Vendor Representative is not required to be in the 
procedure but the Physician or staff has asked him/her to be available, the 
Vendor Representative should leave a contact number and wait outside of the 
procedure suite. 
g) Vendor Representative is required to provide Sterile Processing Department 
with Inventory and control sheets (when applicable) and OR personnel with 
Surgery Proof of Delivery Requisition.  
 
5. Vendor Representatives will not distribute equipment, implants, devices or products in 
any department without authorization.  FMOLHS is under no obligation to pay for 
equipment, implants, devices or products delivered without prior approval and a valid 
FMOLHS purchase order (PO) number. Any equipment and/or product(s) utilized 
without prior authorization will be considered a donation, the patient will not be 
charged for the item(s), the vendor will not be paid for the product(s), and the Vendor 
Representative will be subject to disciplinary action. Approvals for use retrospectively 
will not be granted. 
 
 
  
6. Prior to use, any loaner / trial equipment or product brought in by a Vendor 
Representative must have a fully executed FMOLHS trial agreement.   Once finalized 
and prior to use the equipment must be transported by the Vendor to the facility’s 
Clinical Engineering Department for safety evaluation.  The Vendor Representative 
must allow adequate time for the safety check and set up time. Once the equipment 
leaves the facility, it must be re-evaluated upon return.  
7. Medical equipment, instrumentation and supply products may not be removed from the 
facility’s premises without the notification and written approval of Materials 
Management. 
8. In consideration of patient privacy and compliance with regulatory agencies, only the 
Vendor Representative who is providing assistance/education or training will be 
permitted. 
9. Vendor Representatives may only discuss the attributes and specifications of the 
equipment or product(s) representing with clinical staff. Any request to deliver or ship 
any product or equipment to a FMOLHS facility shall be directed through the 
Materials Management department. 
10. Vendor Representatives will not solicit procedure or patient volumes or competitive 
cost information from FMOLHS staff unless the information is provided in conjunction 
with a contractually established consulting project. 
11. Conversely, FMOLHS staff may not provide or share Physician or operating room 
schedules, volumes, or pricing with any Vendor Representatives. 
12. Conflict of Interest. Conflict of Interest involves a situation in which staff, Vendor 
Representative or Physicians have financial or other personal considerations that may 
compromise, or have the appearance of compromising professional judgment or 
integrity in clinical care.  If a Conflict of Interest exists, the Vendor Representative 
may not be allowed to conduct business at FMOLHS.  
13. FMOLHS reserves the right to restrict access, at any time, to a Vendor Representative 
for any suspicious, inappropriate behavior or misconduct.  
 
Introduction of New Equipment, Implants, Devices and/or Products: 
1. Products, devices, equipment and technology will not be purchased without evaluation 
through a value analysis review process, which may include a committee or team 
review/approval process.  
a. Product samples may not be left by Vendor Representative in any inpatient or 
outpatient clinical area, and may not be evaluated for patient use without being 
submitted to Materials Management for review and approval.   
2. New product or equipment requests will only be accepted on behalf of FMOLHS staff 
members or Medical Staff. No new product request will be accepted / processed on 
direct behalf of a Vendor Representative.   
a. If a Physician would like to use or evaluate new product(s), equipment or 
technology, a new product request must be submitted to the Nurse Manager / 
Supervisor to initiate the new product review process.  
b. Individual physicians are not authorized to enter FMOLHS into any binding 
financial commitment(s), approve any purchase(s) or product evaluations or trials on its behalf.  In the absence of a valid purchase order, the vendor will not 
be paid. 
c. FMOLHS Materials Management is the only agent authorized to approve 
pricing or a contract with a vendor or Vendor Representative.  All contracts, 
price agreements, lease/rental agreements, service agreements or product 
evaluation agreements must be reviewed and approved by FMOLHS Materials 
Management. 
 
New Product Request 
1. FMOLHS utilizes on on-line New Product Request process and system. 
2. The Nurse Manager / Supervisor assumes New Product request ownership for the item 
and follows the New Product request process for approval. The Nurse Manager / 
Supervisor will complete the requestor section of an electronic NEW PRODUCT 
REQUEST FORM.   
a. The Vendor Representative will be asked to complete the vendor survey of the 
request to provide all pertinent information about the product including cost, 
billing codes and expected reimbursement, product effectiveness, previous trial 
results and scientific evidence.  
b. Should any faculty, physician or staff member practicing or working at 
FMOLHS have any financial or other interest in the equipment, product, and/or 
service being evaluated, the Vendor Representative must disclose the specific 
relationship to Materials Management and on the NEW PRODUCT REQUEST 
FORM during the initial request . Failure to disclose such relationships will 
result in sanctions determined by  FMOLHS 
c. All equipment, implants, devices and products must be FDA approved.  The 
Vendor Representative is responsible for clearly identifying non-FDA approved 
items. 
d. Non-FDA approved items must be reviewed by the facility Internal Review 
Board (IRB).  Before use, the Vendor Representative must contact the Nurse 
Manager / Supervisor to initiate IRB review.  
3. The completed electronic NEW PRODUCT REQUEST FORM will be forwarded to 
the appropriate FMOLHS Materials Management RUM (Resource Utilization 
Manager) for review. 
a. Prior to entering the Hospital, any equipment or products provided for 
evaluation or trial purposes must be itemized on a ‘no-charge’ purchase order 
arranged through Materials Management. 
4. Vendor Representatives will be required to provide education, training and 
demonstrations on initial product use for all personnel using a new product or 
technology prior to the evaluation period.  Vendor Representatives will provide 
training competencies for staff. 
a. It is required that Vendor Representatives are credentialed by their employers 
to be able to train medical staff on the specified products’ use. This requires a 
statement or certificate from their employer which will be documented in the 
Vendor Credentialing System. b. Vendor Representatives will be required to provide education/demonstrations 
on several occasions depending on the number of individuals involved in the 
trial, the level of detail in the training, and during implementation of product 
use. 
5. Vendor Representatives may be asked to be present or available in the department 
during all or the first few trials to facilitate safe and effective patient care. 
6. Results of the evaluation may be shared with the Vendor Representative at the 
conclusion of the trial period. 
7. If a product has patient safety concerns or problems have been identified the Vendor 
Representative will be contacted immediately; however, the used product will not be 
released to the Vendor Representative. 
8. At the conclusion of the product or equipment evaluation / trial, a summary of the 
evaluation will be completed and reported to the RUM representing the specific 
Product Analysis Committee (PAC) 
9. The PAC will evaluate the Trial Summary, determine cost/benefit analysis and form 
recommendation(s). 
a. Negative Outcome – Stop new product process. Communication to vendor and 
physician product denied.  Information kept on file for 1 year (no other request 
for trial on product within 1 year unless determined by PAC otherwise). 
b. Positive Outcome – Completion of new product process. 
10. Any new product or equipment evaluation / trial initiated independent of this process is 
prohibited.  A Vendor Representative determined to be participating in an evaluation / 
trial outside of this process is subject to reprimand and/or dismissal from the facility. 
 
Invoicing and Payment of Non-Stock Items “Walked-In” by the Vendor: 
1. Vendor Representatives must register with the Vendor Credentialing System in order 
to perform business at an FMOLHS facility. 
2. Devices or products furnished by the Vendor Representative shall have current (as 
applicable) FDA approval, be within the expiration date of the manufacturer and shall 
be in a clean, sterile (as applicable) and unopened condition at the time it is brought 
into the facility. 
3. FMOLHS utilizes a centralized purchasing function, therefore the FMOLHS 
Purchasing Department is the only agent authorized to issue purchase orders. 
FMOLHS Purchasing Department provides final review and execution of purchase 
orders committing the Hospital to purchase goods, services and equipment.   
4. Vendor Procedure Invoicing Protocol: 
a. Special order or non-stock implant or product, services or equipment (Bill 
Only) purchase requests, known as the Proof of Delivery (POD) Requisitions, 
should be completed by the Vendor Representative before leaving the facility. 
The completed POD must accurately document the implantable, patient 
chargeable items or billable services and equipment utilized per procedure and 
include the patient label, date of service, manufacturer item number(s), 
complete product description, quantities used / wasted,  reason item wasted 
when applicable and correct pricing. b. The staff nurse will validate the POD Surgery Requisition by comparing what 
was documented on the implant record and confirm vendor supplied items 
utilized/wasted on the procedure.  If there are no discrepancies, the staff nurse 
will sign the vendor POD Requisition verifying such for the Vendor 
Representative to submit for requisition of “Bill only” purchase order.  If the 
vendor POD Requisition does not match what is documented on the implant 
record or supply item utilized per procedure, the nurse and Vendor 
Representative should review and resolve any discrepancies prior to submission 
for payment processing.   
c. Vendor Representatives must submit Proof of Delivery (POD) Surgery 
Requisition(s) within 24-hours of the / procedural procedure or the next 
business day.  NOTE: Failure to provide this information with the appropriate 
verification sign-off or within the allotted time frame will result in non-
payment of invoices and be considered a donation.  Additions to billing 
information are not allowed after the 24-hour time span.  
d. Authorization for payment will be based on the following criteria: 1) receipt of 
POD Requisition within 24-hours of procedure or the next business day, 2) 
quote on a negotiated price, and 3) approval by the facility administrative team 
or 4) one-time use approval by facility Administration.  If an item fails to meet 
any of these criteria, the POD Requisition will be submitted to the 
Administrator for a second review. Any item(s) deemed unauthorized after the 
second review, will be entered into non-payment status and will not be paid. 
e. Vendor invoices that do not match a FMOLHS purchase order line-for-line will 
be rejected by the FMOLHS accounts payable system and may be vigorously 
disputed. 
f. Vendor Reps must utilize specific facilities drop off process and locations.  
 
Loaners, Instruments and Implants - Sterile Processing Department (SPD) Protocol: 
1. All instrument and implant sets must be approved prior to utilization at any FMOLHS 
facility any new instrument and implant set to be considered for utilization must be 
submitted for review and granted approval by the appropriate committee.  All new 
instrument and implant sets are not allowed in SPD for processing or utilization until 
such approval has been granted. 
2. All loaner instruments or implant sets, instruments / implants not owned by or stored in 
facility, must be received, inspected, recorded, decontaminated, and sterilized in SPD. 
Loaner instruments will not be accepted by SPD without the manufacturers’ tray 
content lists and FDA-cleared manufacturers’ written instructions for disassembly, 
cleaning, packaging, and sterilization methods and cycles (pictures must be provided 
and on file within the department for each tray/set). Any deviation in this policy may 
result in immediate termination of relationship with responsible Vendor 
Representatives. All items are considered “non-sterile” anytime instrumentation is 
provided as a loaner from any company and/or it’s Vendor Representative. 
3. Vendor Representatives must provide educational in-service to SPD staff for any 
tray(s) that are brought in as a loaner at a minimum of 48 hours prior to scheduled 
procedure. This includes, but is not limited to, decontamination, inspection, assembling, packaging, sterilization, handling, and any other information that is needed 
for proper processing of the instrumentation.  
4. All instrumentation sets will require an inventory sheet to be logged into the 
Instrument Tracking and Management System if applicable and control sheet.  This is 
required prior to any approved new set(s) being processed for service.   The inventory 
sheet must indicate total instrument and implant count.   
5. The control sheets must include the following: 
a. Physician 
b. Date/Time of Surgery 
c. Scheduled Procedure 
d. Name of each set and how it is to be labeled 
e. Note:  SPD must receive complete inventory sheets on all vendor sets 
processed within 30 days of the effective date of this policy.  Failure to 
provide an inventory sheet within this timeline will result in the hospital 
assuming no responsibility for lost instruments and the set(s) will be removed 
from service and not allowed to be processed until complete information is 
received.   
6. All vendor instrument and/or implant sets must weigh 25 pounds or less (ANSI/AAMI 
ST79:2006).  If a set contains multiple layers and the set weighs more than stated 
amount, the Vendor Representative is responsible for breaking down the set to meet the 
weight requirement.   
7. Vendor Representatives must check-in and check-out all loaner instruments or implant 
sets in the Instrument Tracking and Management System if applicable at every 
occurrence that the set is transported into and removed from the hospital.  
8. All implants and instrumentation must be delivered 48 hours prior to the scheduled 
procedure.  All instruments/implants must be terminally cleaned and terminally 
sterilized prior to use. Timely arrival allows for adequate processing, cooling and 
biological result identification (if applicable) prior to release. 
 
9. Emergency or Late Deliveries:  Instrumentation that is unable to be delivered by 
Vendor Representatives within the above SPD time frame must be communicated to 
the OR and SPD management/designee. 
a. The following departments shall be notified of any late deliveries: 
1. Our Lady of the Lake: 
a. Main: OR (225)765-8830 and SPD (225)765-8318 
b. Tower: OR (225)765-8888 and SPD (225)765-7645 
c. H&VI: OR (225)374-2764 and SPD (225)765-7645 
d. LSU: LSU: OR (225)768-5746 and SPD (225)768-5763 
 
2. Our Lady of Lourdes: 
a. OR Case Manager (337)470-4177, (337)470-4176, 
(337)470-4178 
b. Supervisor Prep/Decontam (337) 470-4130, (337) 470-
4338 3. St Elizabeth: 
a. OR Main: (225)647-5049 
b. ASC: (225) 743-2442 
c. After hours: House Supervisor (225) 647-5000 
4. St Francis:  
a. OR Main: (318) 966-4190 
b. After hours: House Supervisor Office # (318) 966-4233 
i. Cell #    (318) 512-1109 
5. Our Lady of the Angels: 
a. OR Main: (985)730-6792 
b. After hours: House Supervisor (985)750-0481 
b. The following information shall be communicated:  
i. Time of delivery 
ii. Date/Time of surgery 
iii. Scheduled procedure 
iv. Type and number of sets (Instruments vs. Implants) 
v. Vendor Representative name and contact number 
10. SPD will not receive items by courier or freight delivery.  Vendor Representatives 
must deliver the instrument sets to validate Physician, procedure date, procedure, 
instrumentation/implant sets and provide inventory sheet or complete control sheet. 
11. Vendor packing material and shipping cartons will not be received in SPD.  Such 
vendor material is not allowed in SPD. 
 
Instrumentation Guidelines: 
 
1. All instrumentation will be cleaned and processed according to manufacturer 
recommendations. 
2. The Vendor Representative assures there is an adequate amount of instrument sets to 
provide terminal sterilization for all sets for multiple procedures per day and avoid use 
of immediate use sterilization.  
3. The Vendor Representative will be responsible for routine replacement due to dullness 
and wear & tear of instruments. 
4. When loaner vendor sets are to be used in a procedure, it is recommended that the 
Vendor Representative be present. 
5. Once the procedure is complete, loaned instruments will be returned to SPD.  
6. Before any instruments leaves, all instruments will be decontaminated following the 
same process that is required prior to use. 
7. The Vendor Representative must inventory the set along with SPD staff prior to 
leaving. Or the facility will not accept responsibility for the set of instruments. 
8. If the inventory of items upon completion of the procedure does not match the prior 
count manager must be notified immediately. 
9. No FMOLHS owned set may be removed from Hospital property without prior 
approval. 
 
 Disciplinary Action: 
 
1. Activities granted to Vendor Representatives are privileges that have been extended by 
FMOLHS.  All FMOL Departments in conjunction with Materials Management is 
responsible for enforcing this procedure. 
2. Disciplinary action for infractions will be taken by following the three steps listed 
below. 
a. 1st infraction – A meeting will be scheduled with the Vendor Representative to 
discuss his / her infraction. 
b. 2nd infraction – All privileges of the Vendor Representative will be suspended 
for a period of 30 days.  A letter will also be sent to the Vendor 
Representative’s immediate supervisor and reference any previous violations 
leading up to the suspension. 
c. 3rd infraction – All privileges will be suspended and / FMOLHS will demand a 
new Vendor Representative. 
3. At the discretion of FMOLHS, the three-step process may be accelerated at any time.  
If any disciplinary action is taken, at every step the Vendor Representative and his / her 
immediate supervisor will receive a written report stating the details of the infraction 
and the disciplinary action taken.  This information will remain on file in the Vendor 
Representative’s credentialing file. 
REFERENCES: 
N/A 
ATTACHMENTS: 
N/A 
 
 