OO-GN-015 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: General 
Title: Disclosure of Information in Response to 
Media Requests 
Policy Reference #: OrgOps/GN/015 
Supersedes #: A/VI/5/1080 
AD/A/011 
Date of Origination: October 1, 1980 Last Review Date:  November 1, 2024 
Last Revision Date: July 1, 2003 
 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to protect the patients' rights of privacy and cooperate with the news media. 
 
POLICY 
Public news releases from Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) sent to the news media 
are prepared by the Marketing and Communications Department and approved by the Communications 
Director or designee.  In certain situations, the CEO or COO will approve news releases before they are sent 
to the media.   
 
PROCEDURE 
1. From 8:30 A.M. to 5:00 P.M, requests for information about patients or hospital activities shall be 
directed to the Communications Director.  A communications specialist or designee may also field 
media inquiries when the Communications Director is not available.  After these hours and on 
weekends, the nursing supervisor should try and reach the Communications Director or designee to 
filed the media inquiry.  If no one can be reached, the nursing supervisor can release one word condition 
reports if the patient is listed in the hospital directory.  For any other media issues, the administrator on 
call or the Communications Director should be notified.  The PBX operator has a current on-call list. 
 
2. Media must provide the patient’s first and last name on all inquiries regarding a patient’s condition. If a 
name cannot be given by the media for the inquiry, no information shall be given. 
 
3. The name of the physician may not be released without his/her consent. 
 
4. A patient that is conscious and can communicate with the doctor or nurse in charge will give consent for 
release of information to the news media.  The released information will be in writing and signed by the 
patient.  If this is not possible, oral consent can be given in the presence of two witnesses.  If the patient 
is unable to give consent, then the consent of a responsible family member will be obtained in the same 
manner. 
 
5. Permission to photograph a patient at OLOL will only be given if: 
a. The patient's condition will not be jeopardized according to the attending physician. 
b. The patient or parents or guardian, in the case of a minor, are willing to give permission to have 
a photograph taken.  This permission will be in writing and signed by the patient or parent or 
guardian. 
 OO-GN-015 
Page 2 of 2 
6. A matter of public record is defined as situations that are reportable by law to public authorities, such as 
law enforcement agencies, the coroner or public health officer.  While laws require healthcare facilities 
to report a variety of information to public authorities, it is not the responsibility of the hospital to 
provide that information in response to calls or other inquires from the media or other parties, including 
law enforcement officials.  Instead, such calls should be directed to the appropriate public authority.  In 
matters of public record, the following one word condition descripting may be given without the 
patient's consent regarding the patient’s condition: 
a. Undetermined.  Patient awaiting physician assessment. 
b. Good.  Vital signs are stable and within normal limits.  Patient is conscious and comfortable.  
Indicators are excellent. 
c. Fair.  Vital signs are stable and within normal limits.  Patient is conscious, but may be 
uncomfortable.  Indicators are favorable. 
d. Serious.  Vital signs may be unstable and not within normal limits.  Patient is acutely ill.  
Indicators are questionable. 
e. Critical.  Vital signs are unstable and not within normal limits.  Patient may be unconscious.  
Indicators are unfavorable. 
f. The term “stable” should not be used as a condition.  
 
7. In highly charged situations such as disasters, the public may benefit from the release of general 
information when specific information is not yet releasable.  In these instances, it is appropriate to state 
the number of patients who have been brought to the facility by gender or by age group (adults, 
children, teenagers, etc.)  This type of general information can help reduce undue anxiety.  Other more 
specific information will be released to the Office of Emergency Preparedness for dissemination to the 
media and families. 
 
 
 