OrgOp/GN/013 
Page 1 of 2 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational  Section/Chapter: Operational/General 
Title: Policy Development & Approval  Policy Reference #: OrgOp/GN/013 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: October 19, 2007 Last Review Date: February 13, 2023 
Last Revision Date: January 31, 2020 
 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines the process for development, approval, and maintenance of policies within Our 
Lady of the Lake (OLOL). To ensure that policies are developed in collaboration. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
When used in this policy, these terms have the following meaning: 
A. Policies which directly affect patient care:  Those policies that give guidance and instruction in 
the administration of clinical services.  Examples include policies related to medication 
administration, wound care, IV therapy, etc. 
B. Policies which indirectly affect patient care:  Those policies that are not inherently clinical in 
nature but which may have secondary consequences for clinical outcomes.  Examples include 
policies related to safety, risk management, admission and discharge, etc. 
 
POLICY: 
A. All hospital policies shall be in compliance with applicable law and the standards of regulatory, 
accrediting and licensing agencies including, but not limited to, The Joint Commission (TJC), 
Louisiana Department of Health (LDH), Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and 
the Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services. 
 
B. All policies directly affecting patient care shall be reviewed at least annually; all other policies 
shall be reviewed at least every three years. 
 
C. All policies shall be stored in the applicable folder in the T: Data/Policies folder on the  OLOL 
intranet. Policies are uploaded onto the Sharepoint TeamLink intranet site. Current, version 
history, and archived policies are stored on Sharepoint, as well.  
 
D. There shall be a designated “Responsible Party” or policy owner  for each policy. The 
“Responsible Party ” shall ensure that input is solicited and incorporated into a final policy 
statement from appropriate individuals, departments, and/or committees.  
 
E. In lieu of individual documented policy approval each Manual section will be reviewed and have 
a signatory approval document     
 
 
F. Depending upon the policy type policies are approved, at a minimum, by the Department Leader, 
appropriate Director/Vice President  and Medical Director if applicable. Organizational policies 
are approved by the Vice President responsible for the area and the Regulatory Management 
Committee and then by the Chief Operating Officer.  
 OrgOp/GN/013 
Page 2 of 2 
 
G. Those policies which directly or indirectly affect patient care are approved by the Nursing Policy 
and Procedure Committee and then by the Nurse Executive Council. 
 
 
H. The “Responsible Party” or policy owner  will receive electronic notification directing them to 
review/revise the policy 90, 60, and 30 days prior to the scheduled review date. 
 
I. Department Heads shall receive electronic notification when an organizational policy has been 
revised and shall be responsible for reviewing and disseminating policy changes with their staff.  
 
J. Department Heads shall be responsible for disseminating departmental policy changes to the 
appropriate individuals, departments, and/or committees.  
 
REFERENCES: 
Huggins, D. (October 19, 2006). Best Practices For Policy Writing. Retrieved May 17, 2007,  
from http://www.lockergnome.com/nexus/it/2006/10/19/best-practices-for-policy-writing/. 
Matthews, R., Smaldon, T. (2007). The anatomy of a well-written policy and procedure. Health  
Care Compliance Association, June(2007), 4.  
 
 
 
  