  OrgOps/GN/008 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Operational 
Subject:  Service of Legal Documents for Patients Section:  General 
Date of Origination:  October 1, 1985   Supersedes: AD/A/012 
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
May 4, 2018 
June 14, 2021    
Serial Code:  OrgOps/GN/008 
  
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to specify procedures for the service of legal documents to patients of Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center or execution of legal documents by patients of OLOLRMC. 
POLICY:  
Service of legal documents on patients  - The patient's attending physician will be notified prior to the 
time any legal docum ents are served on the patient. The patient’s attending physician may prevent 
access to that patient if the attending physician deems that the patient's condition so warrants. 
Execution of legal documents by patients  - Hospital personnel will not act as witnesses to any legal 
document executed by a patient. Patients may not be prevented from executing legal documents, 
however, if the patient's visitation orders prevent visitation, legal counsel or witnesses may not aid the 
patient in the preparation or execution of those documents. 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Officers of the court who want to serve legal documents on patients will go to  the House 
Manager's office in Patient Care Services. Only subpoenas /warrants from a uniformed officer of 
the court with a badge will be accepted. 
2. The House Manager will notify the nursing unit on the floor where the patient is locat ed of the 
name of the patient. The House Manager will not examine the legal document to determine its 
validity.  
3. The nursing unit will notify the patient's attending physician.  If the patient’s attending physician 
gives permission for the service of the legal document on the patient, the nursing unit will notify 
the House Manager, and the officer of the court will be escorted to the patient’s room  by the 
House Manager or a Security Representative, and allowed to serve the document.  If the patient’s 
attending physician does not give permission for the service of the legal document on the patient, 
the officer will be so informed and asked to serve the legal process after the patient has been 
discharged from the hospital. 
 
   OrgOps/GN/008 2 
See also: Policy OrgOps/GN/017 Subpoenas, Summons, Search Warrants 
 
       
 
 
 