Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center
Sterile Processing Protocol
1. All vendor instrument and/or implant sets must weigh 25 lbs or less 
(ANSI/AAMI ST79:2006).  If a set contains multiple layers and the set weighs more than 
stated amount, the vendor rep is responsible for breaking down the set to meet the weight 
requirement.  All instrumentation brought into SPD for the first time must be 
accompanied by sterilization guidelines to be kept on file for future use.  For 
complex and complicated instrumentation, the rep must instruct the SPD staff on how the 
set is to be broken down and provide instructions for cleaning and processing.
2. All instrumentation will require an inventory sheet and control sheet.  If an inventory 
sheet is not present the representative must complete a control sheet(s) indicating total 
instrument count and ID any missing pieces. The control sheets must include the 
following:
a. Surgeon
b. Date/Time of Surgery
c. Scheduled Procedure
d. Name of each set and how it is to be labeled
Note:  Failure to provide an inventory sheet will result in the hospital assuming no 
responsibility for lost instruments.
3. All implants and instrumentation scheduled for “next day” case must be delivered to the 
appropriate SPD no later than 7PM the night prior to the scheduled procedure.   Special 
arrangement must be made with SPD Manager or Supervisor for any items delivered after 
7PM.  Preferably instruments and/or implants should be delivered 24-48 hours, 
excluding Saturday, prior to the scheduled procedure.  All instruments/implants must be 
terminally cleaned and terminally sterilized prior to use in the OR.  Timely arrival allows 
for adequate processing, cooling and biological result identification (if applicable) prior 
to release.   
4. Late Deliveries:  Instrumentation that is unable to be delivered by vendors within the 
above SPD time frame must be communicated to the OR and SPD management/designee.
a. The following departments shall be notified of any late deliveries:
OR:  Main OR (225) 765-8830 or Tower OR (225) 765-8888
SPD: Main SPD (225) 765-8318 or Tower SPD (225) 765-7645
b. The following information shall be communicated:
 Time of delivery
 Date/Time of surgery
 Scheduled procedure
 Type and number of sets (Instruments vs. Implants)
 Vendor name and contact number5. SPD will not receive items by courier or freight delivery.  Vendors deliver instrument 
sets to validate surgeon, surgery date, surgical procedure, instrumentation/implant sets 
and provide inventory sheet or complete control sheet.
6. Vendor packing material and shipping cartons will not be received in SPD.  Such vendor 
material is not allowed in SPD.
7. Instrumentation:
a. All instrumentation will be cleaned and processed according to manufacturer 
recommendations.
b. The vendor representative assures there is an adequate amount of instrument sets 
to provide terminal sterilization for all sets and avoid use of flash sterilization.
c. The vendor representative will be responsible for routine replacement due to 
dullness and wear & tear of instruments.
d. Instruments will be inventoried upon arrival by both the vendor rep and SPD staff 
against the vendor’s inventory sheet.
e. Instrumentation must be decontaminated prior to use at OLOL regardless of 
method of transport.
f. When sets are to be used in a case, it is recommended that the vendor 
representative be present.
g. Once the surgical procedure is complete, loaned instruments will be returned to 
SPD via the dirty dumbwaiter/elevator.
h. Before any instruments leave OLOL, all instruments will be decontaminated 
following the same process that is required prior to use.
i. The vendor rep must inventory the set along with SPD staff before leaving the set 
or OLOL will not accept responsibility for the set of instruments.
j. If the inventory of items upon completion of the case does not match the count 
prior…the OR and SPD manager must be notified immediately.
Loaner Instrumentation – loaner instrumentation is defined as any instrument 
and/or instrument set with or without implants that a vendor is loaning to OLOL 
for a surgical procedure.
 Securing Loaner Instrumentation
o The vendor representative will be contacted by the operating room 
staff or MD when loaner instruments are needed.
o The vendor representative will deliver instruments and/or implants 
to the Sterile Processing Department and complete all required 
documentation.
Consigned Instrumentation – consigned instrumentation is defined as any 
instrument and/or instrument set with or without implants that a vendor is leaving 
at OLOL with the expectation of frequent use.  The instruments are not 
purchased by OLOL.
 Storage space for consigned vendor sets should be an agreement 
between the OR, Vendor Representative and Sterile Processing. All consigned set must has an inventory control sheet listing all 
instruments and/or implants present must accompany the set at time of 
initial check in.  The inventory control sheet must list the monetary 
value.
 Anytime the set is removed from SPD for another facility for any reason, 
SPD/OR Manager must be notified.  The set must be checked back in 
with a new inventory control sheet.   A complete inventory will be done 
to also verify properly working components.  