 
 
PURPOSE:
To assure compliance with Joint Commission and FDA established regulations and standards for the transport, receiving, 
storage and tracking of all biological implants (human and non-human cellular based implantable and transplantable 
products).  
 
POLICY:
Every biological implant will comply with regulatory standards for receipt, inspection, storage and traceability from point of 
receiving until implantation. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Product must be an OLOLRMC approved product, ie, approved by Service Line Committee, 
OR Supply committee & CQVA OR PAC.
2. If a product is needed prior to approval by the appropriate committees, the MD must receive interim approval from 
the Service Line Administrator or Divisional Director Surgical Services or Director Operating Room.   Approval will 
be given for a limited time period or specific number of cases. Once interim approval is obtained, the product will be 
handled through the same process as approved items.  
3. The Vendor must complete a “Supplier Qualification form” and provide a letter, on company letterhead, stating the 
shipping process of the biological product (how shipped, the temp maintained during shipping, how long product is 
guaranteed good until in OLOL possession). 
4. FMOL Purchasing Department issues a purchase order. 
5. All products must be shipped to OLOLRMC Surgical Materials Department from the manufacture/vendor.  
6. No products will be accepted directly from a sales representative. 
7. OLOL will not pay for any product that does not have a purchase order number. 
8. Upon receipt by Surgical Material Dept,  staff  must: 
         Validate the integrity of the shipping container
         Verify that the recommended temperature has been maintained.
         Record In house storage temps
         Verify recipient and implant info match.
9. Surgical Materials Department will be responsible for ensuring all required information is entered into the tracking 
system. 
10. If upon inspection the product does meet all requirements for shipping and pack integrity, it will be rejected and 
returned to the Vendor.  
 
Approved by:
 
Pedrina Blouin, BSN, RN, Director of Surgical Services
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER
Policy Manual:
 
Perioperative Services
 
Section/Chapter: Guideline
Title:
Request for Biological implants 
(human and non-human cellular based 
implantable and transplantable 
products).  
 
Policy Reference #: VEN107
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 7/1/09 Review Date:  
Revision Date:    
Page 1 of 1OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER
9/8/2009file://C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator.DATACENTER\Local Settings\Temp\BCL ...