OO-HIM-008 
Page 1 of 3 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: HIM 
Title: Release of Information – Facsimile 
Transmission 
Policy Reference #: OrgOps/HIM/008 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: April 14, 2003 Last Review Date: November 11, 2013 
Last Revision Date: September 24, 2009 
 
Purpose: 
The purpose of this policy is to define the guidelines for releasing copies of medical records by facsimile 
transmission. 
 
Policy: 
It is the policy of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center that all requests for release of medical 
record information by facsimile transmission should be directed to the Health Information Management 
Department for processing.  Outgoing patient-related information for continuity of care may be faxed to 
the physician of record without patient authorization when the physician supports the request for 
expedited communication with a reasonable explanation of need. 
 
Protected Health Information (PHI) shall be transmitted by facsimile only when other means of 
transmission are not feasible.  Minor inconvenience shall not constitute infeasibility.   
 
1. Sensitive PHI shall not be faxed except in circumstances constituting a medical emergency.  
Sensitive PHI includes, but is not necessarily limited to: 
- Information concerning mental health 
- Gender identity 
- Drug or alcohol dependence 
- Sexually transmitted diseases 
- Plagues and HIV 
 
In situations where sensitive PHI must be transmitted via fax, the individual who sends the fax is 
responsible for documenting receipt of a fax verification in the patient record and placing a 
follow-up telephone call to the fax recipient to ensure that the fax was properly routed.   
 
2. PHI will only be sent via fax when the request is made for patient care purposes.  Any other 
requests for PHI to be received via fax shall be approved by the release of information supervisor 
or the Director of Health Information Management.   
 
 
3. Designated fax machines shall be located away from fax machines used for routine business, as 
space allows.  Efforts shall be made to locate designated fax machines in low-traffic areas that 
are less accessible to persons who are not permitted to access PHI. 
 
4. A fax coversheet will be used when faxing PHI.  The cover sheet will contain a notice alerting 
the recipient that the information is confidential.  The notice will contain instructions on action to 
be taken if the information has been received in error.  The cover sheet will also contain spaces 
that allow for the insertion of the following information: OO-HIM-008 
Page 2 of 3 
 
a. Sender’s name, address, telephone number and fax number 
b. Recipient’s name and fax number 
c. Date and time of the fax 
d. Number or pages transmitted, and 
e. A brief description of the information contained in the fax.  Information 
regarding the expected verification of receipt of the fax (if required) shall be 
included.  More sensitive or urgent transmissions may request a return phone 
call, e-mail, page or substantive return fax in order to verify the receipt of the 
fax. 
 
5. Faxing Procedures – Except in emergency situations, the following faxing procedure shall be 
followed: 
a. The sender of a fax containing PHI shall confirm the recipient’s proper fax 
number 
b. If PHI is frequently faxed to a person or organization, that recipient’s fax 
number shall be programmed into the designated fax machine to prevent 
typographical errors. 
c. The confirmation of e-mail transmission shall be maintained.  The disclosure 
via fax shall be documented in the same manner as all other PHI, for accounting 
purposes of disclosures to the patient. 
d. Upon learning that a fax containing PHI has been misrouted, the sender of the 
fax shall contact the unintended recipient and request either the return or 
destruction of the document.  Steps shall be taken to remedy the problem that 
caused the misdirection.  The sender shall provide written notice to the Privacy 
Officer that a misrouting has occurred.  Each of these steps shall be documented 
in writing by the sender of the fax.   
e. Faxes that contain PHI that are received by employees, volunteers, medical staff 
members or other individuals allowed to access PHI shall be shredded once the 
recipient is finished using them for their intended purpose.  This requirement 
does not apply when the transmitted information is to be maintained in the 
patient’s medical record or another appropriate secure area. 
f. In order to promote prompt delivery of health information to physicians 
involved in a patient’s care, auto faxing may be used.  Physicians who wish to 
receive PHI via auto fax must verify their fax number in writing.  Fax numbers 
will be verified annually. 
 
Authorization: 
 
The authorization shall be considered valid if it conforms to the requirements as stated in the Release of 
Information policy. 
 
Faxed authorizations for the release of medical records will be honored if it contains the following 
information: 
 
-  Name of the facility that is to release information. 
 OO-HIM-008 
Page 3 of 3 
 
-  Name of the person or institution and address to whom the information is to be given. 
 
-  Name of the patient, patient address, date of birth, and/or social security number. 
 
-  Purpose of disclosure. 
-  Specific time period to be covered and the extent or nature of information to be 
    released. 
-  Signature of the patient or legal representative (Guardian). 
 
-  Dated at time of signature (void after 90 days). 
 
-  Date of authorization does not retroactively release information. 
 
Refusal to Honor Authorization: 
 
The facility may refuse to honor a faxed authorization if there is reasonable doubt as to the validity of 
the authorization. 
 
The facility may refuse to honor authorization as stated in the release of information policy. 
Emergency Situation: 
Emergency transmission o f patient-related material to another facility may be released as specified in 
hospital policy or with specific instructions from the Medical Record Director,  Administrator on call or 
risk Manager.  
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO 