 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual: Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: HIM 
Subject: Use and Disclosure of Psychotherapy Notes Section:  
Date of 
Origination: 
Date Last 
Revised 
April 14, 2003 Supersedes: 
 
 Serial Code:
 OrgOps/HIM/005 
Reviewed:  03/19/15, 05/08/18 
 
 
 
DEFINITION: 
 
Psychotherapy Notes: Notes (i.e., process notes) that capture the Therapist’s Impressions about the 
patient containing details of the conversation considered to be inappropriate for the medical record, and 
are used by the provider for future sessions. Psychotherapy notes can also be recorded (in any medium) 
by a healthcare provider who is a mental health professional documenting or analyzing the contents of 
conversation during a private counseling  session or a group, joint, or family counseling  session. 
Psychotherapy notes are kept separate from the rest of the individual’s medical record. 
 
POLICY: 
 
1. OLOL may not release psychotherapy notes, except in specific situations or as required by law. 
 
2. Psychotherapy notes shall be maintained separately from the medical record. 
 
3. Summary information (i.e. progress notes) such as current state of the patient, symptoms, summary 
of the theme of psychotherapy session, diagnoses, medications prescribed, side effects, and other 
information needed for treatment or payment shall be placed in the medical record. 
 
4. A patient does NOT have a right to inspect or obtain a copy of psychotherapy notes.  A patient may 
not request a review of an originator’s denial of access to psychotherapy notes. However, a patient 
may be provided access to a summary of the psychiatric treatment. 
 
WHEN AUTHORIZATION IS NOT REQUIRED: 
 
Authorization for the disclosure of psychotherapy notes is not required in the following circumstances: 
▪ For use by the originator for treatment 
▪ For use in educational programs including residency or graduate training programs where students 
  and trainees learn to practice counseling; 
▪ To defend a legal action brought against a patient; 
▪ For purposes of the Dept. of Health and Human Services in determining compliance with the 
  privacy rule. 
▪ As otherwise required by law; 
▪ By a health oversight agency for a lawful purpose related to oversight of a psychotherapist; 
▪ To a coroner or medical examiner for the purpose of identifying a deceased person, determining a 
 cause of death, or other duties as authorized by law; or, 
▪ To law enforcement in instances of permissible disclosure related to a serious or imminent threat to 
 the health or safety of a person or the public. 
 
RELEASE OF PSYCHOTHERAPY: 
 
The authorization for psychotherapy notes may not be combined with an authorization for any other 
PHI. An authorization for the use or disclosure of psychotherapy notes may only be combined with 
another authorization for the use or disclosure of psychotherapy notes. 
 
References: 45 C.F.R. 164.508(a)(2) 
45 C.F.R. 164.524 
 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Ramona Fryer 
VP of Revenue Date 