OO-PC-001 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Pastoral Care 
Title: Anointing of the Sick Policy Reference #: OrgOps-PC-001 
Supersedes #: AD/A/047 
Date of Origination: March 15th, 1988 Last Review Date: January 4, 2018 
Last Revision Date: January 4, 2018 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for administering the Sacrament of the Sick for Roman Catholic patients and 
Anointing of the Sick for patients of other faith groups. 
 
POLICY: 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) through the Pastoral Care Department provides 
the Sacrament of the Sick to Roman Catholic patients upon request according to the Code of Canon 
Law.  Anointing of the Sick is provided to patients of other faith groups according to the norms of their 
faith tradition. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Catholic priests may administer Anointing of the Sick to Catholic patients who are properly disposed 
as follows: 
▪ Those having reached the use of reason (age seven or older) who are in danger of death 
from sickness or old age.   
▪ Before surgery whenever a serious illness is the reason for the surgery. 
▪ Conditionally given to unresponsive patients who at least implicitly requested it when 
they were in control of their faculties. 
▪ The sacrament may be administered in case of doubt whether the person has attained the 
use of reason, is dangerously ill or is dead. 
▪ The anointing may be repeated if the sick person recovers after being anointed and then 
again becomes gravely ill or, if during the same illness, the person’s condition becomes 
more serious.   
Although a deceased patient may be anointed only in cases of doubt, an alternative prayer for the 
deceased may be offered. 
 
2. Catholic priests may administer the Anointing of the Sick to other Christians who, if in danger of 
death or some other grave necessity urges it according to the discretion of the diocesan bishop, 
cannot approach a minister of their own community and who request it, provided that they manifest 
Catholic faith in respect to this sacrament and are properly disposed. OO-PC-001 
Page 2 of 2 
3. Catholic ministers may bless with sacramental oils as long as this practice does not in any way cause 
confusion with regard to the Anointing of the Sick reserved to Catholic priests. 
4. Christian ministers of other faith traditions may administer anointing with oils according to their 
own faith traditions. 
5. All clarifications are to be directed to the Pastoral Care Department. 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 