 
OS006 
 
 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Oncology Support  
SUBJECT:  
Survivorship Program (CoC S4.8) - Oncology 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
N/A 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 4/1/22 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE:  
N/A 
DATE LAST REVIEWED: 
3/15/24 
POLICY NUMBER: 
OS006 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System, Inc. (FMOLHS) and its wholly owned sponsored 
organizations that propose and adopt System wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To provide definition of the survivorship program to meet the needs of cancer patients treated with curative intent.  
POLICY: 
The Survivorship program Coordinator develops a survivorship program team to determine a list of at least three 
services and programs that address the needs of cancer survivors.  
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A  
PROCEDURE: 
I. The Survivorship Program Team members include a registered nurse, a social worker, a registered dietician, tumor 
registry director, MDC manager, a representative from Occupational/ Physical Therapy, and a representative from 
the American Cancer Society.  
II. The Survivorship Program Team formally documents a minimum of three services offered each year.  Services 
utilized by the survivorship program may include, but are not limited to:  treatment summaries, survivorship care 
plans, screening programs for cancer recurrence, screening for new cancers, seminars for survivors, rehabilitation 
services, nutritional services, psychological support and psychiatric services, support groups and services, 
formalized referrals to experts in cardiology, pulmonary services, s exual dysfunction, fertility counseling, 
financial support services, and physical activity programs. The Survivorship Program Team will meet at a 
minimum quarterly but can meet more often as needed. 
III. Each calendar year, the Survivorship Program Coordinator will provide a summary report to the cancer committee 
that reviews the activities of the survivorship program. The report will include the number of cancer patients who 
participated in the three identified services and identification of the resources needed to improve the services if 
barriers were encountered.  
 
OS006 
 
 
2 
IV. Referrals to the Survivorship Program are done through our Patient Navigation and Support Services department 
and/or by the patient’s provider.  
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
N/A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by:  Denise Bradford 
 
TITLE Director Cancer Navigation and Support Services 