 
OS001 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Oncology Support 
SUBJECT:  
Multidisciplinary Cancer Case Conference (CoC S2.5) - 
Oncology 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
ER-3 Cancer Conference (Lake > Organizational > 
Oncology) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 12/1/16 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
3/15/2024 
DATE LAST REVIEWED: 
3/15/24 
POLICY NUMBER: 
OS001 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System, Inc. (FMOLHS) and its wholly owned sponsored 
organizations that propose and adopt System wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To provide an outline to govern multidisciplinary cancer case conference activity.    
POLICY: 
 This policy explains the participation, frequency, format, and required elements of discussion of multidisciplinary 
cancer case conferences.  
DEFINITIONS: 
Prospective presentations: 
i. Newly diagnosed and treatment not yet initiated, or treatment initiated, and discussion of additional treatment is 
needed. 
ii. Previously diagnosed, initial treatment completed, and discussion of adjuvant treatment or treatment for 
recurrence or progression is needed.  Previously diagnosed and discussion of supportive or palliative care is 
needed.  
PROCEDURE: 
I. A general multidisciplinary cancer case conference and site-specific conference will be held in accordance with 
the specifications below.  
a. General Multidisciplinary Cancer Care Conference  
i. Participation:  Representatives from surgery , pathology, radiology, radiation oncology, and 
medical oncology will attend 100% of conferences 
ii. Frequency:  Weekly 
b. Lung Nodule Conference 
 
OS001 
2 
i. Participation: Representatives from thoracic surgery, medical oncology, radiation oncology, and 
radiology will attend 100% of conferences. Pathology attendance is optional. 
ii. Frequency:  Weekly 
c. Head and Neck Cancer Care Conference 
i. Participation: Representatives from surgery and radiation oncology will attend 100% of 
conferences.  Medical oncology will attend 7 5% of conferences , pathology and radiology  
representatives will attend as needed. 
ii. Frequency: Weekly. 
d. Colorectal Cancer Care Conference 
i. Participation:  Will follow NAPRC standards for attendance 
ii. Frequency: Twice monthly. 
II. Participation is also encouraged for other physicians such as primary care,  gastroenterologists, and other 
physicians involved in the diagnosis or work-up of cancer patients. 
III. Additional support staff representing areas from  clinical research, social worker, patient navigat ion, nutritional 
services, cancer registry, early detection and outreach, and multidisciplinary care  will attend all cancer care 
conferences.  
IV. All multidisciplinary cancer case conferences will include the following elements of discussion (as appropriate). 
a. Clinical and/or pathological stage 
b. Treatment planning using evidence-based guidelines 
c. Options and availability for genetic testing, clinical research studies, and supportive care services (as 
applicable) 
V. Each calendar year, a  minimum of 15 percent of the annual analytic caseload will be presented  to a 
multidisciplinary cancer case conference. At least 80 percent of the cases presented will b e prospective 
presentations.  
VI. Cancer case conference activity will be monitor ed by the Cancer Conference Coordinator and reported to the 
cancer committee at least twice per year. The report will include the following data points. 
a. Participation and attendance 
b. Frequency 
c. Number of cases presented and percentage of prospective cases  
VII. If any area of cancer case activity falls below the established benchmarks included in this policy, an action plan 
will be implemented to address any areas of non-compliance.  The action plan as well as steps to address areas of 
non-compliance will be reported to the cancer committee.  
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
N/A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
CoC NAPRC Optimal Resources for Rectal Cancer Care, Standard 2.5 Rectal Cancer Multidisciplinary Team 
Attendance 
 
Policy Oversight by:  Amy Wall 
TITLE Manager, Cancer Registry 
 