 
OS005 
 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Oncology Support  
SUBJECT:  
Oncology Nutrition Services (CoC S4.7) - Oncology 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
N/A 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 4/1/22 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
N/A  
DATE LAST REVIEWED: 
03/15/2023 
POLICY NUMBER: 
OS005 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System, Inc. (FMOLHS) and its wholly owned sponsored 
organizations that propose and adopt System wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To identify cancer patients who are at a perceived or documented nutritional risk and to provide guidelines for the 
assessment of their nutritional status in order to maintain or promote optimal health during the course of treatment.    
POLICY: 
Oncology nutrition services will be provided on site by a registered and licensed dietitian, who will conduct a nutritional 
risk screening for cancer patients seen in the infusion clinic. As appropriate, nutrition services will be provided by 
referral, in coordination with Cancer Services of Greater Baton Rouge and the American Cancer Society. 
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A  
PROCEDURE: 
I. Nutritional Risk Screening 
A. Oncology nutrition services provided on site include screening and nutrition assessment for risk and 
diagnosis of malnutrition, nutrition-related problems; medical nutrition therapy using Academy of 
Nutrition and Dietetics; nutrition counseling and follow up;  
B. Medical Oncology/Hematology 
i. Licensed nursing personnel and/or provider will screen the patient for nutrition related issues at 
the time of chemotherapy teaching. Registered nurses will screen for nutrition risk at infusion 
appointments. They will both refer the patient to the dietitian if needed.  
ii. Dietitian will screen daily infusion schedule to identify high risk patients. 
II. Nutrition Documentation and Follow Up Appointments (if applicable) 
A. A dietitian will perform an initial nutritional assessment based on the following criteria: 
 
OS005 
 
2 
i. Adequacy of nutrient intake – current, previous and required, 
ii. Anthropometric measurements and evaluations including weight, weight history, and BMI, 
iii. Medications which may affect nutritional status, 
iv. Conditions that may affect ingestion, digestions, absorption, or utilization of nutrients, 
v. Food intolerance and allergies, 
vi. Religious, cultural, ethnic, and personal food preferences, 
vii. Nutritional implications of selected laboratory tests or their results,  
B. Educational materials will be provided to patients by the Dietitian or staff as appropriate for the patient’s 
diagnosis or nutrition-related issues associated with treatment. 
C. The dietitian will assist patients in obtaining nutritional supplements when applicable.  
D. The dietitian will document a summary of nutrition assessment, intervention, educational materials 
discussed, nutritional supplies distributed, and the plan of care in Epic.   
III. Weight Monitoring 
A. Licensed nursing personnel will weigh each patient at each visit and follow-up appointments. Weight 
monitoring may be more frequent at the physician’s request.    
IV. Nutritional Supplements 
A. OLOLCI does not have an affiliation with the manufacturer of nutritional supplements and makes no 
explicit recommendations concerning the use of specific products.  
B. Expiration dates of all products will be checked monthly and all expired products will be discarded.  
C. As appropriate, referral will be made to Cancer Services of Greater Baton Rouge or the American 
Cancer Society.  
D. The dietitian will assist patients in obtaining nutritional supplements when applicable. 
V. Tube Feedings 
A. The dietitian will receive a consult whenever a feeding tube is ordered by a provider to be placed in a 
patient of the Cancer Institute. 
B. Educational materials and a demonstration to use the feeding tube will be provided to the patient and 
family by the Dietitian or durable medical equipment (DME) company. 
C. The dietitian will assess the patient and write a nutrition prescription according to the patient’s 
nutritional needs. 
VI. Each calendar year, the cancer committee will monitor, evaluate, and make recommendations for improvements 
to on-site oncology nutritional services.  
  
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
N/A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
  
OS005 
 
3 
 