PADM-03 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:   Patient Care  
Subject:  Code Stork – Emergency Department Section:  Pediatric Emergency 
Department  
Date of Origination:  April 30, 2019 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
February 28, 2024 
Serial Code:  PADM-03 
  
PURPOSE: 
Development and implementation of Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital’s response to an actual or 
potential emergent vaginal delivery at any location on Children’s Hospital Campus. 
 
POLICY:  
I. Team Member Response – this team will assign themselves to the Code Stork team via communication 
device 
a. ER Charge Nurse or designated RN 
b. ER Provider 
c. Respiratory Therapist 
d. NICU Charge Nurse or designated RN 
e. NICU Provider 
f. Pastoral Care, if available 
g. Transport Team Member, if available 
h. Access Service Representative/Registration 
i. House Supervisor 
j. Child Life, if available 
 
II. Equipment Required 
a. Newborn Precipitous Delivery Cart 
b. Infant Identification Bands 
c. Infant Warmer 
d. Fetal Heart Monitor 
e. Crash Cart 
 
III. Procedure 
a. Team Member may activate Code Stork procedure when a potential or emergent delivery is 
imminent: 
1. The person involved will call extension 5-3333 to enact Code Stork 
2. The information to provide to operator is (A) Code Stork (B) your name and (C) location 
(such as front lobby, ambulance entrance, visitor parking) 
3. Notification to Code Stork Team will be sent via communication device. 
b. The patient will be taken to Trauma Bay, ready the Precipitous Delivery Cart, Panda/Infant 
Warmer and obtain Fetal Monitor.  The House Supervisor will respond to assist as needed.  An 
additional precipitous delivery infant tray is available in Central Supply if needed for multiple 
births. PADM-03 
Page 2 of 2 
c. The Pediatric ER RN and providers will facilitate delivery and care of the mother.  The NICU 
provider and NICU RN will assume initial care and identification banding of the newborn.  Refer 
to precipitous delivery policy PC05.  Respiratory will assist to assure airway support if needed. 
d. CSR will notify OB/GYN Provider, if known, of impending delivery. 
e. During normal business hours when available, social services or child life will report to delivery 
area to assist with family and security will report to area to assist with directing traffic away 
from area. 
f.  After the incident is resolved, the house supervisor will direct operator to resend second 
communication device message All Clear Code Stork 
 