 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Patient Access 
SUBJECT:  
Payment Policy for Time of Service 
Collections 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: N/A Pages 4 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
February 1, 2014; Jan 23, 2018 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER: 
 
Approved by: Date – January 2014 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Patient Access associates at FMOL facilities and its subsidiaries.  
PURPOSE: 
To establish standard processes for patient collections at the time of service.  Collecting at the 
time of service reduces overall costs of collection, increases cash flow, reduces days in accounts 
receivable, and reduces the volume of bad debt expense.   
 
POLICY: 
FMOL staff will make appropriate efforts to collect from patients/guarantors deductibles, co -
payments, co-insurance, and other liabilities at or before the time of service  
 
 
PROCEDURE:  
• Patient Access staff must ensure that patients are aware of their financial responsibilities 
at or before the time service is rendered and collect payment which may be due on the 
patient’s portion.  Patients/guarantors will be expected to:  pay their portion in full, 
establish payment arrangements, or submit financial information to be evaluated for 
financial assistance. 
• Time of service collection efforts will include collection attempts of existing prior 
balances and bad debts for all patients.  Each patient’s prior account balances will be 
communicated to the patient during pre-registration and registration process; inquiry on 
how the patient intends to resolve the balances must be addressed and arranged.  
• The collection process begins with the first contact with the patient, whenever that 
occurs.  Advanced scheduling of patient services affords the best opportunity to prepare 
for collections. 
• Emergency Room Services.   
o Patients will not be approached for money until a medical screening has been 
conducted and the patient determined to be in stable condition.   o Once the patient is stable, the Patient Access Representative (PAR) will attempt 
to collect out-of-pocket monies owed.  
o Self-pay patients: PAR will attempt to collect the AGB (Amount Generally 
Billed) only! 
o The facility will establish an effective discharge planning process in the ED that 
enables Patient Access associates to communicate with patients/guarantors about 
their financial responsibilities. 
• Unscheduled/Direct Admits to Inpatient and Observation Floors 
o The facility will establish a process to identify unscheduled/direct admissions to 
inpatient and observation units.  This process will be performed at least daily.  
o A PAR (usually a financial counselor) will visit the patient room to inform the 
patient of their financial obligations and obtain a deposit toward out-of-pocket 
monies owed. 
o Prior to entering a patient room, the PAR will obtain permission from the nursing 
unit (or Case Management) to ensure that the patient’s clinical condition would 
not compromised by a financial visit. 
• Non-Urgent Services.  Payment is expected at or before the time of service for the 
patient’s liability (co-pay, deductible, and co-insurance).  Payment plans may be offered 
as appropriate (see below).  Non-urgent procedures may be rescheduled if acceptable 
payment terms are not reached.  The physician should be consulted in accordance with 
facility guidelines. 
o Payment in full or downpayment (at least 50%).  The patient/guarantor will first 
be asked for payment in full.  If the patient cannot pay in full, the PAR is to 
request down payment, with the minimum being 50%.  (Payment arrangements 
for the remaining balance will be established and documented, in accordance with 
payment plan guidelines in the table below.)  If the PAR is unable to obtain at 
least a 50% down payment, a supervisor/manager is required to intervene to 
review and approve alternative arrangement if and when appropriate. 
o Payment Plan.   (Requires supervisor or manager approval.)  If the patient 
refuses to pay the minimum of 50% down, the Patient Access/Pre-Access 
Supervisor or Manager may offer the long-term payment plan, based on 
individual circumstances.  The 1st month payment is due at the time of service.  
Exception:  Patients with accounts in bad debt must pay a minimum of two 
months at the time of service.  These payment terms apply to associates, as well as 
non-associates.  NOTE:  Deviations from these minimum payment guidelines 
must be approved by facility management. 
PAYMENT PLAN GUIDELINES  
AMOUNT OWED PAYMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
$50 or less Full Payment (no pmt plan option) 
$51 - $200 2 monthly payments    
$201 - $500 4 monthly payments    
$501 - $750 6 monthly payments    
$751 - $1,000 10 monthly payments    
$1,001 – 2,000 12 monthly payments    
$2,001 - $3,000 15 monthly payments    $3,001 - $4,999 18 monthly payments    
>= $5,000 Refer to Financial Counselors or Business Office 
 
 The account will also be reviewed to determine if the patient is under-insured and 
may qualify for medical indigence. 
• Services that the Physician States Cannot be Rescheduled.  If the physician indicates a 
service is medically urgent and cannot be rescheduled due to lack of payment 
arrangement, the PAR must notify his/her manager or director, who will consult the local 
VPMA or Administrative Council member for guidance.  If the procedure is allowed to 
proceed without time-of-service collections, then the collection will be attempted post 
service, while the patient is still in-house whenever possible.  NOTE:  This section of the 
policy does not apply to emergent cases. 
• Up-front Payments/Deposits.  Scenarios are outlined below. 
Up-Front Payments / Deposit Amounts  
Scenario Up-Front Deposit 
 
Patient has two or more insurances 
$0, unless insurances do not 
coordinate benefits.  In this case, 
collect co-pay & deductible but no 
co-insurance. 
Patient has only one insurance and co-
Insurance can be reasonably determined in 
advance (using PEA, contracts, co-
insurance worksheets, …) 
 
Collect co-pay, deductible, & co-
insurance. 
 
Patient has only one insurance and co-
insurance cannot reasonably be 
determined in advance.  
Collect the patient’s deductible and 
co-pay, plus the standard deposit 
amount as established by the 
region’s CFO.  (Std deposits should 
be established for:  inpatient 
surgery, inpatient medical, cath lab, 
day surgery, GI lab, imaging, 
emergency room, and lab, at a 
minimum.) 
Worker’s Compensation; Medicare or 
Medicare Replacement with a 
supplement; traditional or managed 
Medicaid; insurance with secondaries that 
are not simple supplemental policies, such 
as Physician’s Mutual that only cover a 
small portion of OOP costs. 
 
 
$   0 
 
Motor vehicle accident or other 3rd-party 
liability 
Obtain 3rd-party liability 
information.  Request payment from 
patient based on his/her health 
insurance coverage.  Request legal 
review. 
Flat-rate or packaged pricing procedures, 
e.g. plastic surgery, bariatrics, calcium 
 
Payment in full is expected. scoring, concussion baseline screenings, 
self-referral labs, etc… 
 
Patient is uninsured 
$0 if patient is approved for charity 
care.  At least 50% of uninsured fee 
schedule amount if patient does not 
qualify for charity. 
 
 
• Uninsured Patients.  Refer to the FMOL Charity Care policy.  Determination of charity 
care approval and uninsured fee schedule amounts will be based on the family income 
(and assets) as a percentage of the federal poverty guidelines.   Patients with “other 
assistance” must have already applied with the appropriate program in order to be 
considered “Qualified” under this provision.  For example, if a patient may qualify for 
Medicaid, he or she must first meet with a representative and complete documentation for 
eligibility determination.  