PEDS-02 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Pediatric Primary Care Nurse Initial and 
Ongoing Assessment 
Section:  Pediatric Emergency 
Department 
Date of Origination:  November 1998 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
July 5, 2006 
February 28, 2025 
Serial Code:  PEDS-02 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide a standard of nursing care for assessment of all pediatric patients in the Emergency Care Unit. 
 
POLICY: 
• Initial assessment is to include airway, breathing, circulation, disability, pain, exposure/skin, full set of 
vital signs, and a focused assessment based on the chief complaint.  If patient is here for pregnancy 
related complaint initial assessment should include emergent OB assessment documentation. 
• Serial re-evaluation assessment to be completed based upon patient’s condition or as ordered by 
provider. 
• The provider will be notified of abnormal vital signs or assessment findings with initial and ongoing 
assessments. 
• Pediatric patient with cardiac complaints should be placed on a cardiac monitor and continuous pulse 
oximetry with appropriate alarm limits set.  Heart tones should be auscultated for murmurs and/or 
irregularities. 
• The length and height measurements, and head circumferences will be completed per triage policy or 
with physician order. 
• Psychosocial issues will be addressed with all pediatric patients and families as needs are identified. 
• Functional level of the pediatric patient will be identified in relation to developmental milestones and 
the use of any assistance devices. 
• Nutritional issues will be identified, and a referral sent to Nutritional Services as needed for further 
consultation. 
• Communication, cultural needs, and/or educational/language barriers will be identified, and needs 
addressed.  Be sure to include documentation of support devices incorporate into patient care. 
• When assessing pediatric level of consciousness, the State Behavior Scale (SBS) will not be required for 
a sedated pediatric emergency department patient. 
• When the pediatric patient is discharged the following will be documented:  
• time of discharge,  
• mode of discharge (wheelchair, ambulatory),  
• education and discharge instructions given,  
• prescriptions if needed, post sedation warning given if pertinent, disposition of clothing and valuables 
when appropriate,  
• discharged by. 
• Focused nursing reassessment of clinical stability/condition 
• Provider notification of abnormal vitals/assessment prior to transfer/discharge and documentation to 
proceed PEDS-02 
Page 2 of 2 
Org 10/2020 
 Any admitted patient remaining in the pediatric emergency department greater than four hours will be 
considered a boarder. The primary nurse will: 
a. Complete boarder documentation 
b. Initiate plan of care – documentation must occur every shift once initiated 
c. Initiate sign and held orders 
 
Any patient transfer should include documentation of handoff for transfer within facility or transfer to 
another facility. 
 
 
REFERENCE: 
Emergency Nurses Association (2023). Provider Manual Emergency Nursing Pediatric Course (6th ed.). 
Burlington, MA: Jones and Bartlett Learning  