 
PH.2439_Emergency Preparedness 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Emergency Preparedness 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2439 (03/27/2023) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
11/26/2024 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2439 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures minimal disruption to patient care during emergency situations or pharmacy system failure. 
POLICY: 
A. OLOLH pharmacies shall have an emergency preparedness plan designed to provide its patients/clients continuing 
care and support appropriate to the care or service provided.  OLOLH pharmacies will respond promptly to any 
detected problems and take corrective action as needed. In the event of an emergency or local disaster that would 
result in an interruption of service, OLOLH pharmacies shall ensure adequate coverage for patient care and 
services. 
B. Emergencies shall fall under the following general categories, each having its own specialized procedure:  
1. Tr a nsportation - An environmental condition, such as a flood, blizzard, hurricane, fire, etc., where common 
courier services may be unable to be dispatched to patient/client locations. 
2. Electrical /Communication - An environmental or technical difficulty resulting in the loss of power or 
communications for an extended time. 
3. Staff -  An  organizational or internal issue resulting in shortages of personnel due to illness, emergencies, or 
disasters. 
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: [URAC RM 4-1 (a-ii, a-iii)] 
A. Tran sporta tion and Electrical 
1. The pharmacy manager and technician supervisor shall maintain a current list of all employees with their 
phone numbers. 
2. Should an emergency be declared, the pharmacy manager shall notify appropriate personnel to remain on an 
on-call status. 
3. The Administrator on Call/Incident Commander shall establish a central emergency communication center 
with appropriate personnel. Employees are notified via email of the emergency communication center and the 
phone number to call in case of an emergency. If email is not accessible, the pharmacy manager and 
technician supervisor will call employees to give instructions.  
4. Patient records can be accessed remotely by the pharmacy manager and from the hospital. The pharmacy 
manager or designee will keep a current patient/client list permitting personnel to contact patients/clients on a 
priority basis dependent upon level of need and urgency.  
5. Personnel shall establish phone contact, if possible, with patients/clients according to their scheduled fill date 
and make arrangements to provide medication to patients by priority.  
6. Contacting an alternate supplier of the care or service in closer proximity to the client. OLOLH pharmacies 
refers to Rx ONE | Med Plaza, Rx ONE | Lake, or Our Lady of the Lake Main Hospital pharmacy for 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
11/26/2024 2:47 PM 
 
 
PH.2439_Emergency Preparedness 
2 
emergency supply.  With the exception of Rx ONE Lake, these alternate suppliers are not a “specialty” 
pharmacy, but Louisiana does not require separate licenses for “specialty”, and they are able to dispense 
specialty medications; 
7. Contacting authorities for possible assistance or evacuation to an appropriate health care facility.  
8. OLOLH pharmacies dispenses emergency medications per Section 519 of the Board’s rule: When the 
Louisiana governor declares a state of emergency, the rule states, in part: 
"1.  A pharmacist may work in the affected parish(es) and may dispense a one-time emergency prescription of 
up to a thirty day supply of a prescribed medication if: (a) in the pharmacist's professional opinion the 
medication is essential to the maintenance of life or to the continuation of therapy, and (b) the pharmacist 
makes a good faith effort to reduce the information to a written prescription marked "Emergency 
Prescription", then file and maintain the prescription as required by law." 
B. Staff 
1. Training programs shall be conducted to develop the adequate knowledge and skills necessary to allow 
personnel in one job category to adequately perform in another patient/client related job category if so needed.  
2. OLOLH pharmacies shall maintain a file of backup personnel capable of providing the level of service needed 
by patients/clients. 
3. OLOLH pharmacies shall maintain a listing and be prepared to call upon alternate organizations providing the 
same services, should OLOLH pharmacies be unable to adequately service its patient/client population with 
available staff.  
C. Specialty Pharmacy Impacted  
1. If an emergency situation results in the specialty pharmacy becoming inoperable and/or inaccessible, staff can 
access the pharmacy system remotely within 24 hours from pre-determined laptops and desktop computers in 
different locations that have the pharmacy operating system software installed and user credentials.  The 
clinical management program is accessible from any computer with internet access and user credentials.  
locations include: 
 
2. If necessary, prescriptions will be transferred to other pharmacies to meet patient needs and the pharmacy will 
notify the Pharmacy Benefit Managers, as appropriate.  Pharmacies that may be used include: 
a. In-State 
(1) Rx ONE locations that are not impacted by the disaster 
(2) Our Lady of the Lake retail pharmacy locations 
(a) O’Donovan Pharmacy 
(b) MidCity Pharmacy 
(c) Lake Children’s Pharmacy 
(3) Our Lady of the Angels Outpatient Pharmacy 
 
b. Regional/National 
(1) Asembia ASPN network  
 
D. Hours of Operation 
1. During an emergency resulting in a command center activation, the retail locations may be required to operate 
outside of their normal business hours including but not limited to: 
a. Extending closing hours during the activation phase of the emergency to ensure that patients have 
been contacted and that Long Term Care and Meds to Beds patient prescriptions are filled with 
sufficient supply to exceed the projected crisis period. The duration of extended hours will be 
determined at the discretion of the Director of Pharmacy based on anticipated patient need and travel 
information/instructions dictated by local authorities as required to ensure the safety of staff. 
b. Opening for business during the recovery phase on non-business days including weekends and 
holidays. If the pharmacy opens on non-business days, the Director of Pharmacy will communicate 
the hours of operation to the applicable command center.  
c. Pharmacy Managers will create a rotating list of staff members for the activation and recovery teams.  
The lists will rotate all staff within the geographical areas of Baton Rouge and Monroe.  This includes 
the assignment of staff from pharmacies other than their primary work locations in the geographical 
area.  
PH.2439_Emergency Preparedness 
3 
d. Staff will not be required to stay overnight. 
D. Patients Area is impacted  
1. If the patient’s area is impacted OLOLH pharmacies will work with the patient and/or designee to coordinate 
delivery to any location that is accessible to the patient or transfer prescriptions to a pharmacy the patient can 
access.  In situations where refrigeration is not available due to power outages and the patient is unable to find 
an alternate location with refrigeration, OLOLH pharmacies will assist in developing a plan.  Options may 
include: 
a. Providing additional ice packs and/or containers 
b. Filling less doses of medications to minimize storage requirements 
c. Reviewing acceptable excursion time documentation 
d. Consulting with prescriber if there are non-refrigerated alternate therapies   
2. If doses of medication are going to be missed and/or patient care will be impacted the prescriber will also be 
contacted.   
E. Utilities Management: 
1. The pharmacy ensures adequate backup systems are in place in the event of power failure. Utilities 
management may include but are not limited to: 
a. Heating and cooling in the office or warehouse 
b. Refrigeration 
c. Water supply 
d. Communication systems, including back up of software and all pharmacy systems 
2. In the case of a power outage, sites equipped with generator backup, which includes all accredited specialty 
pharmacies, will retain access to the following systems: 
a. 1 computer for processing prescriptions 
b. 1 cash register  
c. Medication refrigerators 
d. Backup lighting  
3. The pharmacy operations will continue under the above conditions. In the event that the pharmacy cannot 
operate due to loss of generator power, service will be provided at another pharmacy location with power 
including locations in other geographical locations and medications will be either moved to a location with 
controlled room or refrigerator temperature or otherwise returned for destruction through the reverse 
distributer service.    
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: RM 4-1 
• ACHC Standards: DRX7-4A 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  