 
PH.2448_Personnel Qualification & Management 
1 
 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Personnel Qualifications & Management 
PAGES: 
6 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2448 (03/30/2023) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
06/07/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2448 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that employees hired meet the required qualifications and receive appropriate training prior to taking 
on their job tasks. In addition, this policy also ensures that current employees receive the required annual training and 
evaluations.  
POLICY: 
A. In compliance with federal and state regulations/guidelines, all employees will meet OLOLH requirements for 
employment. 
B. A formal assessment program has been implemented so that staff can be held accountable for appropriate 
implementation of documented program and tools. Data related to staff competence is collected continuously, 
aggregated, and analyzed for patterns and trends. The patterns and trends are used to identify staff learning needs 
and acted on by offering in-service education, training, or other teaching methods related to the identified learning 
needs. 
DEFINITIONS: 
Annually (or “yearly”) occurs every 12 months to the month (not the day of the month). In other words, it is a 
month/year to month/year requirement. 
Certification is a professional credential, granted by a national organization, signifying that an individual has met the 
qualifications established by that organization. To qualify under these standards, the certification program must: 
• Establish standards through a recognized, validated program; 
• Be research-based; and 
• Be based (at least partially) on passing an examination. 
Conflict of Interest is any relationship or affiliation on the part of the organization or a reviewer that could 
compromise the independence or objectivity of the independent review process. Conflict of interest includes, but is not 
limited to: 
• An ownership interest of greater than 5% between any affected parties; 
• A material professional or business relationship; 
• A direct or indirect financial incentive for a particular determination; 
• Incentives to promote the use of a certain product or service; 
• A known familial relationship; 
• Any prior involvement in the specific case under review. 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
6/7/2023 1:29 PM 
 
 
PH.2448_Personnel Qualification & Management 
2 
Consultant is a professional who provides advice in specific areas of expertise (e.g., health care, pharmacy, case 
management, utilization management, etc.) and usually has a wide knowledge of the subject matter. A consultant 
usually has a defined scope of work through documents such as, but not limited to, contracts, master service 
agreements, scope of work, etc. These individuals are not considered staff (i.e., employees) of the organization. 
Direct patient care – care of a patient provided personally by a staff member or contracted individual/organization in 
a patient’s residence or healthcare facility.  
Employee is one who is hired by an employer to do a specific job and contributes labor and expertise to an 
organization. This person can be a full-time or part-time employee. 
License is a license or permit (or equivalent) to practice medicine or a health profession that is (1) issued by a state 
regulatory body or jurisdiction in the United States U.S.; and (2) required for the performance of job functions. 
OIG is the Officer of Inspector General 
Primary Source Verification is verification of a practitioner’s and/or facility credentials/licensure based upon 
evidence obtained from the issuing source of the credential. 
Professional Competency is the ability to perform assigned professional responsibilities. 
PROCEDURE: 
A. All employees shall receive and sign their job description. The signed copy of the job description shall be placed 
in their personnel file. [ACHC Standard DRX4-2E] 
1. Job descriptions for staff shall address requirements pertinent to the scope of the positions’ including: 
a. Required education, training, and/or professional experience;  
b. Expected professional competencies; 
c. Appropriate licensure/certification requirements; and  
d. Current scope of role and responsibilities. 
2. All staff members must meet the qualifications as outlined in the job descriptions. 
3. To ensure staff members meet job requirements upon hire as well as when transitioning roles within the 
organization the following items are reviewed: 
a. Applicant’s experience, such as listed on their resume or application, is compared to requirements 
listed on the job description; and 
b. Verification of required licensure and/certification as required by the job description is completed and 
stored. 
B. Employees who drive the company owned vehicle will be required to have a valid driver’s license appropriate for 
the type of vehicle they operate.  
If motor vehicles are used that require a special class of driver’s license, such as a Commercial Driver’s License 
(CDL) are verify through a Motor Vehicle Records (MVRs) check that the employee has a valid license at time of 
hire and annually. [ACHC Standard DRX4-2F] 
C. All employees hired for positions requiring licensure or certification (pharmacists, pharmacy technicians, etc.) 
shall have current and unrestricted license(s) or registration(s) from appropriate agencies. This includes those 
affiliated through contractual or other responsible arrangements.  
1. URAC and ACHC required Primary Source Verification (PSV) for licensure or certification as required for 
position will be performed upon hire and thereafter prior to the expiration date, no less than every 3 years. 
URAC and ACHC required PSV prior to hire and post hire will follow the below process and retain 
documentation. [URAC OPIN 2-1 (a)] 
a. Please refer to Human Resources policy HR.01.015 Mandatory Requirements 
2. Employees are required to notify their direct supervisor within seven (7) days of an adverse change in 
licensure or certification status [URAC OPIN 2-1 (b)] 
a. If an Employee does notify their direct supervisor within seven (7) days of an adverse change in 
licensure or certification status that employee will be subject to Corrective Action. The employee will 
be removed from Clinical Services or suspended until his/her license or certification returns to 
positive status.  
PH.2448_Personnel Qualification & Management 
3 
b. If employee does not notify their direct supervisor of an adverse change in licensure or certification 
within the seven (7) day timeframe, then corrective action up to dismissal will be taken.  
D. OLOLH has an employment background screening program for employees who handle pharmaceuticals and 
patient data which includes: Criminal background check which includes a sex offender’s registry check and drug 
testing/screening. [URAC OPIN 2-2 (a, b)] [ACHC Standard DRX4-2H] 
1. C riminal background checks will be performed on all candidates prior to employment.   Candidates with 
criminal backgrounds will typically be excluded from employment. [URAC OPIN 2-2 (a)] [ACHC 
Standard DRX4-2H] 
2. All employees will be screened before employment for OIG Exclusion and the OIG Exclusion list 
(https://exclusions.org.hhs.gov/) will be reviewed. Candidates identified in the OIG Exclusion list will not be 
employed. Employees identified in the OIG Exclusion list will be terminated. [ACHC Standard DRX4-2H] 
a. Monthly all employees with active employee identification numbers are checked against the OIG, 
SAM and state Medicaid exclusion databases. OLOLH Human Resources department receives 
notifications each month via email that the reports have run and should the reports indicate a true 
match the pharmacy manager would be notified immediately.    
3. Pre-employee drug testing will be performed [URAC OPIN 2-2 (b)] 
4. Drug testing for cause will be performed  
5. Drug testing after a reported accident involving an employee who has been physically injured or has caused 
physical injury to another individual while on the job.  
E. All employees providing direct patient care will have TB screening with confirmed negative results before 
employment that would bring them into “hands on” patient care or compounding of sterile drug products.  As of 
policy review date, the pharmacy does not have employed nurses or any pharmacists compounding or preparing 
sterile products. [ACHC Standard DRX4-2C] [ACHC Standard DRX7-1A] 
1. Upon hire tuberculin skin testing (PPD), or x-ray screening is performed on all direct care personnel in 
accordance with Center for Disease Control (CDC) guidelines. 
2. An annual risk assessment is performed to determine risk classifications. Risk classifications will be used to 
determine the need for TB screening for direct care personnel in accordance with the CDC 
recommendations. 
F. All employees providing direct patient care will have documented Hepatitis B vaccination history or initiate 
vaccination series immediately upon employment if that employment would bring them into “hands on” patient 
care or compounding of sterile drug products.  As of policy review date, The Pharmacy does not have employed 
nurses or any pharmacists compounding or preparing sterile products. [ACHC Standard DRX4-2D] [ACHC 
Standard DRX7-1A]  
1. Hepatitis B vaccination program and post-vaccination antibody titer are performed in accordance with CDC 
and OSHA guidelines. Personnel sign a declination statement for the Hepatitis B vaccination within 10 
working days of employment if they choose not to become vaccinated. 
2. The Hepatitis B vaccine series is available (free of charge) to employees. 
3. The following are circumstances under which an organization is exempted from making the vaccination 
available: 
a. The complete Hepatitis B vaccination series was previously received 
b. Antibody testing shows the employee to be immune 
c. The vaccine cannot be given to the individual for medical reasons or the individual cannot receive 
antibody testing 
G. Any candidate for employment that does not meet one or more of these qualifications for employment must have 
documented reasons for their employment and how any risks and exceptions have been addressed. These 
exceptions must be approved by the Director of Human Resources. No exceptions will be made for candidates for 
employment listed in the National Sex Offender registry or for those whose criminal record indicates physical 
violence, intimidation or other acts against a person that might be considered a risk to our patients.  
H. OLOLH maintains a formal assessment program for individual staff members, which includes an annual 
performance appraisal and a review of relevant documentation produced by that individual staff member. [ACHC 
Standard DRX4-2J] 
1. As part of the staff competency assessment, the pharmacy will:  
PH.2448_Personnel Qualification & Management 
4 
a. Assess staff’s knowledge, skills, and experience as related to their job description at 12 months as part 
of the review process. [ACHC Standard DRX4-2J] 
b. Performance evaluations are conducted by the employee’s direct supervisor or a member of the 
leadership team. A written review is complete, and a meeting is scheduled with the employee to go 
over the written annual review. Once the meeting is complete the employee and supervisor or 
member of leadership will sign and date the written review and the original will be placed in the 
employee file. (Please see Annual Review Form for review criteria) 
c. Monitor periodic customer satisfaction surveys to determine any trend data regarding staff 
competence in order to identify patterns and act on staff learning needs 
d. Monitor customer complaints quarterly to determine any trend data regarding staff competence in 
order to identify patterns and act on staff learning needs 
e. Observe employees by “MBWA” (Management by Walking Around) and complete a short report on 
any identified inferences, if needed 
f. Have qualified personnel observe and evaluate each direct care/service personnel performing their job 
duties at frequencies required by state and/or federal regulations. If not regulation exists, the 
evaluation is performed at least once annually to assess that quality care/service is being provided. 
[ACHC Standard DRX4-7A]  
g. Require supervisors to make outside calls with their staff serving the customer outside the company 
and submit a report on the level of competency of those employees as part of an annual review. As of 
policy review date, the pharmacy does not have employed staff serving the customer outside the 
company.  
h. Review customer files to determine level of competency in the completion of required paperwork and 
training for the customer.  
i. When learning needs are identified, there will be a meeting between the supervisor and a business 
principal to develop in-services, education, training, or other teaching methods related to the identified 
learning needs. As part of this process, supervisor may survey staff to assess competency levels or 
conduct other similar needs assessment to identify the learning needs of the department as a whole. 
I. The pharmacy has a Competency Assessment Program [ACHC Standard DRX4-7A] 
1. The pharmacy has designed and implemented a competency assessment program based on the care/service 
provided for all personnel who set up, train and/or educate on the use of medications, equipment and/or 
supplies. Competency assessments are an ongoing process and focuses on the primary care/service being 
provided by pharmacists, technicians, and support personnel. 
2. Competency assessments are conducted initially during orientation and annually thereafter. Validation of 
skills is specific to the employee's role and job responsibilities. 
a. New Hire Employee must successfully pass the competency assessment to graduate from New Hire 
Training.  
b. If a New Hire Employee does not initially pass the competency they will be given additional time to 
review and study materials provided during training and other tools and materials employees have 
access to then they will be provided the opportunity to take the competency assessment for a second 
time. If the New Hire Employee does not pass the competency assessment for a second time trainers, 
HR members, supervisors and second level managers will meet to discuss if the New Hire Employee 
should be offered the opportunity to take the competency assessment for a third time or to for the 
employee to be terminated.  
c. All New Hire Employees, once successfully completing New Hire Training, will be monitored during 
a 90-day probationary Period. 
d. The Pharmacy has designed and implemented a competency assessment program based on the 
care/service provided to all personnel who set up, train, clean, test, repair and/or provide education 
regarding the use of medications, equipment, and/or supplies. Competency assessment is an ongoing 
process and focuses on the primary care/service being provided and is conducted initially during 
orientation, prior to providing a new task, and annually thereafter. Validation of skills is specific to 
the employee’s role and  job responsibilities. All competency assessments and trainings are 
documented. A self-assessment tool alone is not acceptable. Peer review of clinical personnel 
competency by like disciplines is acceptable if defined by the organization. A corrective action plan  
PH.2448_Personnel Qualification & Management 
5 
will be put in place to address performance and education of personnel when they do not meet 
competency requirements.  
e. All competency assessments and trainings are documented. 
(1) A self-assessment tool alone is not acceptable. 
J. The pharmacy has an ongoing education and training program that includes: 
1. Initial orientation and/or training for all staff before assuming assigned roles and responsibilities, which 
includes but is not limited to the following: [URAC OPIN 2-3 (b-i)] [ACHC DRX4-6A] 
a. C ompany policies, processes, and procedures as well as t raining in current URAC Standards as 
appropriate to job functions; [ACHC DRX4-6A] 
(1) Employees receive training prior to assuming their job roles and when changes in the 
standards, policies, processes, and/or procedures occur. 
b. Handling and storage of controlled substances and hazardous materials [ACHC DRX7-2A] 
(1) Employees receive training prior to assuming their job roles and thereafter when changes in 
laws and regulations occur. 
c. Ethics in Healthcare [ACHC DRX4-8A] 
(1) Employees receive training prior to assuming their job roles. 
d. Code of ethical business conduct is provided to employees prior to assuming their job roles and 
annually thereafter and includes: [URAC OPIN 2-4 (a)] 
(1) Conflict of interest; [ACHC DRX4-2I, DRX 4-6A] 
(2) False Claims [ACHC DRX2-9A, DRX 4-6A, DRX4-8A] 
(3) Fraud and Abuse [ACHC DRX2-9A, DRX 4-6A, DRX4-8A] 
(4) Illegal Activities [ACHC DRX2-9A, DRX 4-6A, DRX4-8A] 
e. P rivacy and security of information protections that incorporates Regulatory Compliance Training 
including HITECH act and expanded HIPAA laws [URAC OPIN 2-3 (a)] 
(1) Employees receive training prior to assuming their job roles and then annually thereafter. 
f. Employees also receive training on the below topics at least annually: 
(1) Confidentiality;  
(2) Emergency/disaster training [ACHC DRX4-8A] 
(3) How to handle grievances/complaints [ACHC DRX4-8A] 
(4) Infection control training [ACHC DRX4-8A] 
(5) Cultural diversity [ACHC DRX4-8A] 
(6) Communication barriers [ACHC DRX4-8A] 
(7) W orkplace [OSHA] and patient safety including fire, evacuation, security, office environment 
and environmental hazards [ACHC DRX4-8A] 
(8) Patient rights and responsibilities [ACHC DRX4-8A] 
(9) Compliance Program [ACHC DRX4-8A] 
(a) Comprehensive compliance program includes, at minimum, annual training for all 
employees, a confidential ethics hotline, and effective policies and procedures for resolving 
employee compliance concerns and avoiding fraud in pharmacy transactions.  
g. Documentation of all training provided for staff is maintained electronically and paper files are 
maintained in the pharmacy employee folder for annual competency assessments; 
(1) HR and Pharmacy Leadership are responsible for providing training to employees. 
h. Ongoing education and training, at a minimum annually, to maintain professional competency in 
assigned roles and responsibilities. [URAC OPIN 2-3 (b-ii)] 
(1) Education and training may vary by profession and the type of organization. Examples of 
training include: 
(a) Obtaining continuing education credits in a relevant field 
(b) Attendance at meetings or conferences related to job functions 
(c) In-house training on performance of job functions. 
(2) Ongoing education and training should be documented in personnel files. 
(a) Employees receive training on company policies and procedures. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion.  
PH.2448_Personnel Qualification & Management 
6 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC Standards: DRX4-2C, DRX4-2D, DRX4-2E, DRX4-2F, DRX4-2H, DRX4-2I, DRX4-2J, DRX4-7A, 
DRX4-8A, DRX7-1A  
• URAC Standards: OPIN 2-1, 2-2, 2-3, 2-4 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  