 
PH.2437_Quality Management Program Description 
1 
 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Quality Management Program Description 
PAGES: 
9 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2437 (07/13/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE:  02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/31/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2437 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines the pharmacy Quality Management Program (QMP). This policy is required for all pharmacies listed 
with NCPDP as specialty pharmacy providers.  Pharmacies not listed with NCPDP as specialty pharmacy providers are 
encouraged but not required to participate in and report through the QMP. 
POLICY: 
A. Quality Management Committee (QMC) is the quality oversight body responsible for monitoring the metrics and 
progress in meeting quantifiable goals and overseeing improvement activities for the pharmacy. [URAC PMI 1-1 
(b)]  
B. The QMC: [URAC PMI 1-1 (a)] [URAC PMI 2-1 (a, b, c, d)] 
1. Identifies metrics and quantifiable goals relevant to the program 
2.
 Collects accurate data for each metric 
3. Monitors progress in meeting each quantifiable goal 
4. Analyzes data and identifies performance trends for each metric at least annually 
5. Includes the design and implementation of strategies to improve performance levels 
DEFINITIONS: 
Quality management is the act of overseeing all activities and tasks needed to maintain a desired level of excellence. 
This includes creating and implementing quality planning and assurance, as well as quality control and quality 
improvement. 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Organization Overview 
1. The Governing Body has ultimate authority over the governance of the organization and its programs. 
Responsibility for the overall leadership and management of the pharmacy is vested in OLOLH’s Senior 
Director of Retail Pharmacy. This individual is accountable for all operations, for ensuring quality patient 
care, for ongoing compliance with all local, state and federal regulations, and for the ongoing viability of the 
pharmacy program. On behalf of the Governing Body, the Senior Director of Retail Pharmacy is responsible 
for maintaining ongoing liaison among the Governing Body, professional advisors and the pharmacy staff. 
The pharmacists are delegated day to day operational management.  The pharmacists report directly to the 
Pharmacy Manager who in turn reports to the Director of Pharmacy. The Pharmacy Manager chairs the QMC 
and provides oversight to the organization as a whole.  
2. The QMP reports to and is approved by the Senior Director of Retail Pharmacy who in turn ultimately reports 
to the Governing Body.  
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/31/2023 1:18 PM 
 
 
PH.2437_Quality Management Program Description 
2 
 
B. Quality Management Program (QMP) Overview [URAC PMI 1-1 (b)] 
1. The QMP helps to ensure the pharmacy meets its responsibilities to its contractors, consumers, and the 
community through continuous and systematic assessment and improvement of program systems and 
processes.  
2. The QMP is the vehicle through which the pharmacy analyzes and responds to data collected by its medical 
record system, claims data, operational performance monitoring, and other program measurement processes. 
The purpose of the QMP is to systematically use performance information and data to improve clinical care, 
training, support and outreach services.  
3. The Quality Management Program Description (QMPD) outlines the QMP which promotes objective and 
systematic measurement, monitoring and evaluation of services and implements quality improvement (QI) 
activities based upon the findings. The QMPD defines the Quality Management structure and process, as well 
as the role and responsibilities of the QMC, and other staff involved in the execution of the QMP. The 
QMPD was approved, implemented and commenced in November 2017.  The QMC reviews the QMPD at 
least annually and updates as necessary.  
C. Program Scope & Structure [URAC PMI 1-1 (b)] 
1. The scope and content of the QMP is designed to continuously monitor, evaluate and improve the clinical 
care and service provided to consumers and providers by the pharmacy. Specifically, the QMP includes, but 
is not limited to, the following responsibilities and monitoring of key performance measures:  
a. Development and implementation of the Specialty Pharmacy program  
b. Monitoring the Performance Improvement Plan  
c. Implementation and monitoring of the Patient Management Program  
d. Monitoring and evaluation of Adverse Drug Event Reporting  
e. Evaluation of accessibility and availability of program representatives  
f. Regulatory/Corporate compliance, including Fraud Waste and Abuse, current URAC and ACHC 
accreditation standards and functions covered by URAC and ACHC Accreditation, Privacy and 
Security including HIPAA, applicable state and federal regulations, etc. to include standards and 
procedures to detect and take corrective action for non-compliant employees. Ensures the 
organization conducts periodic reviews and analysis of its organizational structure, written policies, 
and documented procedures to determine if there are any changes that impact compliance. Ensures 
internal monitoring and auditing to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations. Reviews 
or ensures the reviewer of the organization’s training and education on the compliance program. If 
applicable ensures communication with delegation entities regarding changes impacting compliance.   
g. Monitoring for violations regarding Code of Conduct and Conflict of Interest. 
h. Establishment and implementation of mechanisms to promote collaboration, coordination and 
communication across disciplines and departments within organization. 
i. Oversight of marketing and sales materials in coordination with the marketing department. 
j. Client (business-to-business) and consumer, provider and patient satisfaction surveys regarding 
program services. 
k. Management of consumer/patient complaints. 
l. Tracking and follow-up processes for adverse incidents including, but not limited to those reported 
by patients and/or caregivers to ensure consumer safety.  
m. Identification, selection, and implementation, and tracking of Quality Improvement Projects (QIPs) 
of action plans  
n. Evaluation and oversight of the performance of delegated entities  
o. Evaluation of resources to include computer resources, internal staffing etc. and other resources to 
support day-to-day operations of the QMP  
p. Evaluation of clinical decision support tools as appropriate  
q. Monitoring and evaluation of billing and coding errors 
r. Monitoring and evaluation of patient record accuracy 
s. Collaboration with Pharmacy Benefits Managers to conduct quality management initiatives as 
identified  
PH.2437_Quality Management Program Description 
3 
D. Oversight and Authority [URAC PMI 1-1 (b)] 
1. The day-to-day operation of the QMP is overseen by the pharmacy manager who is the Senior Clinical Staff 
Person, a pharmacist and a member of the administrative team and Chair of the QMC. The ultimate authority 
for the pharmacy QMP is delegated to the QMC. The QMP reports to the QMC which is chaired by the 
Pharmacy Manager who performs oversight and guidance. 
2. The Pharmacy Manager is responsible for: 
a. Assisting with the overall development and implementation of the QMP,  
b. Assisting in the identification of goals and related patient outcomes, and 
c. Coordinating, participating in and reporting activities and outcomes. 
E. Quality Management Committee (QMC) [URAC PMI 1-1 (b)] [URAC PMI 2-1 (b)] 
1. The QMC is granted authority by the Governing Body and is responsible for the management of the QMP 
including monitoring the progress in meeting each quantifiable goal. The QMC meets at least quarterly with 
the purpose of improving services by monitoring processes, analyzing data, implementing interventions to 
improve, and evaluating the effectiveness of those interventions. The QMC receives reports of all monitoring 
and evaluation activities, maintains records of all committee meetings through minutes taken, which are later 
reviewed and approved by the committee members. The QMC receives quarterly reports from the QMP. In 
order to promote and establish interdepartmental collaboration, the multidisciplinary committee includes 
administrative and clinical members and representatives who collaborate with participating providers/clients 
and bring their input to the QMP and QMC as applicable. The QMC is comprised of content experts 
including pharmacists, and if appropriate on an as needed basis A participating providers and/or other clinical 
practitioners will be retained on a consultant basis on an “as needed” basis for participation in the QMC when 
his/her subject matter expertise is required.  
2. The QMC is responsible for the following activities: 
a. To provide on-going reporting to the Senior Director of Retail Pharmacy  
b. To provide guidance to staff on Quality Management priorities and projects  
c. To review, evaluate and approve the QMPD annually  
d. To establish long and short-term goals for the QMP  
e. To review and approve Policies and Procedures at least annually 
f. To measure and monitor the quality of the Patient Management Program (PMP) to ensure the 
program follows evidence-based medicine practices in its development and reassessment All 
education materials to be reviewed and authorized annually. Review and analysis of patient outcomes 
related to formal Patient Management. 
g. To approve selected corrective action plans [URAC PM 2-1 (d)] 
h. To monitor and document action plans for progress in meeting goals [URAC PMI 2-1 (d)] 
(1) The QMC uses a team approach for monitoring progress in meeting quality improvement 
goals.  Members of the QMC are tasked with pulling reports for our measures and action 
plans and presenting data during QMC meetings.  Data is reviewed month over month, 
quarter over quarter as well as annually to determine if goals are being met.  Documentation 
of this review is noted in the minutes of each QMC Meeting.  If goals are not being met the 
QMC discusses appropriate actions to be taken to meet the goal. 
i. To monitor and document the following key performance measures that are quantifiable and used to 
establish acceptable levels of performance, including a baseline and at least an annual re-
measurement 
(1) Complaints  
(2) Consumer Satisfaction  
(3) Provider Satisfaction  
j. Monitor access to services to include types of services offered, geographic area served, medication 
accessibility and availability to consumers. To include monitoring availability of nurse evaluation 
and education when indicated. Also, to include monitoring of staff responsiveness to telephone 
activity and office operating requirements. Implement action plans as necessary to achieve and 
maintain its pharmacy operations’ performance requirements.   
k. Quality and safety of drug inventory and distribution  
l. Implementation of activities designed to improve or correct identified problems, including reduction 
of errors/adverse events/near misses, or meet acceptable levels of performance   
PH.2437_Quality Management Program Description 
4 
(1) Plans to reduce errors or otherwise improve performance are implemented based on 
measurement results.  The quality improvement activities in these plans can include 
corrective action and preventive action processes. 
(2) Evaluate the effectiveness of the QMP annually  
m. When applicable, to receive and incorporate input from participating providers  
3. The QMC will receive the following: 
a. Reports on progress in meeting Quality Improvement Goals  
b. Analyses of consumer complaints and appeals  
c. Analyses of access to services to include phone access, measure performance against types of 
pharmacy services offered, geographic area served and medication accessibility and availability to 
consumers  
d. Quality management audits to verify on-going monitoring of compliance with Customer Service, 
Communication and Disclosure standards 
e. Assessment reports of performance related to correct drug, directions, dosage, quantity, patient, 
labeling to include proper handling and distribution. Assessment of error reporting frequency and 
completeness to include near misses  
f. Analyses of patient satisfaction surveys  
g. Reports on ongoing compliance with URAC & ACHC standards 
h. Reports on objectives and approaches utilized in monitoring and evaluation of Quality Management 
activities  
(1) The objective of our Quality Program is to continuously monitor and improve our 
performance through the selection of performance metrics, as well as discussing quality 
related topics and concerns during QMC meetings.  The approach used in monitoring quality 
activities is a team approach where all data and topics are reviewed and discussed as a group 
during QMC Meetings.  When goals are not being met the QMC will discuss and implement 
appropriate actions to meet goals and objectives. 
i. Tracking and trending of performance measures relevant to the scope of Specialty Pharmacy  
j. Reports on implementation of action plans to improve or correct identified problems  
(1) Action Plans are implemented when a goal is not consistently being met.  The QMC will 
determine when an action plan is appropriate during QMC meetings and will designate a 
member of the QMC to be responsible for the Action Plan and progress monitoring. 
4. Reporting Requirements: 
a. Telephone Performance Monitoring  
(1) The pharmacy has developed mechanisms and processes to monitor, measure, and 
continuously review, at least monthly, all incoming calls. This is to include at least the 
following telephone performance indicators: Average abandonment rate and Average speed 
of answer by a live person.  
(2) On at least a quarterly basis, telephone performance metrics must be reported to the QMC.  
b. Patient Safety Reporting 
(1) On at least a quarterly basis, report aggregate findings, including adverse drug events, quality 
related errors, medication errors and other patient safety related errors, to the QMC.  
(2) On an annual basis the pharmacy manager reviews published safety literature for prevention 
recommendations and best practices and shares with the QMC during one of the quarterly 
meetings.  
c. Pharmacy Operations Reporting  
(1) Operations performance is reported quarterly to QMC  
(2) The pharmacy implements action plans as necessary to achieve and maintain its pharmacy 
operations’ performance requirements.  
d. Quality and Error Management Reporting 
(1) On at least a quarterly basis, report findings in the following areas to the QMC:  
(a) Quality concerns:  
(i) Quality and safety of drug medication inventory and distribution 
(ii) Quality of service 
(iii)  Complaint Reporting   
PH.2437_Quality Management Program Description 
5 
(a) Reporting analysis of the complaints to the quality management committee 
at least on a quarterly basis. This is to include reporting on complaint 
resolution turnaround time. The goal is to respond to 95% of complaints 
within seven days.   
(b) Accuracy errors:  
(i) Proactive risk assessment 
(ii) Tracking of errors 
(iii) Reporting of errors to internal and external entities as appropriate 
(iv) Analysis of error data 
(v) At least annual review of published safety literature for prevention 
recommendations and best practices 
(c) Billing and Coding errors 
(d) Patient record accuracy 
5. Annual QMP Report: 
a. There is a comprehensive, written annual report that describes the quality and performance 
improvement activities, findings and corrective actions that relate to the services provided.  
b. The annual QMP Report will contain, at a minimum, the following items: 
(1) Number of Specialty clients/patients receiving prescriptions 
(2) Number of Specialty prescriptions dispensed 
(3) Number of Specialty prescriptions dispensed per payer source 
(4) Number of Specialty prescriptions dispensed incorrectly: 
(a) Wrong client/patient 
(b) Wrong drug 
(c) Wrong address 
(d) Wrong quantity 
(5) Number of shipping/delivery errors: 
(a) Prescriptions mailed with an incorrect address 
(b) Prescriptions mailed with a correct address, but were not delivered to the correct 
location 
(6) Average delivery time 
c. Number of complaints received and the average resolution time 
d. Call center metrics 
e. Satisfaction survey rates as a percentage of patients served 
f. Senior Clinical Staff Role and Responsibilities [URAC OPIN 3-1 (a-ii, a-iii)] 
(1) The pharmacy manager is the Senior Clinical Staff person. The Senior Clinical Staff person 
is an individual who is responsible for providing guidance to the clinical operational aspects 
of program and provides Quality Management oversight. This individual chairs the QMC 
and is responsible for the oversight of clinical decision-making aspects of the program; 
he/she also has periodic consultation with practitioners in the field. The Senior Clinical Staff 
person is also responsible for ensuring the organization utilizes qualified clinicians who are 
accountable to the organization for decisions affecting consumers. The Senior Clinical Staff 
person is a pharmacist and holds a current, unrestricted clinical license in the state of 
Louisiana. If the license is restricted, the pharmacy ensures the job functions of this 
individual do not violate the restrictions imposed by the state licensure board. The Senior 
Clinical Staff person has experience in direct patient care and possesses the qualifications to 
perform clinical oversight of pharmacy services.  The Senior Clinical Staff person chairs the 
QMC and the development and implementation of all clinical Action Plans. 
6. Quality Management Resources  
a. The pharmacy employs staff and other resources to provide the necessary support to the day-to-day 
operations of the QMP. All staff take part in the execution of the QMP. Additionally, the table below 
indicates staff who are designated to perform specific QMP tasks and coordinate and oversee Quality 
Management activities to help ensure the QMP development and plan are enacted. 
 
  
PH.2437_Quality Management Program Description 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. Improvement Activities and Action Plans [URAC PMI 2-1 (c, d)] 
a. The pharmacy’s QMC identifies areas for improvement from its ongoing monitoring of key 
performance measures. When an opportunity is identified and the QMC determines a formal quality 
management process is warranted, the QMC will develop an action plan. Action plans will address 
opportunities for either error reduction or performance improvement related to its Specialty 
Pharmacy program services.  
F. Quality Management Process Model 
1. The QMC is responsible for selecting, implementing and monitoring the progress of all action plans. The 
QMC utilizes the DMAIC (Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve, Control) process improvement model as 
outlined in the below graph, to manage the action plans and ensure goals are met and maintained.  
a. Action Plan Structure 
(1) If the action plan is clinical in nature, then the pharmacy will involve senior clinical staff 
person in judgments about the use of the clinical quality measures and clinical aspects of 
performance. The QMC is responsible for gathering, documenting, and reporting all of the 
following factors for each selected Action Plans: 
(a) Clearly defined quantifiable measures  
(b) Measurement of baseline performance  
(2) Re-measurement of performance at least annually as compared to the baseline performance  
(3) Creation of specific goals for performance that are an improvement over the baseline 
performance  
(4) Designed and established strategies for performance improvement  
(5) Documented changes or improvements relative to the baseline measurement  
(6) Established projected time frames for achievement of performance improvement goals  
(7) Conduct a barrier analysis if performance goals are not met  
G. Communication of Quality Management Activities 
1. The pharmacy recognizes the need to involve the whole organization in Quality Improvement. In order to 
promote quality throughout the organization, the progress on these action plans as well as other Quality 
Management activities are routinely communicated to all staff through memos, staff meetings, and bulletins. 
Members of the Quality Management Committee and organization staff are provided with regular updates on 
action plan performance and quality program goals.  
2. Customer Satisfaction  
a. Customer Satisfaction is a high priority for the pharmacy; therefore, it conducts ongoing patient 
satisfaction surveys through the use of kiosks and patient interviews. 
H. Clinical Decision and Support Tools  
1. Pharmacy staff members are trained to utilize several decision support tools to perform their daily tasks.  
These resources include: 
a. Pharmacy Dispensing Software 
(1) All staff is trained on the use of pharmacy dispensing software, EMR for patient care, 
customer care, prescription processing and fulfillment and adjudication of electronic claims. 
b. Intranet 
(1) All staff are trained to access the organizational Teamlink Intranet site for pertinent 
department information and policies and procedures. 
c. Reference Materials 
(1) The pharmacy uses Lexicomp as a reference source.  
d. Supervisor/Chain of Command 
Staff Title Dedicated QM 
 Pharmacy Manager 0.25 FTE 
  Patient Assistance Technician 0.25 FTE 
Pharmacist   0.25 FTE 
Total Resources 0.75 FTE  
PH.2437_Quality Management Program Description 
7 
(1) All staff are trained to utilize their supervisors and chain of command when they are unsure 
of how to answer/handle a particular question/situation. 
e. All employees are trained on compliance with regulatory and accreditation requirements including 
the following:  
(1) HIPAA 
(2) URAC and ACHC Accreditation Training as appropriate to job function and including: 
(a) Purpose of quality improvement activities 
(b) Person responsible for coordinating quality improvement activities 
(c) Outcomes resulting from previous performance improvement activities 
(3) Fraud, Waste and Abuse Training 
(4) Conflict of Interest Training 
(5) Confidentiality Training  
(6) Safety testing on equipment used in the work environment 
(7) Emergency/Disaster Training 
(8) Complaints and/or Grievance Procedures 
(9) Infection Control Training 
(10) Cultural Diversity 
(11) Ethics Training 
(12) Sexual Harassment 
(13) Workplace and client/patient safety-including disaster planning 
(14) OSHA (Right to Know Laws) 
(15) Client/Patient Rights and Responsibilities 
I. QMP Implementation [URAC PMI 2-1 (c)] 
1. The pharmacy has implemented a systematic, evidence-based quality improvement process that includes: 
a. The QMC will select performance indicators. 
b. Definitions of performance indicators shall be outlined within the QMPD or within a policy 
and procedure specific to the performance indicator. 
c. See performance indicator grid below. 
d. The QMC shall outline the frequency in which performance indicator data is reported to the 
QMC. 
(a) See performance indicator grid below. 
e. Performance metrics are measured monthly and reported at least quarterly, with the 
exception of Patient Satisfaction and Provider Satisfaction which are measured and reported 
annually. 
a. Measurement of process, errors/adverse events/near misses, satisfaction (of the 
population served), complaints, access, or outcome trends performed using valid and 
accurate measurement methods. 
b. Analysis of process, errors/adverse events/near misses, satisfaction (of the population 
served), complaints, access, or outcome trends to determine if defined performance 
metrics are met. 
c. Implementation of activities designed to improve or correct identified problems, 
including reduction of errors/adverse events/near misses, or meet acceptable levels of 
performance; [URAC PMI 2-1 (d)] 
(1) The QMC shall approve and oversee action plans for any performance 
indicators not meeting goals as well as any other area the QMC identifies as 
needing improvement. 
(2) Plans to reduce errors or otherwise improve performance are implemented 
based on measurement results.  The quality improvement activities in these 
plans can include corrective action and preventive action processes. 
(3) The QMC shall evaluate the effectiveness of action plans on at least a quarterly 
basis. 
(4) Comparisons to baseline prior to the action plans are useful in demonstrating 
progress and identifying the need for further action.  
PH.2437_Quality Management Program Description 
8 
(5) When an action plan is not effective in nature, the QMC will review and revise 
the action plan. 
d. Periodic re-measurement of the level of performance for as long as necessary to ensure 
sustained improvement. 
2. The pharmacy includes data management within the QMC, whereby it: 
a. Benchmarks its own performance; and 
(1) The pharmacy benchmarks against its own performance data by setting goals 
and reviewing data month over month and quarter over quarter on a scorecard 
within the QMC meeting minutes. Data is then reviewed during the annual 
QMC meeting and goals/benchmarks are reviewed, selected and/or updated for 
the following year. [URAC PMI 2-1 (c)] 
(a) Performance data is obtained by measure of errors/incidents/complaints, 
satisfaction, access, or outcome trends referenced as Performance Indicators in 
the grid below. 
(b) Performance measures are analyzed to determine if goals are met. 
(2) Wherever possible, valid comparison data should be used.  For comparison data 
to be valid, the sample size needs to be enough to draw a valid conclusion. 
(3) The pharmacy ensures data integrity for all data prior to being used or presented 
to the QMC. 
(4) Reports are collected prior to each QMC meeting and audited by a QMC 
member who did not pull the report. The auditor has the opportunity to seek 
clarification from the reporter. [URAC PMI 2-1 (a)] 
(5) Th e QMC works closely with any external departments that produce reports, for 
example phone statistics reports, to ensure the reports and any applicable 
parameters are appropriately configured and generating accurate data. [URAC 
PMI 2-1 (a)] 
3. The pharmacy has selected the following metrics: [URAC PMI 1-1 (a)] [URAC PMI 2-1 (c)] 
Goals are approved by the QMC and outlined within QMC meeting minutes. 
Performance 
Indicator 
Description Reporting to 
QMC 
Measured P&P 
Adverse Events All adverse events will be 
tracked and reviewed for 
trends and process 
improvement opportunities. 
Quarterly Monthly PH.2455 
Average 
Abandonment Rate  
The percentage of calls 
offered into a 
communications network or 
telephone system – i.e., 
automatic call distribution 
(ACD) system of a call 
center – that are terminated 
by the persons originating 
the call before answer by a 
staff person 
Quarterly Monthly  PH.2449 
Average Speed of 
Answer 
The average delay in 
seconds that inbound 
telephone calls encounter 
waiting in the telephone 
queue of a call center before 
answered by a staff person. 
Quarterly  Monthly  PH.2449 
Patient Satisfaction  Patient Satisfaction Survey At least Annually At least Annually PH.2432 
Distribution 
Accuracy 
Assesses the percentage of 
prescriptions delivered to the 
wrong recipient. (The 
recipient may be either a 
Quarterly  Monthly PH.2440  
PH.2437_Quality Management Program Description 
9 
patient or a patient’s health 
care provider.) 
Medication 
Dispensing Accuracy 
Assesses the percentage of 
prescriptions that the 
organization dispensed 
accurately.  
Quarterly  Monthly  PH.2445 
Near Misses  All near misses will be 
tracked and reviewed for 
trends and process 
improvement opportunities.  
Quarterly Monthly  PH.2445 
Proportion of Days 
Covered (PDC) 
Adherence Metric based on 
fill data 
Quarterly  Monthly  PH.2465 
Provider Satisfaction Satisfaction of 
Providers/Prescribers will be 
obtained via a survey. 
At least Annually At least Annually PH.2430 
Turn Around Time of 
Complaints and 
Errors 
This measure is to be known 
as Turn Around Time 
(TAT). Data is aggregated 
and trended to ensure: 
(1) Timely response to 
patients’ problems, 
concerns, and complaints; 
(2) Timely response to 
errors, including dispensing 
errors and shipping errors; 
and (3) Timely response to 
provider/prescriber 
problems, concerns and 
complaints.  
Quarterly Monthly  PH.2464 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: PMI 1-1, 2-1, OPIN 3-1 
• ACHC Standards: DRX2-5A, DRX2-7A, DRX2-B, DRX5-5A, DRX6-1A, DRX6-1B, DRX6-1C, DRX6-1D, 
DRX6-E, DRX6-1F, DRX6-1G, DRX6-2A, DRX6-3B, DRX6-3C, DRX6-3D, DRX6-3E, DRX6-3F, DRX6-3G, 
DRX6-3I, DRX6-3J, DRX6-6A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  