 
PH.2444_Environmental Safety 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Environmental Safety 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2444 (10/26/2021) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/29/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2444 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures a safe working environment.  
POLICY: 
OLOLH pharmacies will provide a safe and secure environment for customers, staff, and visitors that includes 
emergency preparedness. Employees will be trained regarding environmental safety to include the office environment, 
fire protection and utilities management. 
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Office & Pharmacy environment: 
1. It is the responsibility of each employee to keep his/her work area clean and free from hazard. 
2. It is the responsibility of each employee to report a hazardous condition found in the workplace. 
3. All work environments will be kept clean and orderly. 
4. All spilled liquids will be cleaned up immediately. 
5. Emergency spill kits are available in the drug storage area. [URAC P-OPS 5-2 (c-ii)] 
a. Employees are trained on the use of the emergency spill kits upon hire and when t here are changes 
in protocols or kits. 
6. Eye w ash stations or eye wash kits are easily accessible and located in the pharmacy. All employees should 
be aware of the location of the eye wash station or kit in their pharmacy.  [URAC P-OPS 5-2 (c-iii)] 
a. Employees are trained on the use of the eye wash kits upon hire and wh en there are changes in 
protocols or kits. 
7. Combustible waste is stored in metal containers. 
8. Toilet and washing facilities are kept clean and sanitary and are complete with suitable cleansing agents 
and paper towels. 
9. All work areas and hallways are adequately lighted. 
10. All aisles are kept clear. 
11. Materials and equipment are stored in such a way as to prevent sharp objects from interfering with the 
walkways. 
12. Floors are clean, dry, and free from protruding nails, splinters, loose boards, or holes. 
13. In the cleaning area, drainage shall be maintained, and surfaces kept appropriately, minimizing slippery 
conditions. 
14. Material piled, stacked, or racked on elevated surfaces is done so in a manner to prevent it from tipping, 
falling, collapsing, rolling, or spreading. 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
 
3/29/2023 1:32 PM 
 
 
PH.2444_Environmental Safety 
2 
15. Buildings have sufficient exits at appropriate locations to permit the prompt escape of occupants in case of 
emergency. 
16. Exits are unobstructed and accessible at all times. Lit exits signs are used and readily visible. 
17. Exits discharge directly to the street or other public open space that provides safe exit to a public way. 
18. Glass exit doors, used for exiting are fully tempered and meet the safety requirements for human impact. 
19. All employees are trained in and know the closest exit from any location in the building and know where to 
meet for accountability in the event of evacuation. (A location has been established for all employees to 
meet). 
20. All stored materials stacked in tiers are stacked, blocked, and limited in height so that they are secure 
against sliding or collapse. 
21. St ora ge areas are kept free of accumulation of materials that constitute hazards from tripping, fire, 
explosion, and pest harborage. Vegetation control is exercised, when necessary. 
22. All sweeping, solid or liquid waste, refuse, and garbage are removed in such a manner as to avoid creating 
a menace to health and as often as necessary to maintain good sanitary conditions. 
B. Fire Protection: 
1. The local fire department is acquainted with the facility, its location, and any specific hazards. 
2. Portable fire extinguishers suitable to the condition and hazards involved are provided and maintained in 
effective operating condition. 
3. Fire extinguishers are mounted where they will be readily accessible and are not obstructed or obscured 
from view. 
4. Fire  e xtinguishers are recharged regularly (yearly) and noted on the unit inspection tag. 
5. Employees are periodically educated in and can demonstrate proper use of a fire extinguisher and know the 
general principles of a fire extinguisher. 
6. Flammable liquids are kept in covered containers or tanks when not in use and located outside or an inside 
storage room or in fire resistant storage cabinets. 
7. Adequate precautions are taken to prevent the ignition of flammable vapors. Sources of ignition include, 
but are not limited to open flames, lighting, smoking, and electrical sparks. 
8. Fire drills are performed annually. 
C. Utilities Management: 
1. OLOLH pharmacies ensures adequate backup systems are in place in the event of power failure. Utilities 
management may include but not be limited to: 
a. Heat i ng and cooling in the office or warehouse 
b. Refrigeration 
c. Water supply 
d. Communication systems including back up of software and all pharmacy systems 
2. OLOLH pharmacies do have an emergency power source that will provide power if normal power is 
interrupted. Power will be supplied to continue illumination of exit route. In the event that backup power 
fails or runs out, OLOLH pharmacies will transport all refrigerated medications to a designated 
refrigerator with emergency backup power located at Perkins Surgical Center which is located w ithin a 
few miles of each pharmacy or to another OLOLH pharmacy that has a power source.  
D. Home Safety: [ACHC Standard DRX7-2B] 
1. OLOLH pharmacies do not provide home health services. Pharmacists are available to provide counseling 
to patients or caregivers on home safety when required or needed. 
2. In the event that in the future OLOLH pharmacies provides home health services, procedures will be 
written to address the following items:  
a. Compliance monitoring measures relating to the client’s/patient’s medication; if applicable 
b. Safety measures relating to oxygen use; if applicable 
c. Client/patient medical equipment safety; if applicable 
d. Basic home safety measures (e.g., household chemicals, throw rugs, furniture layout, cluttered 
stairways, blocked exits, bathroom safety, electrical safety, etc.) 
3. Personnel would receive training on home safety during orientation and at least once annually in the event 
OLOLH pharmacies starts to provide home health services.  
PH.2444_Environmental Safety 
3 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: P-OPS 5-2 
• ACHC Standards: DRX7-2A, DRX7-5B 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 