 
PH.2461_Machine and Equipment Maintenance 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Machine and Equipment Maintenance 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2461 (10/26/2021) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/29/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2461 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that proper maintenance and upkeep is complete on equipment, including equipment used for 
dispensing and labeling medication, in the pharmacy. 
POLICY: [URAC P-OPS 2-5 (a)] 
A. When the pharmacy uses an automated dispensing system, it will adopt the manufacturer’s 
recommended policies on cleaning and maintenance.   All other machinery and equipment are cleaned on 
a routine schedule. Logs are maintained to show when machines have been cleaned and by whom.  The 
pharmacy practices preventive maintenance on the machines and equipment and logs are kept of when 
machines receive such maintenance. Automated equipment and other equipment are randomly tested on 
a regular basis to ensure that they are working correctly.   
B. All maintenance completed on machines and equipment shall be documented and retained. 
Documentation received from the maintenance (including any maintenance performed by a vendor) shall 
be retained.  
C. Calibration is performed on machinery and equipment, as applicable, and consistent with any 
manufacturer guidelines. Any testing or calibration issues found with machines or equipment shall be 
documented as well as the resolution. These records shall be maintained.  
D. All employees responsible for cleaning, testing and calibrating of automated equipment shall receive 
training prior to taking on these responsibilities. Such employee training shall be documented and the 
records of the training maintained.   
E. The pharmacy manager is responsible for overall machine and equipment maintenance. The pharmacy 
manager is responsible for auditing all logs to verify cleaning/calibration/randomized testing has been 
completed consistent with this policy.  
F. The pharmacy manager audits cleaning, calibration and testing logs on a quarterly basis to ensure 
calibration, cleaning and randomized testing is conducted as required.  
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: [URAC P-OPS 2-5 (a)] 
The pharmacy adheres to the following procedures when evaluating and maintaining its equipment, including 
equipment used for dispensing and labeling medication, specifically: 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
 
3/29/2023 1:34 PM 
 
 
PH.2461_Machine and Equipment Maintenance 
2 
  
A. Refrigerators 
1. Are electronically monitored continuously 24/7 and the temperatures are recorded every day. 
2. Has monitored alarms and a pharmacist on call is notified if the temperature exceeds acceptable 
range. 
3. Are on the “backup” generator circuit. 
 
B. Freezers used to store gel/ice packs for shipping 
1. Are electronically monitored continuously 24/7 and the temperatures are recorded every day. 
2. Have built in alarms for temperature issues. 
3. Are on the “backup” generator circuit. 
 
C. Robotics and Medication Dispensing Equipment- KL1 Plus (O’Donovan Pharmacy); KL30 and KL60 
(Midcity Pharmacy)  
1. Each are cleaned, as appropriate, on a regular basis according to manufacturer’s guidelines, but 
no less than monthly. Cleaning is documented on a log with the date and the initials of who 
cleaned it and with the cleaning agent that was used.  
2. The pharmacy follows manufacturer’s guidelines on preventative maintenance (calibration). All 
maintenance records are maintained. 
3. KL1 Plus counters do not require calibration.  
4. The pharmacy conducts random testing on a monthly basis to ensure each machine is counting 
correctly. This testing is noted on a log with when and who completed it. 
5. Logs of cleaning, maintenance, calibration and randomized testing are maintained showing 
when and who performed the cleaning, maintenance, calibration and randomized testing, as 
applicable.  
6. The pharmacy manager audits cleaning, calibration and testing logs on a quarterly basis to 
ensure calibration, cleaning and randomized testing is conducted as required.  
 
D. Counting Trays [URAC P-OPS 2-4 (a)] 
1. Separate counting trays are used for hazardous agents as well as agents with a potential to cause 
allergic reactions or cross-contamination such as uncoated tablets or the like to prevent cross 
contamination. Counting trays are labeled according to what type of agent they are used for.  
2. All Counting trays are cleaned and disinfected after each use. 
3. Cleaning of counting trays is logged twice daily, at the beginning and end of the workday.  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC: DRX4-14F, DRX7-1A, DRX7-12A, DRX7-14A 
• URAC Standards: P-OPS 2-4, P-OPS 2-5 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 