 
PH.2450_Quality & Error Management 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Quality & Error Management 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2450 (03/31/2023) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
06/07/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2450 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that all errors are reported and resolved appropriately.  
POLICY: 
A. Quality Assurance in pharmacy services is essential. The pharmacist is often viewed as the “safety net” in the 
healthcare delivery system, responsible for ensuring that the right patient receives the right drug in the right dose at 
the right time. While pharmacy staff makes every effort to prevent dispensing errors, it is recognized that some 
small number of such errors may occur from time to time.  In order to minimize the risk of orders each new order 
is entered by a technician and reviewed by a pharmacist after order entry. In the event a pharmacist enters the 
order, a second pharmacist will review the order. This helps to ensure that orders are complete and accurate. 
Pharmacy dispensing errors may be serious and have significant adverse effects on treatment outcomes and overall 
health.  
B. In order to minimize the risk of dispensing errors and address the rare occurrence of an actual error, all employees 
must adhere to the following procedures.  
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Patient Identification [ACHC Standard DRX7-21A] 
When speaking with patients, pharmacy personnel will attempt to use three means by which to verify the 
pat
ient's identity.  The first will always be patient name, asking the patient by name to verify identity. 
Additionally, pharmacy personnel will request a date of birth and address.  
B. New and Refill Prescriptions  
1. Verbal orders will be immediately reduced to writing and reviewed for accuracy before they are entered into 
pharmacy software.  A pharmacist will review all of this information to ensure its accuracy and place their 
initials on the written order form to indicate that they have done so. 
2. Should the pharmacist detect an error, the prescription process will stop.  The order will be immediately 
placed in the pharmacy dispensing software error resolution queue and will be reprocessed and resubmitted 
for pharmacist review.  
C. Reported and/or Detected Errors  
1. Should a patient report an error or an employee detect an error, this issue will receive the highest priority level 
until resolved. The pharmacist will immediately take steps to determine why and how this error occurred and 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
6/7/2023 1:28 PM 
 
 
PH.2450_Quality & Error Management 
2 
whether or not other errors may have resulted as well.  Errors that are essentially clerical (such as number of 
tablets dispensed, etc.) may be resolved quickly and usually without further incident.  Errors in which the 
wrong drug or dosage have been dispensed should be given the highest level of priority and investigated by 
the pharmacist.  Employees should be notified of their error and if necessary, the event should be documented 
in their personnel record.  The pharmacist is responsible for evaluating the level of risk, determining need to 
notify patient and mitigating, addressing or rectifying any damages that may have occurred. This may include 
notifying the prescriber of the event and recommending that the patient seek medical attention.  
2. The Pharmacist In Charge is made aware of dispensing errors immediately upon detection and will work with 
pharmacist and technicians to revise practices that might allow further errors to occur. 
3. A complaint form is completed, and the error is documented in the pharmacy complaint log by pharmacies 
listed with NCPDP as specialty pharmacy providers.  Pharmacies not listed as specialty pharmacy providers 
will not maintain a separate complaint log. All pharmacies will submit errors through the health system 
electronic reporting tool (RLDatix). The error is taken through the error resolution process and the manager 
has to do a follow up.  All information on the complaint log is reviewed by the Quality Management 
Committee (QMC) during each quarterly meeting.  During the review and analysis of the complaint log, 
which includes prescription related dispensing errors, the QMC may find an increase in a certain type of error 
and determine that further action needs to be taken to reduce that type of error.  Actions that could be taken 
are Quality Improvement Projects (QIPs) or corrective action plans.  If a QIP is recommended, the QMC will 
take a vote to approve the QIP before it can begin, and this will be documented in the QMC meeting minutes 
4. If a dispensing error or an error of clinical significance, which is an error that results in delays or necessitates 
a change in treatment, is discovered prior to notification of the error from a patient/caregiver or prescriber, a 
pharmacist will contact the patient/caregiver or prescriber to disclose the error within 1 business day. The 
pharmacist will request that the medication dispensed be returned to the pharmacy and the pharmacist or 
pharm tech will process a new order for the patient. If the patient is at risk of missing a dose of medication 
due to the dispensing error, the pharmacy will expedite delivery if possible or find a local pharmacy with the 
medication in stock that will be able to dispense the medication for the patient to ensure that patient does not 
miss a dose. The pharmacy will also reach out to the prescriber, patient and/or caregiver when warranted to 
discuss other potential patient safety events.   
a. Potential patient safety events, such as a contraindication or drug recall, new FDA and/or 
manufacturer requirements, restrictions and/or guidelines, are communicated to patients, prescribers, 
and/or other pharmacies, as appropriate.  A pharmacist will communicate this information within one 
(1) business day by one of the following methods: telephone, email, or direct message within the 
electronic medical record (EMR). [URAC P-OPS 5-3 (a, b)] 
5. If a dispensing error is detected prior to the final check by the pharmacist, this is considered an internal error 
or a “near miss.” 
a. The pharmacist who discovers the near miss will immediately correct the prescription. 
b. Near misses are documented and tracked. 
c. The pharmacist will make the pharmacy manager aware of the near miss. 
d. Education will be provided to the employee who made the error, and the pharmacy manager will 
work with the pharmacists and technicians to revise practices that might allow further errors to occur. 
D. The pharmacy maintains a quality management program that includes, but is not limited to a mechanism to 
identify, address and resolve quality problems related to dispensing and distribution, medication safety, drug 
inventory management, customer service, and clinical pharmacy services. Quality improvement activities include a 
mechanism to report and track adverse events or errors, root cause analysis, trend analysis, and report of findings 
to the Quality Management Committee. The Pharmacy’s quality management program includes identification of 
opportunities for real time, measured improvement in areas of core competencies of dispensing and delivery of 
specialty drugs, including demonstrated ties between findings and implementation of corrective measures as they 
relate to staff orientation and training and policies and procedures.  
E. Summary report of errors and analysis with appropriate follow-up (corrective action if indicated) will be submitted 
to the Quality Management Committee on a quarterly basis which include reports on the following:  
1. Proactive Risk Assessment  
2. Tracking of errors  
3. Reporting of errors to internal and external entities as appropriate  
a. Errors are reported internally to the Quality Management Committee   
PH.2450_Quality & Error Management 
3 
b. Errors can be reported externally if requested by payers.  
c. Analysis of error data  
4. The pharmacy will collaborate with the Pharmacy Benefit Manager to conduct quality management initiatives 
as identified.  
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC Standards: DRX7-21A, DRX6-1A, DRX6-3F, DRX5-18B 
• URAC Standards: P-OPS 5-3 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 