 
1 
PH.2412_Down Time Procedures 
 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Down Time Procedures 
PAGES: 
 2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2412 (03/12/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE:  03/28/2014   
REVISION DATE: 
08/30/2022 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2412 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
To provide patient medication during emergency situations or pharmacy system failure. 
 
POLICY: 
The pharmacy will make every effort to ensure continuity of care for all patients served including transferring 
prescription services to, OLOLH affiliated pharmacies, and/or local specialty pharmacies of choice.  The process will 
be tested minimally every 2 years. [URAC Pharm Core 14 (d)] 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: 
[URAC Pharm Core 14 (a, b, d)] 
Emergency Situations with loss of power: 
1. If the pharmacy is unable to process prescriptions due to loss of power for greater than 1 business day, patients 
requesting prescriptions will be notified and those prescriptions will be transferred by the pharmacist to the 
patient’s pharmacy of choice.   
2. In preparation of impending loss of power due to hurricane or other expected natural disaster, the pharmacy 
will identify those patients with potential to require refills during the expected down time and fill the 
medications in advance of the expected disaster.  Patients will be notified as the prescriptions are filled and 
given advance notice of possible closure to allow the patient time to pick up medications. 
3. If prescriptions cannot be filled due to unavailability of medication, patients will be notified and prescriptions 
transferred to the pharmacy of the patient’s choice. 
4. All pharmacies are equipped with generator backup that have sufficient fuel to last 4 to 5 days, however, in the 
event that power is lost and refrigerator or freezer temperatures fall outside of the required range for over 2 
hours, pharmacy staff will be notified by the refrigerator monitoring system via e-mail and/or text and 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
8/30/2022 9:30 AM 
 
 
2 
PH.2412_Down Time Procedures 
 
manually remove all product, place in coolers, and transport to the alternate OLOL owned pharmacy location. 
[URAC Pharm Core 14 (b)] 
 
Pharmacy System Failure without loss of power  
1. The pharmacy will make every attempt to limit downtime due to system failure through use of a virtual server 
housed at OLOLH. 
2. During occasions when the server is down, the pharmacy will continue to fill all prescriptions in Quality 
Check and store them until the pharmacist can check them when the system is functional. 
3. Patients requesting medication pick up will be notified of delay and asked to return at a later time. 
4. No prescriptions will be processed during this down time.  If patients require immediate assistance, 
prescriptions will be transferred by the pharmacist to a patient’s pharmacy of choice. 
5. If down time exceeds 2 hours, medication dispensing will be allowed for medications awaiting quality check 
on a case by case basis at the pharmacist’s discretion after a manual check of the filled medication has been 
performed and label signed by the licensed pharmacist. The pharmacist that checked the dispensed medication 
must complete quality check through the pharmacy software system when the system is again functional.   
6. Patients may pay cash for the medications dispensed above and must sign the receipt as proof the medication 
was received.  All receipts will be filed and maintained in the pharmacy for no less than 3 years and be readily 
retrievable in the event of an audit. . 
7. No refills will be manually processed during down time unless they met criteria #5 and #6 above. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: PHARM Core 14 
• ACHC Standards: DRX7-4A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by:  
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  