 
PH.2462_Admission Plan 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Admission Plan 
PAGES: 
4 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2462 (03/30/2023) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
06/07/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2462 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. This policy applies to pharmacies listed with NCPDP as specialty pharmacy providers. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines the pharmacy’s admission process.  
POLICY: 
A. There shall be continuity in the care provided by the pharmacy. Timeliness and appropriateness of admission are 
essential in providing services to the patients.  
B. Upon receipt of the prescription, the pharmacy has the capacity to inform patients about available information, 
resources, and instructions on how to receive assistance via telephone or in person. 
DEFINITIONS: 
Auxiliary Personnel: Personnel that support patient and liaison workflows.  This may include the following: 
Engagement Center personnel, Patient Support Center (PSC) personnel, and/or pharmacy technicians. 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Admission Referral  
1. All new patient prescriptions will be directed to liaisons, Pharmacists, or auxiliary personnel. 
2. Patient referrals are accepted primarily from FMOLHS affiliated locations but can be accepted from other 
licensed providers. 
3. All referral information will be documented appropriately.  
B. Admission Mechanism 
1. Upon receiving a patient prescription, the Pharmacist, liaison or other auxiliary personnel will compare the 
patient's care needs with the pharmacy's capabilities to meet those needs 
2. If the evaluation complies with the admission criteria, the patient will be considered admitted and the funding 
process started in order to obtain authorization for medications. If the patient’s needs cannot be met, the 
patient will be referred to another pharmacy, which can meet the patient’s needs.  Pharmacy notifies 
members and physicians within 24 hours of receipt of becoming aware that the prescription will not be 
dispensed. 
C. Admission Acceptance 
1. Each patient, after evaluation against the admission criteria, will be notified of their acceptance with service 
beginning in a timely manner. 
2. After the initial acceptance, the appropriate pharmacy personnel will generate an order which contains the 
patient's name and address, etc., and the reason for request for service.  This order will include a written 
order, prescription labels, drug monographs, a packing slip (if applicable) and other appropriate materials. 
3. The patient will be contacted, and the appropriate pharmacy personnel will explain the pharmacy’s procedure 
regarding services requested. 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
6/7/2023 1:54 PM 
 
 
PH.2462_Admission Plan 
2 
4. The patient will be informed of enrollment in the pharmacy’s Patient Management Program. 
5. The patient will be provided an opportunity to speak with a pharmacist about their prescribed therapy, if 
desired. 
6. The patient, at the time of initial order, shall receive a Welcome Packet. 
7. The packet shall contain at least the following:  
a. “Welcome to the pharmacy” information 
b. Printed Drug Monographs 
c. Supportive Information or other materials as appropriate and available 
8. It is the responsibility of the liaison or auxiliary personnel to adequately explain the information in the packet 
and ensure that the patient has a full understanding of the information. Only a pharmacist will engage in the 
provision of clinical information to patients. These actions will be documented in the pharmacy clinical 
software and dispensing software. 
D. Post Enrollment Patient Information [URAC P-PSC 1-2] 
1. T he pharmacy wil l inform the patients/consumers about available information, resources, and instructions on 
how to receive assistance via Welcome Packet, telephone or in person.  All information is also available upon 
request from patients and prescribers during regular business hours.  Additional information will include as 
applicable: [URAC P-PSC 1-1] 
a. Pharmacy patient access to pharmacy information for patient’s and support services, including: 
(1) Geographic area served  
(2) Instructions on how to access program representatives; [URAC P-PSC 1-1 (a-i)] 
(3) Instructions on how to access a pharmacist and provider by phone and in person, including 
provision of phone numbers and addresses;  
(4) Information and tips to assist in interactions with the organization;  
(5) How to access support from consumer-advocates. The pharmacy staff assists with patient 
advocacy support on a case-by-case basis depending on the patient disease state and 
circumstance; [URAC PM 5-1 (c)] 
(6) Patient’s financial responsibilities including out-of-pocket costs such as deductibles, co-pays, 
and co-insurance;  
(7) Employees have available to them a list of advocacy groups for the disease states serviced. 
(a) If determined a patient would benefit from a support group or if requested, employees are 
able to provide patients and caregivers information on the appropriate group over the phone. 
(8) Patient’s financial responsibilities including out-of-pocket costs such as deductibles, co-pays, 
and co-insurance. [URAC P-PSC 1-1 (b-i)] [URAC P-PSC 1-2 (a-i)] 
(a) Liaisons and/or auxiliary personnel complete benefit investigations and support patients 
with seeking copay assistance to reduce the cost of the medication.  Liaisons and/or auxiliary 
personnel proactively provide patients with their financial responsibility prior to first 
dispense of their medication.  Pharmacy employees, pharmacists, liaisons and/or auxiliary 
personnel are available during regular business hours to answer financial responsibility 
questions from patients and prescribers. 
(b) The liaison, auxiliary personnel, or pharmacy employee will verbally share the network 
status of the pharmacy with the patient or prescriber and provide them with additional 
information on cost differences, as necessary, prior to the patient deciding to fill their 
medication with the pharmacy.  Pharmacy employees, liaisons and/or auxiliary personnel are 
available during regular business hours to answer network status questions from patients and 
prescribers. [URAC P-PSC 1-2 (a-ii)] 
(c) The copayment is documented in the patient management software. 
(d) Liaisons, auxiliary personnel, and pharmacy employees proactively seek financial 
assistance for patients to lower their out-of-pocket cost. 
(9) How to contact patient support services and obtain prescription order status and information 
on delays. [URAC P-PSC 1-1 (a-iii)] [URAC P-PSC 1-2 (a-iii)] 
(a) The liaison, auxiliary personnel, or pharmacy employee will verbally share the order 
status with the patient or prescriber and provide them with additional information as needed.  
Patients and prescribers are informed to call the pharmacy with any questions on the order  
PH.2462_Admission Plan 
3 
status.  Pharmacy employees, liaisons and/or auxiliary personnel are available during regular 
business hours to answer order status questions from patients and prescribers. 
(10) The cash price of the medication, upon request. [URAC P-PSC 1-1 (b-ii)] 
(a) If at any time a patient requests the cash price of a medication, the liaison, auxiliary 
personnel, or pharmacy employee will verbally share the cash price with the patient, which 
can be obtained from the pharmacy operating system. 
(11) How to contact the pharmacy for claims-related information 
(12) Pharmacy product information, including: 
(a) Information on product selection (including how to get medications not available from 
the pharmacy that took the order); Information about a process for refilling prescriptions 
which would otherwise be limited by benefit design in order to ensure access to the types of 
medication drug therapy needed.  
(b) If the prescribed medication is not available at our pharmacy, such as certain limited 
distribution drugs, pharmacy employees will facilitate transferring the prescription to a 
pharmacy with access to the medication.  Pharmacy employees will make outreach to the 
patient to provide the pharmacy name, contact information and reason for the transfer. 
[URAC P-PSC 1-1 (a-iv)] 
(13) I nformation about a process for refilling prescriptions which would otherwise be limited by 
benefit design to ensure access to the types of drug therapy needed. [URAC P-PSC 1-1 (a-ii)] 
(a) In the case of benefit limitations, such as refill-too-soon, vacation overrides, lost 
medication, therapy duplication override, and quantity limits, our organization has designated 
employees to contact the patient's insurance plan to resolve plan limitations.  Patients will be 
contacted by an appropriate pharmacy employee regarding the outcome of plan limitations 
and will refer the patient to their insurance plan in the case that additional information is 
required to process a refill.  Employees will initiate prior authorizations (PA) as necessary 
and will provide updates to PA outcomes via phone. 
(14) Proper order placement to include required submission time. The patient is notified by their 
liaison or auxiliary personnel when they are brought on to service with the pharmacy that the 
pharmacy will contact them 3-7 days prior to the end of the previous month’s treatment to 
ensure all dispensing and billing requirements are completed before the end of the medication 
cycle.  Additional information on refilling prescriptions is available in the Welcome Packet.  
Patients will also receive proactive refill reminder calls.  [URAC P-PSC 1-1 (a-ii)] 
(15) A ccess to medications if an emergency disaster or delay occurs. In this event the patient may be 
transferred to another functioning pharmacy in the area depending on how broad the affected 
area is. [URAC P-PSC 1-1 (a-iv)] [URAC P-PSC 1-1 (a-iii)] 
(a) Patients are provided information regarding order delays via outgoing phone calls made 
by appropriate pharmacy employees. 
(16) How to access order status by contacting the pharmacy directly. [URAC P-PSC 1-1 (a-iii)] 
(17) Information about drug substitutions of prescriptions is provided as needed on a case-by-case 
basis by a licensed professional. 
(18) Transferring prescriptions from one pharmacy service to another. [URAC P-PSC 1-1 (a-iv)] 
b. Pharmacy health and safety information, including: 
(1) Consumers’ rights and responsibilities  
(2) Evidence-based health information and content for common conditions, diagnoses, and the 
treatment diagnostics and interventions are provided in the patient Welcome Packet;  
(a) Patients are provided this information through counseling and clinical initial assessments 
and reassessments performed by pharmacists or registered nurses. 
(3) Instructions on how to handle drug recalls. Patients are instructed on how to handle drug recalls 
by licensed professionals on a case-by-case basis 
(4) Instructions on how to safely dispose of drugs, based on state and federal laws and regulations 
during the enrollment process via the welcome packet [URAC P-PSC 1-2 (a-v)] 
(a) Pharmacy employees, liaisons and/or auxiliary personnel are available during regular 
business hours to answer questions from patients and prescribers on safe disposal techniques.  
Questions will be escalated to a pharmacist if necessary.  
PH.2462_Admission Plan 
4 
(5) Instructions on how to address adverse drug reactions by contacting the pharmacy immediately 
if any adverse reactions or side effects are noticed. Patients are also asked on a routine basis if 
they have experienced any side effects from the medication [URAC P-PSC 1-2 (a-vi)]  
(a) Patients and prescribers can reach a pharmacist by calling the pharmacy 24/7 to receive 
support in the case of an adverse reaction. 
(6) Information about drug substitution protocols 
c. How to report any concerns and/or suspected errors including suspected medication issues to the 
pharmacy, appropriate state agencies, URAC and ACHC. [URAC P-PSC 1-2 (a-iv, a-vii)] 
(1) Patients and prescribers are informed that they can submit a complaint by calling the 
pharmacy.  A pharmacy employee, liaison and/or auxiliary personnel are available during 
regular business hours to resolve and document the concern. 
(2) Patients and prescribers can reach a pharmacist by calling the pharmacy 24/7 to receive 
support in the case of a suspected medication error. 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC Standards: DRX2-1A, DRX2-1B, DRX2-4C, DRX5-12A 
• URAC Standards: P-PSC 1-1, PSC 1-2, PM 5-1 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  