 
PH.2454_Unacceptable Medication 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
 SUBJECT:  
Unacceptable Medications 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2454 (05/16/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE:  02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/30/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2454 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines the handling and removal processes for unacceptable medications. 
POLICY: 
As part of the pharmacy’s consumer safety process, an effective system is in place for handling and removal of 
unacceptable medications in order to prevent harm or adverse patient outcomes. These procedures address the removal 
and disposal of medications that have been recalled, discontinued, expired, been determined to be counterfeit, damaged, 
adulterated, misbranded, contaminated, tempered with or otherwise found to be unacceptable. 
DEFINITIONS: 
Unacceptable mediations are medications deemed not acceptable to dispense and includes the following types of 
medications: recalled, discontinued, expired, damaged; adulterated, unacceptable, misbranded and determined to be 
counterfeits. 
PROCEDURE: [URAC CPE 2-2]  
A. These guidelines categorize all drug recalls into one of three classes, according to the level of hazard involved: 
1.
 Class I: Dangerous or defective products that predictably could cause serious health problems or death. 
Examples include: food found to contain botulinum toxin, food with undeclared allergens, a label mix-up 
on a lifesaving drug, or a defective artificial heart valve.  
a. In the case of a Class I recall patients are notified the same day the pharmacy receives the recall 
notification.  
2. Class II: Products that might cause a temporary health problem, or pose only a slight threat of a serious 
nature. Example: a drug that is under-strength but that is not used to treat life-threatening situations.  
3. Class III: Products that are unlikely to cause any adverse health reaction, but that violate FDA labeling or 
manufacturing laws. Examples include: a minor container defect and lack of English labeling in a retail 
food.  
B. The pharmacist, upon receiving information about an unacceptable medication or supply from manufacturer 
and/or FDA/DEA, will notify appropriate staff and provide instructions for handling the removal of the 
unacceptable medication. With the pharmacist’s signature, this documentation is placed in the “Recall” folder in 
the pharmacy.   
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/30/2023 12:25 PM 
 
 
PH.2454_Unacceptable Medication 
2 
1. In the case of a Class I, II, or III recall, purchase order documentation will be reviewed for recalled lot 
numbers.  
2. Unacceptable pharmacy stock will be pulled from the stock levels and segregated into the Quarantined 
Drug area to include medications that are in the process of being shipped or prior to shipping. The 
Pharmacist In Charge (PIC) is responsible for removing unacceptable drugs from the inventory.  
3. The PIC will be responsible for the appropriate disposal of medications that have recalled, discontinued, 
expired, been determined to be counterfeit, damaged, adulterated, misbranded, contaminated, tempered 
with or otherwise found to be unacceptable will be performed through a reverse distributer.  
4. Dispensed unacceptable product will be audited against patient records and patients will be notified.  
5. In the event of patient-level recalls, pharmacy personnel will assist in communicating recalls to the 
prescribers of individual patients whose medications have been affected by the recall(s).  
6. The pharmacy will reclaim any unused unacceptable pharmaceuticals from patients, taking caution not to 
alarm any patients. However, communication must be deliberate to ensure the need to return or discard the 
product.  
7. In the case of recalls, as well as in other cases where a patient needs to dispose of unacceptable unused 
medication, a pharmacist or pharmacy technician will advise the patient to:  
a. Remove the medication from the prescription container as practical  
b. Mix the unused medication with an inert and undesirable substance like kitty litter or unused coffee 
grounds  
c. Place the resulting mixture in a zippered-lock plastic bag, sealed coffee can or similar container  
d. Place the sealed container in a sealed trash bag for garbage pick-up  
e. When the unused medication is in an injection device, the pharmacist or pharmacy technician will 
advise the patient to dispose of the “sharp” item in an approved sharps container and offer to provide 
one at no charge should the patient not have one. The pharmacist or pharmacy technician will advise 
the patient as to how to seal the sharps container, place it in a sealed trash bag for garbage pick-up  
f. NOTE: Disposal of needles, syringes and materials contaminated with body fluids shall be done so 
properly in a sharps container. Staff will inform patients to go to http://www.safeneedledisposal.org/ 
to find a location near them to dispose of sharps containers.  
8. If a patient-level recall drug or any medication deemed unacceptable is in route, a pharmacist or pharmacy 
technician will contact the patient by phone, email or other expeditious method in an effort to prevent their 
use of the unacceptable medication. If unable to reach the patient, they will notify the patient’s prescriber 
by phone, fax or other expeditious means. If the medication was sent to the prescriber, the prescriber will 
be noticed first.  
9. Written reports of all activities must be completed and filed in the “Recall” folder along with the initial 
document.  The pharmacy manager will also be apprised of all patient-level recall activities and a 
summary analysis will be reported to the Quality Management Committee (QMC). 
a. Records are maintained to identify each patient who has received recalled medications or products. 
Documentation includes, but is not limited to: 
(1) The manufacturer of each patient’s medication 
(2) Lot numbers 
(3) Expiration dates 
(4) Serial numbers used to track equipment 
10. Disposal of Unacceptable Drugs  
a. The pharmacist notifies and provides direction to staff members through announcement or staff 
meeting on how to handle the removal or disposal of medications that have been discontinued, 
expired, damaged, contaminated, unacceptable and/or determined to be counterfeit if different than 
the current process which is placing medications that have been discontinued, expired, damaged,  
PH.2454_Unacceptable Medication 
3 
contaminated, unacceptable and/or determined to be counterfeit on in the Quarantined Drug area. 
These medications are removed from inventory and disposed of Pharmacy follows local, state and 
federal guidelines.  
11. Defective Product 
a. The manufacturer and/or distributor will be notified of defective products. 
12. Employees are trained on how to identify counterfeit drugs.  Training is documented. 
13. The Pharmacy reviews notices from wholesalers, manufacturers and news sources and promptly acts upon 
information regarding counterfeit drugs. Pharmacy reviews on-hand inventory in such cases to identify 
potentially counterfeit products. Pharmacy provides training to staff members on how to identify signs of 
counterfeit drugs. These signs include unanticipated side effects and changes in packaging, labeling, color, 
taste, and pill shape. Pharmacy uses the National Association of Board of Pharmacies for materials to train 
employees. 
(http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ResourcesForYou/Consumers/BuyingUsingMedicineSafely/CounterfeitMedici
ne/default.htm) When a staff member identifies counterfeit drugs or suspicious drugs, they are to 
immediately notify their supervisor and the product is to be removed from inventory while it is 
investigated. Pharmacy removes suspicious products from inventory and returns to wholesaler, 
manufacturer or properly destroys removed inventory.  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC Standards: DRX5-5G, DRX7-7A, DRX7-9A  
• URAC Standards: CPE 2-2 
• FMOLHS Policy ADMIN/001 – Good Distribution Policy  
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  