 
PH.2411_Prescription Pricing & Financial Practices 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Prescription Pricing & Financial Practices 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2411 (06/30/2016) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 03/26/2015 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/12/2020 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2411 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
To establish standard pricing guidelines and financial practices in the pharmacy. 
POLICY: 
The pharmacy will charge for prescriptions based on contracted agreements and in accordance with the mission of the 
organization. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
AWP – average wholesale price.  
Cost – actual cost of drug incurred by pharmacy. 
Fee – additional fees, professional/administrative, included in the price of a prescription. 
Discount – reduction, usually a percent, reduced from the price of the prescription. 
Usual and customary price (U&C) – the price charged to patients not meeting criteria for other discounts. 
Specialty Drugs – drugs approved by FDA for treatment of complex diseases, requiring special 
storage/handling/administration, extensive patient education, and other conditions which set them apart from other drugs 
readily available through retail pharmacies. 
Third-Party Payers – any third-party participating in an arrangement with the pharmacy including, but not limited to, 
private insurance or Medicaid such that the third-party contributes to the cost of the care provided to the patient. 
Medication Therapy Management (MTM) Services – services provided by pharmacists including but not limited to 
medication therapy review, assessment, and plan of action. 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
3/12/2020 2:29 PM 
 
 
PH.2411_Prescription Pricing & Financial Practices 
2 
PROCEDURE: 
Prescription Pricing 
1. The pharmacy shall follow pricing as determined by the manager based on drug cost and contractual agreements. 
2. Additional discounts may be applied to specific formulary drugs on a case by case basis as determined by 
leadership and medical staff in efforts to support our mission of assisting those most in need. Drugs included in 
additional discount programs will be marked as such in the pharmacy dispensing software. 
3. Specialty drugs are excluded from any discount  
4. Current pricing is available for reference by personnel responsible for conveying financial information to 
patients.  
5. Personnel responsible for conveying charges to patients are trained on the process.  
 
Financial Practices 
1. The pharmacy implements financial practices that ensure accurate accounting and billing such as: 
a. Receipt and tracking of revenue 
b. Billing of clients/patients and third-party payors 
c. Notifying the client/patient of changes in reimbursement from third-party payors  
d. Collection of accounts 
e. Reconciling of accounts  
f. Financial hardship, if applicable 
g. Assignment of revenue to the appropriate program 
h. Retaining of financial records per applicable laws and regulations 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC Standards: DRX3-2A, DRX3-4A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 