 
PH.2429_Organization Framework 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Organization Framework 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2429 (03/22/2023) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE:  02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
11/25/2025 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2429 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines the organization framework of the program, the patient population served, and the organizational 
oversight and reporting requirements of the program. 
POLICY: 
The pharmacy has a clearly defined mission statement and a vision for how it provides services to fulfill its   
mission defined in PH-01-09.   
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: 
A. The Pharmacy services patients in the state of Louisiana.  
B. The Pharmacy specialty services include but are not limited to the following disease states:  
1. Viral Hepatitis 
2. Oncology (Oral) 
3. HIV/AIDS 
4. Rheumatological Inflammatory Disorders 
5. Osteoporosis  
6. Growth Hormone Disorders 
7. Respiratory Conditions 
8. Gastrointestinal Inflammatory Conditions 
9. Dermatological Conditions 
10. Multiple Sclerosis 
C. Services Provided:  
1. Dispensing of Medications  
2. Claims Processing  
3. Prior Authorization Assistant 
4. Copay Assistant  
5. Patient Counseling and Education 
6. Patient Management Program at specialty pharmacy locations 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
 
11/25/2024 4:31 PM 
 
 
PH.2429_Organization Framework 
2 
D. Patients are able to contact the pharmacy by telephone as well as in person. Medications are able to be 
picked up at the pharmacy and shipped locally if requested.   
E. The Pharmacy is wholly owned by OLOLH.  
F. The Pharmacy does not conduct any business functions offshore or outsource any functions outside the 
United States.  
G. The Pharmacy has the following books of business:  
1. Commercial  
2. Medicare 
3. Medicaid  
4. Self-Funded 
H. The Pharmacy has a defined reporting structure which is outlined on the Organization Chart.  
1. The Pharmacy has designated the Pharmacy Manager as the Senior Clinical Staff Person. 
2. The Pharmacy Manager reports performance metrics, PMP data, regulatory updates and 
corrective action plans when necessary to the Quality Management Committee (QMC). 
3. The QMC will report to the Senior Director of Retail Pharmacy. 
I. The Senior Director of Retail Pharmacy is responsible for the oversight of OLOLH owned pharmacies 
and reports to the Senior Director of Pharmacy who acts as a liaison between the pharmacy and the 
governing body. 
J. The Pharmacy Manager, who reports to the Director of Retail Pharmacy is the individual who is 
designated as responsible for the overall operation and services of the pharmacy. The Pharmacy 
Manager organizes and directs the pharmacy’s ongoing functions; employs qualified personnel and 
ensures adequate personnel education and evaluations; ensures the accuracy of public information 
materials and activities; and implements an effective budgeting and accounting system. [ACHC 
Standard DRX1-4A] 
K. The Pharmacist in Charge (PIC) is the qualified person that is authorized to act in the absence of the 
Pharmacy Manager. The duties that the individual assumes during the absence of the Pharmacy Manager 
are written into the job description, policies and procedures and included in the orientation of this 
individual.  
L. External reporting is provided upon request to the Board of Pharmacy, accrediting bodies, and payers. 
Requested materials may include but are not limited to PMP outcome data, clinical interventions, 
medications errors and adverse events.  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Cross References 
o Organization Chart 
o Job Descriptions 
• URAC Standards: N/A 
• ACHC Standards: DRX1-3A, DRX1-4A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. 