 
PH.2447_Safety Program Education 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Safety Program Education 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2447 (10/26/2021) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/27/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2447 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures the pharmacy provides appropriate safety education to patients and staff 
POLICY: 
The pharmacy shall have a program designed to educate appropriate staff and patients/consumers in safety measures in 
the home to minimize hazards related to the care, and patient’s use of specialty drugs or service provided. 
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: 
A. The pharmacy shall be responsible for the safety program (through direct supervision or delegation) 
B. The pharmacy shall: 
1. Oversee safety-related training; 
2. Maintain copies of all safety-related records, including training, accidents, injuries; 
3. Perform periodic inspections of the company observing for safety hazards; 
4. Be responsible for the reporting of any adverse events; 
5. Conduct environmental care rounds of the work area at least annually. 
C. Personnel operating a company vehicle shall receive initial and ongoing safety training.  
D. The pharmacy shall provide appropriate written and/or verbal safety instructions, relative to the service provided to 
the patient/consumer.  
E. Potential suicide calls or medical emergency: [URAC CPE 2-2] 
1. If an employee is speaking to a patient/caregiver who is threatening suicide or other harm to themselves 
or others, or is having a medical emergency, the employee will keep the patient/caregiver on the phone 
and alert to another employee for assistance in calling 911. 
2. During the time that the employee has the caller on the line, the employee should remain calm and obtain 
as much information about the caller so it can be provided to the co-worker for notification to 911. 
3. At no time after the call is received from a suicidal caller, will the employee answering the phone hang-
up, transfer the call or put the caller on hold. 
4. The employee who has answered the call will remain on the line until confirmation has been received that 
emergency personnel are on the scene. 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/27/2023 12:46 PM 
 
 
PH.2447_Safety Program Education 
2 
F. The pharmacy shall utilize information obtained from these safety programs as potential  indicators to monitor in 
the Performance Improvement Plan. 
                  
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
 STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
ACHC Standard: DRX5-5A 
URAC Standards: CPE 2-2 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 