 
PH.2465_Patient Management Program Description 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Patient Management Program Description 
PAGES: 
12 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2465 (11/30/2021) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/31/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2465 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies.   
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines the patient management program at the pharmacy.  This policy applies to pharmacies listed with 
NCPDP as specialty pharmacy providers. 
POLICY: 
The pharmacy has a defined Pati ent Management Program (PMP) for its specialty pharmacy patient population that 
implements services to meet the needs of individual patients.  The goals of the pharmacy’s PMP are to engage patients to 
help educate, coordinate care and ensure patients receive specialty medication without significant delays.  The objectives 
of the pharmacy’s PMP are to make care more accessible and affordable, attract & retain more patients, and optimize 
patient care.  [URAC PM 1-1 (a-ii)] 
DEFINITIONS: 
1. Patient Management Program (PMP) is a collaborative process that assesses, plans, implements, coordinates, 
monitors, and/or evaluates options and/or services to meet a patient’s health needs through communication and 
available resources to promote quality, cost-effective outcomes. Patient management may include the patient 
and/or the care giver, agent or representative authorized to act on the patient’s behalf. 
2. Specialty Medication (prescription) – medications that require complex storage, handling, or administration, are 
used to treat rare or complex disease states, or have a high cost to dispense.  
3. Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) - a company that administers the drug benefit program for an employer or 
health plan. 
4. Proportion of days covered (PDC) – the percent of days in a given period where a patient was compliant 
(covered) with medication calculated as #days in “covered” period / # of days in period X100. 
5. Auxiliary personnel: Personnel that supports patient and liaison workflows.  This may include the following: 
Engagement Center personnel, Patient Support Center (PSC) personnel, and/or pharmacy technicians. 
6. Clinician: The term clinician describes the pharmacists and registered nurses who provide care to patients as part 
of the Patient Management Program. 
7. QMC: Quality Management Committee 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Scope of Services and Patient Management Documentation 
1. Patient management documentation is located in the patient records section of the pharmacy software and 
patient management software. [URAC PM 2-3 (a)] 
2. The PMP provides services to all patients receiving a specialty prescription. [URAC PM 2-2 (a)] 
a. The PMP excludes services to patients receiving healthcare provider administered (HCPA) 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/31/2023 1:13 PM 
 
 
PH.2465_Patient Management Program Description 
2 
medications unless required by the drug manufacturer or payor. 
b. The PMP excludes services to patients who are hospitalized, incarcerated, or residing in a skilled 
nursing facility (SNF).  Care will be coordinated with clinical employees at the facility. 
c. The PMP excludes services to patients receiving retail and targeted retail medications. 
d. The PMP excludes services to animals receiving specialty prescriptions. 
3. The PMP actively facilitates participation by all patients with prescriptions for specialty medications. 
[URAC PM 2-2 (b)] 
a. Patients are made aware of the PMP when they speak to their liaison or auxiliary personnel.  The 
term auxiliary personnel describe personnel that provides support as part of the PMP and may 
include the following: Engagement Center personnel, Patient Support Center (PSC) personnel, 
patient assistance technician, and/or pharmacy technicians. 
(1) The benefits of the program are explained to the patient at their initial meeting/conversation 
which include: 
(a) 24-hour access to a pharmacist for consultation 
(b) Personalized refill reminder calls 
(c) Clinical interventions by the pharmacist if necessary 
(d) Adherence monitoring 
(i) Liaisons or auxiliary personnel will document the number of doses remaining for 
patients monthly or as appropriate for their medication refill schedule.  If the 
patient is non-adherent the clinician will be notified by triggering an intervention 
in the PMP software.  The clinician will make outreach to the prescriber as 
needed.  The term clinician is used to describe the pharmacists and registered 
nurses who provide care to patients as part of the PMP. 
4. The pharmacy documents when patients opt out of the PMP including the reason in the patient management 
software. [URAC PM 2-2 (c)] 
5. The PMP is provided in accordance with third party payor programs. 
a. The pharmacy provides communication in the electronic medical record (EMR), via third party 
benefits billed through pharmacy operating system (POS) and will coordinate with patients regarding 
external entities that would need to be notified and get authorization to coordinate with those 
authorized entities. 
B. Structure and Oversight 
1. The PMP is developed under the supervision of a clinical oversight body. [URAC PM 2-1 (a)] 
a. The clinical oversight body is the QMC of the pharmacy. 
2. The PMP follows specific drug and/or disease state clinical processes and workflows and is overseen by the 
senior clinical pharmacist. [URAC PM 2-1 (b-i)] 
a. The QMC is composed of licensed pharmacists and one of whom is the pharmacy manager who is 
the Senior Clinical Pharmacist as well as other specialty pharmacy stakeholders. 
3. The PMP is implemented in a way that ensures that clinical services are provided by a pharmacist, registered 
nurse, or other qualified health professional. [URAC PM 2-1 (b-ii)] 
a. T he pharmacy’s PMP is overseen by the senior clinical staff person who is the pharmacy manager  
and is delivered by pharmacists, registered nurses, and/or other qualified health care professionals 
with experience and expertise in patient management. [URAC PM 2-1 (b-i)] 
b. While the pharmacy encourages, promotes, and facilitates direct communication between employees 
and patients, only clinicians will engage in the provision of clinical information to patients.  
Employees that provide non-clinical support will frequently provide valuable information to patients 
that may include, but is not limited to insurance coverage, co-payments, financial assistance, 
shipment and delivery, advance refill planning, and when needed, triage calls to a clinician. 
4. Offers services that are specific to each drug and/or disease state based on medical or scientific evidence 
and/or demonstrated clinical practice guidelines/protocols. [URAC PM 1-1 (a-i)] 
a. The information utilized in the PMP is derived from manufacturers’ FDA approved prescribing 
information and evidence-based medicine sources.  The pharmacy uses Lexicomp as a clinical 
resource and the clinical practice guidelines in the patient management software.  Clinical guidelines 
are used as applicable.  All clinical conversations occur between clinicians and patients (except in 
those cases where patients approve of conversation with a family member or caregiver) and/or  
PH.2465_Patient Management Program Description 
3 
patients’ healthcare providers.  Clinical interventions are consistent with, and supported by, the 
current medical or scientific evidence and/or clinical practice guidelines/protocols.  Clinical practice 
guidelines and clinical resources are reviewed by the organization’s senior clinical officer and 
approved by the QMC annually. [URAC PM 7-1] 
5. The QMC reviews and updates the following at least annually or as needed throughout the year: [URAC PM 
2-1 (c)] 
a. Services offered; [URAC PM 2-1 (c)] 
(1) During the annual PMP review the QMC evaluates a list of current services provided by the 
specialty pharmacy program.  The QMC ensures the list is accurate.  The QMC members have 
an opportunity to provide feedback and recommendations on services that could be added in 
the future. 
b. Clinical protocols and program modules based on drug and disease state established using clinical 
guidelines; [URAC PM 2-1 (b)] [URAC PM 2-1 (c)] 
(1) During the annual PMP review the QMC reviews the clinical map to ensure it meets current 
clinical guidelines as well as identified best practices.  The clinical map provides details on the 
disease specific protocols, including recommended assessment cadence and medication 
specific templates utilized by the clinicians.  The QMC members have an opportunity to 
provide feedback and recommendations on best practices.  The QMC also reviews and 
approves the specialty drug list. 
c. The escalation process based on clinical information gathered by non-clinician or system; [URAC 
PM 2-1 (b-iii)] [URAC PM 2-1 (c)] 
(1) During the annual PMP review the QMC reviews the below escalation process to ensure its 
accuracy and approves the process.  The QMC members have an opportunity to provide 
recommendations on improvements to the process. 
(a) When the liaison or auxiliary personnel discovers clinical information that needs to be 
escalated to a clinician, the liaison or auxiliary personnel triggers an intervention to the 
clinician.  Examples of clinical information that would need to be escalated to a 
clinician include, but are not limited to, side effects, adverse events, new medication, 
new allergy, new comorbidity, non-adherence, etc. 
(b) Once an intervention request is received by the clinical team, a clinician will review the 
patient’s profile in the PMP software.  The PMP software allows for clinical oversight 
by allowing clinicians to view non-clinician activities/assessments as well as past 
clinical activities/assessments.  After this review, the clinician contacts the patient and 
the prescriber if necessary.  Outcomes of all interventions are documented within the 
patient profile in the PMP software. 
(c) Clinicians review escalation processes. 
d. Clinical resources used within the program: [URAC PM 2-1 (c)] 
(1) During the annual PMP review the QMC reviews the clinical resources utilized.  The QMC 
members review the list to ensure its accuracy and then review and approve the use of the 
materials.  The QMC members have an opportunity to provide recommendations on additional 
resources they would like to see used, if applicable. 
e. Educational materials: [URAC PM 2-1 (c)] 
(1) During the annual PMP review the QMC reviews the educational resources provided to 
patients.  The QMC members review the list to ensure its accuracy and then review and 
approve the use of the materials.  The QMC members have an opportunity to provide 
recommendations on additional educational items they would like to see provided to patients, 
if applicable. 
C. Patient Management Program Rights and Responsibilities 
1. Welcome Packet will be given to all patients which will include information on the PMP, Patient Bill of 
Rights and Responsibilities, and Notice of Privacy Practices.  The Welcome Packet will also include printed 
drug monographs, packing slip (medication expense statement), and other supportive information (i.e., 
disease information) as appropriate and available.  The receipt of the Welcome Packet is documented in the 
PMP software.  
PH.2465_Patient Management Program Description 
4 
a. The rights and responsibilities of participating in the PMP are shared with the patient with the first 
dispense of the medication via the Welcome Packet, which includes: 
(1) The right to have personal health information only in accordance with state and federal law. 
[URAC PM 3-1 (a-i)] 
(2) Th e right to identify the program’s employees, including their job title, and to speak with an 
employee’s supervisor if requested. [URAC PM 3-1 (a-ii)] 
(3) The right to speak to a health professional. [URAC PM 3-1 (a-iii)] 
(4) The right to receive information about the PMP. [URAC PM 3-1 (a-iv)] 
(5) The right to decline participation, or disenroll, at any point in time. [URAC PM 3-1 (a-v)] 
b. Th e responsibility to give accurate clinical and contact information and to notification when there is a 
change. [URAC PM 3-1 (b-i)] 
c. The responsibility to notify the treating prescriber of their participation in the PMP. [URAC PM 3-1 
(b-ii)] 
D. Clinical Assessments 
1. Onboarding 
a. An onboarding patient assessment is conducted for each patient receiving a specialty prescription.  
The onboarding assessment is completed prior to dispensing of the medication.  The patient’s chart 
and medical history is reviewed to determine if therapy prescribed is appropriate. 
b. The onboarding assessment is completed by a clinician and determines appropriateness of therapy 
given the patient’s: 
(1) Diagnosis [URAC PM 4-1 (a-i)] 
(a) The clinician reviews the prescribed medication therapy to ensure that it is consistent 
with the provided diagnosis and treatment guidelines according to FDA-approved 
prescribing information and other available consensus guidelines. 
(2) Medication List [URAC PM 4-1 (a-ii)] 
(a) The clinician reviews the patient’s full medication list (including over the counter 
(OTC) and herbal medications) in the EMR.  Drug-drug interactions, as well as any 
actions taken, are documented in the PMP software. 
(3) Comorbidities [URAC PM 4-1 (a-iii)] 
(a) The clinician reviews the patient’s full list of comorbidities in the EMR, and any 
concerns or actions taken (i.e., prescriber intervention) are documented in the PMP 
software. 
(4) Allergies [URAC PM 4-1 (a-iv)] 
(a) The clinician reviews the patient’s allergy information in the EMR to check for 
contraindications. 
(5) Medical history [URAC PM 4-1 (a-v)] 
(a) The clinician reviews the patient’s medical history in the EMR. 
(6) Ability to self-administer medication. [URAC PM 4-1 (a-vi)] 
(7) Therapeutic goals based on possible outcomes of therapy [URAC PM 4-1 (a-vii)] 
(a) The clinician reviews the patient’s EMR to evaluate the patient’s past medical visits 
with the specialty prescriber and selects individual therapeutic goals for the patient.  The 
clinician reviews the goals of therapy upon speaking with the patient to ensure patient is 
agreeable. 
c. If the patient’s prescriber is outside of our health system, we will obtain onboarding information 
directly from the patient upon speaking with them. 
d. Any issues identified by a clinician during the onboarding assessment are communicated to the 
prescriber for further guidance and documented as a clinical intervention within the PMP software.  
Patients will be notified of any impact this has to therapy, therapy start date, and/or delivery of their 
medication.   
2. Initial Assessment 
a. An initial patient assessment is conducted for each patient receiving a specialty medication.  A 
clinician will attempt to counsel the patient prior to their therapy start date.  Workflow protocols 
dictate that outreach attempts to contact the patient start one (1) day prior to the scheduled delivery  
PH.2465_Patient Management Program Description 
5 
date.  When turnaround time is short, a clinician will begin outreach as soon as the initial delivery of 
the medication is coordinated with the patient and the clinician is notified. [URAC PM 5-1 (a)] 
b. The initial assessment is completed by a clinician who provides education and reevaluates the 
appropriateness of therapy. 
c. Patient and caregiver education requirements 
(1) Are provided prior to the first use of medication and includes: 
(a) Expectations and possible outcomes of therapy [URAC PM 5-1 (a-i)] 
(b) Proper use [URAC PM 5-1 (a-ii)] 
(c) Duration of therapy [URAC PM 5-1 (a-ii)] 
(d) Timely administration or intake [URAC PM 5-1 (a-ii)] 
(e) Side effects, including prevention, minimization, and management [URAC PM 5-1 (a-
iii)] 
(f) Missed dose management [URAC PM 5-1 (a-iv)] 
(g) Contraindications [URAC PM 5-1 (a-v)] 
(h) Safety precautions [URAC PM 5-1 (a-v)] 
(i) W hen to report new or changed medications, including prescribed and over- the-counter 
medications and supplements [URAC PM 5-1 (a-vii)] 
(j) Disposal [URAC PM 5-1 (a-vi)] 
(k) Safe handling [URAC PM 5-1 (a-vi)] 
(l) Storage [URAC PM 5-1 (a-vi)] 
(m) Vaccinations, as appropriate [URAC PM 5-1 (a-viii)] 
(n) Rotation of medication inventory such that the oldest product is used first, and 
examination of expiration dates to avoid utilization of expired product. 
(2) Is provided as needed and upon request from the patient and/or caregiver, physician, or other 
health care provider [URAC PM 5-1 (b)] 
(a) Needs are reevaluated during reassessments. 
(3) The clinician utilizes clinical and educational resources, decision support tools, and other 
materials to support patient-shared decision-making when necessary. Examples of these 
resources are as follows: [URAC PM 5-1 (c)] 
(a) LexiComp 
(b) Clinical Map 
(c) Clinical guidelines 
(d) Package inserts 
(e) Primary literature 
(4) During initial and reassessments patients may also be guided to manufacturer online 
educational resources/videos, referred to Patient Advocate Groups either through the 
manufacturer or within their community, and/or provided additional patient targeted resources. 
[URAC PM 5-1 (c)] 
(5) Engaging patients in shared decision-making between patients and clinicians 
(a) The pharmacy provides relevant, ongoing health improvement education via verbal 
counseling with a clinician and through written materials.  All education and counseling 
information is documented in detail in the pharmacy operating system including any 
educational resources provided to individual patients. 
(i) If patients decide not to participate in the PMP, this will be documented in the 
PMP Software. 
(ii) Clinicians will consult clinic notes and labs in the EMR to ensure medications 
taken by the patient are appropriate. 
(b) Includes community and financial resources, support, and advocacy groups when 
necessary [URAC PM 5-1 (c)] 
(i) As  needed, the pharmacy provides patients wi th information on community 
resources and assistance such as location of support groups for their disease states. 
This information is provided in the Welcome Packet. [URAC PM 5-1 (c)] 
(a) Liaisons and/or auxiliary personnel proactively look for copay assistance 
and funding for patients to ensure all patients can afford their medication.   
PH.2465_Patient Management Program Description 
6 
The liaison and/or auxiliary personnel provides information to the patient 
on available financial assistance and provides the patient with the out-of-
pocket cost. [URAC PM 5-1 (c)] 
3. Clinical Reassessments  
a. The pharmacy’s PMP periodically reassesses participating patients to ensure the effectiveness and 
safety of medications used.  The reassessment process is based on disease state, medication and 
patient specific factors.  Reassessments are incorporated into the clinical protocols and program 
modules are evidence based. 
b. A periodic reassessment is conducted no more than 12 months from the previous assessment to 
determine if the medication remains appropriate given the patient’s: [URAC PM 4-2 (a)] 
(1) Current medication list [URAC PM 4-2 (a-i)] 
(a) T he pharmacy employees conduct a medication reconciliation by asking patients during 
initial contact for a list of prescription medications, OTCs and herbals and then confirms 
it matches the list in the EMR.  Patients are asked during refill and clinical assessments 
if there have been any changes. [URAC PM 4-2 (a-i)] 
(b) When the pharmacy employees are informed of a new medication, allergy, or disease 
state by the patient, they will notify the clinician by triggering a clinical intervention in 
the PMP software. 
(c) The clinician will then review the added information, evaluate appropriately, and 
document in the PMP software. 
(i) The clinician will contact the patient regarding any new allergies, drug-drug 
interactions, or disease interactions if they deem necessary from their review. 
(ii) The clinician will contact the prescriber regarding any new allergies, drug-drug, or 
disease interactions if they deem necessary from their review. 
(2) Experience of adverse reactions to the medication [URAC PM 4-2 (a-ii)] 
(a) Patients are asked if they have experienced any adverse reactions during refill calls and 
clinical assessments. 
(b) When a clinician becomes aware of an adverse drug event that might compromise the 
health of a patient or affect their treatment outcomes, the clinician will instruct the 
patient to contact their prescriber. The clinician may also elect to reach out to the 
patient’s prescriber. 
(3) Adherence to therapy [URAC PM 4-2 (a-iii)] [URAC P-OPS 4-1 (a, b)] 
(a) The pharmacy employees monitor adherence in several ways: 
(i) Proportion of Days Covered (PDC) data from the POS which assess the 
percentage of specialty patients covered by prescription claims for the same drug 
or for another drug in the same therapeutic class, within a specified calendar 
range. 
(ii) Recording fill dates in the PMP software 
(iii) Requesting dose count from patients upon refill 
(b) When a patient is deemed to be non-adherent, the pharmacy clinicians will encourage 
adherence and offer guidance on strategies that may improve adherence.  This may 
include, but is not limited to, providing pill boxes, suggesting phone apps that prompt 
dose administration, education materials, etc.  Should a clinician determine that missed 
medication doses compromise the health or potential treatment outcome of a patient, 
they will communicate the refill history to the prescriber. [URAC PM 5-1 (a, b, c)] 
[URAC PM 6-1 (a)] [URAC PM 4-3 (a)] 
(4) P rogress towards achieving the patient’s therapeutic goals based on outcomes of therapy 
[URAC PM 4-2 (a-iv)] 
(a) During each reassessment, patients are asked to rate their quality of life on a scale of 1 
to 10 in order to help determine if the patient is achieving therapeutic benefits from the 
medications.  The patient’s response is documented and if they indicate they feel the 
medication is not working for them, an intervention is triggered to the clinicians to 
review and provide counseling as applicable.  All counseling is documented and if  
PH.2465_Patient Management Program Description 
7 
deemed necessary the clinician contacts the prescriber or refers the patient to contact 
their prescriber. [URAC PM 4-2 (a-iv)] 
c. Based upon the results of the reassessment process, the pharmacy may involve another program or 
healthcare provider (i.e. patient’s provider/prescriber of the medication). 
d. The clinician uses the EMR to review information pertinent to assessing if the patient is receiving 
therapeutic benefits from their medication(s). 
(1) The clinician reviews prescriber/clinic notes in the EMR prior to contacting the patient. 
(2) The clinician reviews any labs pertaining to the medication prior to contacting the patient. 
e. Onboarding, initial, and reassessments as well as interventions are completed by a pharmacist or a 
registered nurse. [URAC PM 2-1 (b-ii)] [URAC PM 4-2] 
4. Clinical Interventions 
a. The PMP maintains processes to: 
(1) Make and document targeted clinical interventions based on patient assessments and as 
needed. [URAC PM 4-3 (a)] 
(a) Clinical interventions may include, but are not limited to: 
(i) Dosage and duration of therapy evaluations and/or recommendations 
(ii) Side effect and adverse event management 
(iii) Allergic reactions 
(iv) Actual or potential drug interactions (drug-drug, drug-food, drug-disease) 
(v) Non-adherence, misuse/abuse 
(vi) Other disease state and medication concerns 
(a) Smoking cessation 
(b) Depression screening 
(2) Document outcomes for clinical interventions made for a patient within the PMP software 
and/or the EMR. [URAC PM 4-3 (b)] 
(3) A nalyze data, identify trends and report program intervention data to the QMC. The QMC in 
turn reviews and analyzes reported data during quarterly meetings. [URAC PM 4-3 (c)] 
E. Medication Fill Protocols 
1. Initial Medication Fill 
a. Before a new patient’s first m edication order is dispensed, they speak with a pharmacist to discuss 
the prescribed medication.  When unable to reach a patient prior to a refill, the a ttempted outre ach 
call is docu mented. After  attempting to reach a patient at least 3 times, the pharmacy staff notifies 
the prescriber.  All patient contact attempts are documented. 
b. Initial fill documentation is in the PMP software. 
2. Medication Refill 
a. The pharmacy does not dispense refills until the patient has utilized at least 75% of the medication 
delivered with the previous fill. 
b. Refill documentation and call attempts are documented in the PMP software. 
F. Coordination of Care  
1. The develops processes to: 
a. Effectively communicate with prescribers and other healthcare providers involved in the 
management of individual patient issues. [URAC PM 6-1 (a)] 
(1) Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and other privacy 
requirements allow for an exchange of information between professionals and community 
resources who have the need to know for the purpose of coordinating patient care. The 
pharmacy clinicians or other employees will share information with prescribers, or their agents 
related to the care of their mutual patients. The communication may include potential drug-
drug interactions, noncompliance, or other information that a prescriber or their agent would 
need to know to provide the highest level of care.   HIPAA and other privacy requirements also 
allow for the communication between clinicians or other employees with payers, insurers, law 
enforcement personnel and other narrowly defined personnel within the scope of pharmacy 
practice.  
(a) Information shared with prescribers may be shared via  
PH.2465_Patient Management Program Description 
8 
(i) Secure fax 
(a) All outbound fax transmission will be sent to the prescribers’ fax number 
on record to minimize the risk 
(ii) Secure email 
(iii) Messaging service in EMR 
(a) Electronic prescriptions and requests for electronic prescriptions from 
pharmacies require secure authentication to minimize the risk 
(b) Use of the EMR messaging system is a secure method that is utilized to 
contact prescribers within the health system 
(iv) Phone 
(b) Information shared with support healthcare providers may be via: 
(i) Secure fax 
(ii) Secure email 
(iii) Phone 
(2) When technology is utilized, every reasonable effort will be made to ensure that the selected 
route of transmission is used in a way to minimize the risk the information will be misdirected 
to an inappropriate party. El ectronic prescriptions and requests for electronic prescriptions 
from pharmacies require secure authentication to minimize this risk.  All outbound fax 
transmissions will be sent to the prescriber’s fax number on record to minimize the risk of 
misdirection to an inappropriate party.  
(3) While the pharmacy encourages, promotes and facilitates direct communication between 
employees and patients, the pharmacy will function within scope of HIPAA and other 
applicable privacy regulations. Each new patient receives a copy of the pharmacy Privacy 
Practices with their first prescription and every drug monograph printed from pharmacy 
operating system is included with every medication dispensed.  
(4) Promotion of referrals, when appropriate, to other health care providers such as another 
specialty pharmacy for limited distribution drugs, assistance programs, or financial aid 
programs. This is accomplished by contacting the other organizations and transferring 
prescriptions, as well as contacting patients and prescribers to inform them of the transfer and 
the transferred-to organization’s information. [URAC PM 6-1 (a)] 
(a) The pharmacy assesses and determines the need for home-based injection training and 
other nursing services and will collaborate with clinic to coordinate such services as 
necessary. 
b. Support transition of care [URAC PM 6-1 (b)] 
(1) Optimization of positive therapeutic outcomes occurs through the promotion of continuity of 
care during patient transition. This includes medication reconciliation and the facilitation of 
collaboration among patient's health care providers. This is achieved by performing a 
medication reconciliation where the pharmacy identifies the most accurate list of medications 
the patient is on at the transition of care. 
(a) When a patient transitions care to the pharmacy, the liaison or auxiliary personnel will 
go over their medication list prior to their first prescription fill. 
(i) This list will be compared to the most recent medication list in the EMR. 
(ii) The clinician will be notified of the updates to the medication list. 
c. When identified, liaisons, auxiliary personnel, and clinicians dispatch issues with social determinants 
of health, to the appropriate entity for further evaluation and management. [URAC PM 6-1 (c)] 
(WHO Determinants of Health https://www.who.int/news-r oom/questions-and-
answers/item/determinants-of-health) 
(1) Prescribers, registered nurses, social workers, and other members of the healthcare team are 
made aware of other factors shared with our team that affect the health of our patients. These 
may include, but are not limited to: 
(a) Economic/financial environment, including income status. 
(b) Social environment, including support networks, cultural customs, and beliefs. 
(c) Physical environment, including safe housing and healthy workspaces.  
PH.2465_Patient Management Program Description 
9 
2. Patient information will be stored in a centralized patient record in the pharmacy operating system; additional 
information may be stored in patient management software if available or a paper file if needed. Included in 
this this record shall be a care plan.  
a. Pharmacists develop care plans for every patient and base the plan on the therapy and initial 
assessment of the patient. Care plans are specific to individual patients but may be therapy specific in 
the absence of unremarkable assessment data. 
b. Concerns that arise with individual patients during the reassessment process will be addressed in the 
care plan. Examples are a serious side effect warranting provider outreach or a patient admitted to a 
hospital because of inappropriate/ineffective therapy. Updates to the care plan are done through the 
reassessment process as well as counseling.  
c. Pharmacy staff will encourage patients and responsible parties to participate in the development and 
maintenance of the care plan. 
d. Changes in care plans are based on reassessment data and are noted in the patient file. Any 
communication with MD, clinicians, etc. will be documented. 
e. Care plans will be reviewed/updated: 
(1) Updates to the care plan are based on frequency in which the patient is receiving therapy. 
(2) When there are changes in response to therapy. 
(3) When MD orders change. 
(4) At request of patient. 
f. All patients will require that a care plan be updated in the patient management software that will be 
reviewed prior to dispensing medication and based on therapy protocols. The care plan will be 
reviewed for: 
(1) Appropriateness (care being provided is still needed),  
(2) Effectiveness (client/patient outcomes/response to care),  
(3) Determining if all needed care/services are being provided, and  
(4) Change in client’s/patient's condition. 
3. Care plans shall include: 
a. Start of care date; 
b. Client/patient demographics; 
c. Principle diagnosis and other pertinent diagnoses; 
d. Medications: dose/frequency/route; 
e. Allergies/Sensitivities as well as relevant nondrug substances which may 
include: 
(1) Peanuts 
(2) Soy 
(3) Latex 
(4) Shellfish 
(5) Adhesives/tapes 
(6) Disinfectants (e.g. iodine, hexachlorophene/phisohex) 
f. Orders for specific clinical services, treatments, and procedures; 
g. Equipment and supplies; 
h. A statement of problems/needs determined upon assessment, including patient-
specific transitions of care needs;  
i. Strategies/interventions to address the problems/needs;  
j. Expected outcome/goals and measurable goals to demonstrate resolution based 
upon the problems/needs;  
k. Interventions; 
l. Monitoring; 
m. Functional limitations, if applicable; 
n. Diet and nutritional needs, if applicable; and 
o. Safety measures, if applicable. 
4. The plan of care should be reviewed at every re-dispensing as well as: 
a. Prior to dispensing medication 
b. Based on therapy protocols  
PH.2465_Patient Management Program Description 
10 
c. When there are changes in client’s/patient’s response to therapy 
d. When physician’s orders change 
e. At the request of client/patient 
f. As defined in the organization’s policies and procedures  
5. The development of the care plan and any revisions to the plan will involve the patient, 
family and/or the caregiver. The pharmacy promotes the empowerment of patient or 
caregiver to self-treat and self-manage their condition or disease; this is accomplished 
by educating the patient/caregiver and prescriber with clinical information to help 
manage the patient’s condition . Documentation of this plan of care will be made in the 
pharmacy records (written or electronic) using patient management system.  
6. When requested by payers, the pharmacy has the capability to generate the following 
information to those payers through the pharmacy operating system:  
a. A record of patient referral, intake and outcome of first prescription order 
(patient, prescriber, drug, quantity, date dispensed, or reason why not 
dispensed) during the reporting period 
b. A record of all patient prescriptions dispensed (new and refill) during the 
reporting period 
c. A record of all patients who did not receive an expected prescription refill on a 
projected date of service and the reason why (when known) during the reporting 
period.  Common reasons reported include: 
• Drug not dispensed due to lost insurance coverage 
• Drug discontinued due to lack of efficacy 
• Drug discontinued due to side effects 
• Drug not dispensed due to payer denied approval 
• Dru g not dispensed as patient could not afford co-pays 
• Drug not dispensed as patient has sufficient supply on hand 
7. Information about third party payer programs and multi-disciplinary teams such as patient assistance 
programs, case management and home care agencies is included in the care plan, when necessary .  
G. Annual PMP Evaluation [URAC PM 7-1] 
1. The pharmacy shall comply with Payer’s Guideline Management programs, if any, to optimize outcomes and 
promote the safe, clinically and cost-effective uses of certain Specialty Drugs based on evidence-based 
medical guidelines. 
2. The PMP evaluation [URAC PM 1-1 (a-ii)] 
a. Is completed at least annually by the QMC [URAC PM 7-1 (a-i)] 
(1) The QMC reviews the PMP for value and effectiveness [URAC PM 7-1 (a-ii)] 
(2) The QMC reviews the goals and objectives of the program [URAC PM 7-1 (a-iii)] 
(3) The QMC makes recommendations and updates to the PMP based on the evaluation [URAC 
PM 7-1 (c)] 
b. Is at minimum, inclusive of the following outcomes: 
(1) Clinical benefits  [URAC PM 7-1 (b-i)] 
(a) Clinical Outcome 1 
(i) Measure/Goal– Proportion of Days Covered (“PDC”) > 80%/year per disease 
category 
(ii) Methodology – On a quarterly basis data will be collected from the pharmacy 
software system to calculate proportion of days covered. 
(iii) Proportion of days covered will be calculated as: 
The number of days in a period covered (the number of days that a patient has 
medication to cover the day) divided by the number of days in a period. 
PDC=            Number of days in “covered” period 
Number of days in period x 100% 
This number will be calculated on a quarterly basis and reported to the QMC.  The 
QMC analyzes this data and identifies performance trends on adherence. [URAC 
P-OPS 4-1 (c)]   
PH.2465_Patient Management Program Description 
11 
(a) Strengths: easy to calculate using claims data and does not require 
eligibility information; provides a measure of consistency of use; helps 
pharmacies keep patients compliant to drug therapies; good for measuring 
compliance for long-term treatment. 
(b) Weaknesses: provides adherence information only for the period of time 
when subjects are receiving drugs. PDC provides a measure of consistency 
of use but provides no information on persistency of use. Variable PDC 
does not provide information on those subjects who stop or interrupt 
therapy, which is a common practice in many medical conditions. 
(b) Clinical Outcome 2 
(i) Measure/Goal – 80 % of patients agree that participating in the pharmacy PMP 
has helped them self-manage their medication. 
(ii) Methodology –The pharmacy will obtain percentage by calculating the number of 
patients who agree that participating in the PMP has helped them self-manage 
their medication over the total number of patients assessed. Data is documented 
during the patient reassessment process and is pulled from the patient management 
system. 
(a) Strengths- Information is easy to collect as the clinician already speaks to 
specialty patients on a regular basis. 
(b) Weakness- Patients may not provide an honest answer or chose not to 
answer at all. 
(2) Financial benefits [URAC PM 7-1 (b-ii)] 
(a) Measure/Goal - The pharmacy will assist its patient management population in 
achieving a total of $25,000 each year in copay assistance and funding. 
(b) Methodology – Data will be pulled from Cover My Meds and will be calculated by 
adding the total number of dollars saved. 
(i) Strengths - easy to track and staff already assist patients with obtaining copay 
assistance. 
(ii) Weakness - some patients may not qualify for copay assistance. 
(3) Patient satisfaction 
(a) Measure/Goal - The pharmacy will achieve an average patient satisfaction rating of 9 
out of 10 from the PMP participants. 
(b) Methodology – Data will be pulled from the patient satisfaction survey question results 
located in the patient management system. The pharmacy measures overall satisfaction 
by asking the patient to rate their satisfaction with the pharmacy services on a scale of 1 
to 10. This question is asked during patient management assessment calls and is 
documented in the patient management system.  The overall satisfaction percentage is 
calculated the average of the rating provided by the patient on the above-mentioned 
scale. 
(i) Strengths - Information is easy to collect as the clinician already speaks to 
specialty patients on a regular basis. 
(ii) Weakness - Patients may not provide an honest answer or chose not to answer at 
all. 
(4) Health-related, quality of life outcomes other than clinical and financial 
(a) Measure/Goal –PMP participants will rate their quality of life as an 8 or higher out of 
10. 
(b) Methodology - Data will be pulled from the quality of life survey question results 
located in the patient management system. This question is asked during patient 
management reassessment calls and is documented in the patient management system. 
(i) Strengths - Information is easy to collect as the clinician already speaks to 
specialty patients on a regular basis.  
PH.2465_Patient Management Program Description 
12 
(ii) Weakness - Patients may not provide an honest answer or chose not to answer at 
all. 
(5) Clinical intervention outcome benefits [URAC PM 7-1 (b-iv)] 
(a) Measure/Goal – The pharmacy will achieve 90% or more clinical intervention 
acceptance rate. 
(b) Methodology – The overall intervention acceptance rate is the total number of 
interventions accepted by the patient, provider, or other healthcare provider over the 
total number of clinical interventions. 
(i) Strengths – Information is easy to collect as the clinician already speaks to the 
patient/provider.  
(ii) Weakness – Patients/providers may not provide an honest answer or chose not to 
answer at all. 
3. The organization is capable of generating reports to demonstrate results of the program evaluation to current 
and prospective payors upon request. The report will be provided to the current or prospective payor within 
30 days of the request. The report will be emailed to the representative of the company that requested it.  
4. Interested parties can submit their requests in writing to the Pharmacy Manager or Director of Retail 
Pharmacy. Payers, insurers, employer groups, prescribers and other qualified parties will receive the 
requested information in writing within 30 days of their request or as stated in the terms of their agreement.  
Reports will be provided to only those parties that have a valid, existing relationship with the pharmacy or are 
evaluating such a relationship. Only the most current outcomes evaluation report will be provided unless 
requested in writing and deemed appropriate by the Pharmacy Manager or Director of Pharmacy.  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC Standards: DRX5-1A, DRX 5-1B, DRX5-1C, DRX5-1D, DRX5-2A, DRX5-2B, DRX5-2C, DRX 5-2G, 
DRX5-2I, DRX5-4A, DRX5-5A, DRX5-5E, DRX6-1A, DRX6-3F, DRX5-15C, DRX2-1A, DRX5-9A, DRX5-
12A, DRX5-15C, DRX7-9B 
• URAC Standards: PM 1-1, PM 2-1, PM 2-2, PM 2-3, PM 3-1, PM 4-1, PM 4-2, PM 4-3, PM 5-1, PM 6-1, PM 
7-1, P-OPS 4-1 
• PH.2428 Cultural Awareness 
• PH.2431 Ongoing Patient Support and On-Call Services  
• PH.2432 Customer Satisfaction Performance Indicator   
• PH.2435 Review of Marketing and Communications Materials  
• PH.2437 Quality Management Program Description 
• PH.2440 Distribution Accuracy Performance Indicator  
• PH.2441 Complaints and Incidents Performance Indicator 
• PH.2433 Access to Services Performance Indicator 
• PH.2445 Medication Dispensing Accuracy Performance Indicator 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 
 
 