 
PH.2434_Policy and Procedure Maintenance 
1 
 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Policy and Procedure Maintenance 
PAGES: 2 REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2434 (03/09/2023) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
09/18/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2434 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that policies and procedures are developed, reviewed, approved and implemented in a consistent 
manner. 
POLICY: 
A. Policies are developed, revised, categorized, reviewed, approved, dated and disseminated in a consistent 
manner. 
B. Policies are reviewed to ensure that they comply with regulations and requirements for accreditation 
organizations, Medicare, Medicaid, the state, third party payers and any other entities. 
C. The organization shall maintain and comply with written policies and/or documented procedures that govern its 
business processes of operations.  
D. Electronic copies of all Policies and Procedure are available for employee reference.  Employees are able to 
locate policies and procedures in TeamLink.  
DEFINITIONS: 
Last Review Date is the date that the entire policy and/or procedure had been reviewed which is required at minimum 
annually. 
Last Date Revised is the last date that a revision was made to the policy.    
Approval Authority is the person(s), group or committee that has approved the policy and/or procedure. 
Approval Date is the date that the policy and/or procedure has been approved by the appropriate approval authority. 
Effective Date /Date of Origination is the date the policy and/or procedure was considered to take effect. This may be 
different from the approval date. 
Policy provides direction and a guide on decision-making.  
Procedures maps out of the steps for staff to follow to perform a particular function. 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
9/18/2023 2:16 PM 
 
 
PH.2434_Policy and Procedure Maintenance 
2 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Pharmacy Policies and Procedures are reviewed at least every 12 months (to the month) and if there are 
changes, they are disseminated, communicated and made effective within that 12-month timeframe. 
[URAC OPIN 1-1 (a-ii)]  
1. The pharmacy disseminates new, changed, and/or updated policies and procedures by placing 
them in TeamLink on the approval/effective date and employees are made aware by huddles, 
emails, and/or electronic notifications. [URAC OPIN 1-1 (a-iii)] 
 
B. The pharmacy maintains and complies with written policies and/or documented procedures that govern 
core business processes of its operations related to the scope of the accreditation. Compliance is 
monitored through processes including but not limited to review by the Quality Management Committee 
(QMC) and through audit of systems and structures.  
 
C. The following must be included on the master list of all policies and procedures and/or documented on 
all policies and procedures: [URAC OPIN 1-1 (a-i)] 
 
1. Approval/Effective Dates 
2. Review Dates 
3. Revision Dates 
4. Approval Authority  
5. When policies and procedures are no longer required and/or necessary for business purposes the 
Approval Authority will retire the policy and/or procedure by adding the retired date to the 
policy and/or procedure and placing it in an archived folder. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: OPIN 1-1 
• ACHC Standards: DRX1-2A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  