 
PH.2417_Central Fill Pharmacy 
1
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Central Fill Pharmacy 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2417 (09/13/2017) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 09/13/2017   
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
02/25/2020 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2417 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
To provide services for patients of OLOLH owned pharmacies when those services cannot be provided by an onsite 
pharmacy due to restrictions including but not limited to the accreditation status of the onsite pharmacy, manufacturer 
limited distribution, or when enhanced services such as those associated with specialty pharmacy are in the best interest 
of the patient. 
 
POLICY: 
OLOLH owned pharmacies will provide centralized prescription dispensing services to other OLOLH owned 
pharmacies in order to equalize the workload and improve patient care by reducing wait time for prescription delivery. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
1. Off – Site Services 
a. As defined by Louisiana State Board of Pharmacy law, Chapter 11, Subchapter D 
i. Centralized Prescription Dispensing – the fulfillment by one permitted pharmacy of a 
request from another permitted pharmacy to fill or refill a prescription drug order.  
ii. On-Site Pharmacy – a permitted pharmacy which utilizes centralized prescription 
dispensing services from a remote dispenser or remote processing services from a remote 
processor.  
iii. Remote Dispenser – a Louisiana permitted pharmacy which provides centralized 
prescription dispensing services for another permitted pharmacy in Louisiana 
 
2. OLOLH owned Pharmacies 
a. O’Donovan Pharmacy 
b. Mid City Pharmacy 
c. Lake Children’s Pharmacy  
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
2/25/2020 11:38 AM 
 
PH.2417_Central Fill Pharmacy 
2
PROCEDURE: 
A. OLOLH owned pharmacies share a common electronic prescription filing systems such that prescription information 
is accessible by pharmacists at all locations and that information may be transferred electronically between systems 
in accordance to Louisiana Board of Pharmacy regulations. 
B. OLOLH pharmacies will provide remote dispensing services to other OLOLH owned on-site pharmacies without 
additional agreement. 
C. Prescriptions dispensed remotely will be filled in accordance with current policies and will include the following 
requirements: 
1. The on-site pharmacy will identify new or refill prescriptions to be filled by the remote dispenser pharmacy 
based on criteria including but not limited to the on-site pharmacy inability to fill the prescriptions due to 
insurance restrictions, limited distribution networks, accreditation requirements or other barriers.  
2. Prescriptions for remote dispensing will be entered into the pharmacy dispensing software by a pharmacist 
or technician at the on-site pharmacy and placed on hold in that pharmacy dispensing system. The 
prescription number will service as a tracking mechanism to identify the pharmacies and pharmacists 
involved in the transfer of the prescription. 
3. The on-site pharmacy will notify the remote dispenser that there is a prescription requiring remote 
dispensing by internal notifications including but not limited to phone, fax, or e-mail and include sufficient 
identification to ensure that the correct patient and prescription will be filled by the remote dispenser.  This 
information will minimally include the: 
1. Patient name 
2. Date of birth 
3. Prescription name 
4. Prescription dose 
5. Prescriber name 
6. Date and time needed 
4. The onsite pharmacy will transfer the prescription electronically to the remote dispenser pharmacy in 
accordance with Louisiana Board of Pharmacy rules and regulations. 
5. The remote dispenser will then fill the prescription. The filling process will comply with all requirements 
including a final comprehensive review by a pharmacist. 
6. The prescription label will reflect the name and address of the remote dispenser and will include the initials 
of the pharmacist that completed the comprehensive review prior to dispensing the medication. The label 
will identify the dispensing pharmacy and the onsite pharmacy. 
7. The patient-specific prescription(s) will be placed in tamper evident packaging and externally labeled with 
patient information including: 
1. Name 
2. Date of birth 
3. Address 
4. Medication name and dose 
5. Storage instructions (i.e. Controlled room temperature, refrigeration, etc.) 
8. The tamper evident package will be transported to the on-site pharmacy via OLOLH courier on a scheduled 
basis in a container that will ensure appropriate temperature conditions based on USP and manufacturer 
recommendations for the medications transported to the on-site pharmacy. A comprehensive list of the 
medications being transported, listed by prescription number, will be attached to the transportation container 
serving as a delivery ticket. 
9. Upon arrival at the on-site pharmacy, pharmacy staff will open the container and verify that the prescription 
numbers on the comprehensive list match with the prescriptions received.  The on-site pharmacy will sign 
and date the delivery ticket, promptly remove the tamper evident bags from the transportation container, and 
place the filled medication in the tamper evident bags in the pharmacy will call section for patient pick up. 
10. The on-site pharmacy will scan a copy of the delivery ticket to a file on the shared pharmacy folder that is 
accessible by employees of OLOLH owned pharmacies. 
11. The patient will pick up medication at the on-site pharmacy through the on-site pharmacy point of sale.  
Signature capture will take place at the on-site pharmacy point of sale and will be accessible to the remote  
PH.2417_Central Fill Pharmacy 
3
dispenser for review if needed.  The prescription status in the pharmacy dispensing software will change 
from “ready for pickup” to “picked up” status.  
12. Counseling will be offered at the point of sale and may be conducted by the on-site pharmacist or by a 
pharmacist at the remote dispensing site via telephone. Counseling for specialty medications is outlined in 
CP.2465 and may be offered concurrently with the refill call, care plan, or pharmacist intervention call in 
addition to counseling at the point of sale and will include the maintenance of appropriate records to identify 
the responsible pharmacist(s) in the counseling process;  
13. Prescriptions not picked up by patients after 10 business days will be reversed in the remote dispenser 
pharmacy software by the remote dispenser and inventory from those prescriptions will: 
1. Be returned to the remote dispenser via OLOLH courier where it will be returned to the stock of the 
remote dispenser. This process will apply to exchanges between pharmacies that share the same 
OLOLH ownership.  
2. Be transferred from the ownership of the remote dispenser and become the inventory of the on-site 
pharmacy.  Inventory adjustments in the remote dispenser and onsite pharmacy dispensing software 
will reflect the change and documentation of the transfer of inventory will be compliant with 
Louisiana Board of Pharmacy and DSCSA requirements. This process will apply to exchanges 
between the remote dispenser and pharmacies that are not directly owned by OLOLH 
D. Refills for prescriptions filled remotely may continue to be filled by the remote dispenser and delivered to the on-site 
pharmacy until requested otherwise by the on-site pharmacy or the patient. 
E. Remote dispensing will exclude prescriptions for controlled substances or drugs of concern. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
 Louisiana State Board of Pharmacy website http://labp.gov 
 CP.2401_Prescription Processing and Dispensing 
 CP.2403_Patient Assistance Program 
 CP.2408_Expired Medications and Medications Returned to Stock 
 CP.2414_Patient Counseling 
 CP.2421_Scope of Pharmacy Services 
 CP.2465_Patient Management Program Description 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  