 
PH.2457_Drug Utilization Review 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Drug Utilization Review 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2457 (02/25/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
10/28/2021 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2457 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines systems and processes for conducting drug utilization reviews prior to dispensing medications or 
medical devices in accordance with applicable state law.  
 
POLICY: 
A. Pharmacy provides prospective, concurrent and retrospective drug management. With the available 
information and data ensures drug management mechanism that address where appropriate: 
1. Therapeutic appropriateness [URAC SDrM 4 (a) 
2. Over and underutilization [URAC SDrM 4 (b)] 
3. Generic use [URAC SDrM 4 (c)] 
4. Therapeutic interchange [URAC SDrM 4 (d)] 
5. Duplication [URAC SDrM 4 (e)] 
6. Drug-Disease contraindications [URAC SDrM 4 (f)] 
7. Drug-drug or drug allergy interactions [URAC SDrM 4 (g)] 
8. Drug dosage [URAC SDrM 4 (h)] 
9. Duration of treatment [URAC SDrM 4 (i)] 
10. Clinical abuse or misuse [URAC SDrM 4 (j)] 
11. Drug-age precautions [URAC SDrM 4 (k)] 
12. Drug-gender precautions [URAC SDrM 4 (l)] 
13. Drug-pregnancy precautions [URAC SDrM 4 (m)] 
14. Regulatory limitations [URAC SDrM 4 (n)] 
 
B. The DUR includes all medications being dispensed by pharmacy, medications dispensed by other 
pharmacies in addition to OTCs and herbals.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Drug utilization review (DUR) - programs that help to ensure that prescriptions for outpatient drugs are appropriate, 
medically necessary, and not likely to result in adverse medical consequences. DUR programs use professional medical 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
10/28/2021 2:57 PM 
 
 
PH.2457_Drug Utilization Review 
2 
protocols and computer technology and data processing to assist in the management of data regarding the prescribing of 
medicines and the dispensing of prescriptions over periods of time 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Pharmacy conducts Prospective DUR prior to dispensing medications being dispensed for the first time. 
A Prospective DUR involves evaluating a patient's planned drug therapy before a medication is 
dispensed. This process allows the pharmacist to identify and resolve issues before the patient actually 
receives the medication. Pharmacists routinely perform prospective reviews in their daily practice by 
assessing a prescription medication's dosage and directions and reviewing patient information for 
possible drug interactions or duplicate therapy.  
1. Issues Commonly Addressed by Prospective DUR: 
a. Drug-disease contraindications 
b. Therapeutic interchange 
c. Generic substitution 
d. Incorrect drug dosage 
e. Inappropriate duration of drug treatment 
f. Drug-allergy interactions 
g. Drug-drug interactions 
h. Clinical abuse/misuse 
 
B. Pharmacy conducts a concurrent DUR when dispensing refills of medications. Concurrent DUR is 
performed during the course of treatment and involves the ongoing monitoring of drug therapy to ensure 
positive patient outcomes. Some refer to this as case management or health management. It presents 
pharmacists with the opportunity to alert prescribers to potential problems and to intervene in areas such 
as drug-drug interactions, duplicate therapy, over or underutilization, and excessive or insufficient 
dosing. This type of review allows therapy for a patient to be altered if necessary. 
1. Issues Commonly Addressed by Concurrent DUR: 
a. Drug-drug interactions 
b. Excessive doses 
c. High or low dosages 
d. Duplicate therapy 
e. Drug-disease interactions 
f. Drug-allergy interactions  
 
C. Pharmacists, Pharmacy Technicians, clinical resources, and the Pharmacy Operation System all play a 
key role in the DUR process.  
 
1. Pharmacist 
a. Pharmacist must review patient profiles as well as DUR indications from the pharmacy 
operating system.  
b. Pharmacist will provide counseling to patients and caregivers when deemed necessary 
as a result of a DUR.  
c. Pharmacist will contact prescribers when necessary to discuss findings from a DUR. 
d. DUR includes, at a minimum, screening by the pharmacist for: 
(1) Potential drug therapy problems due to therapeutic duplication 
(2) Drug-drug interactions (including interactions with non-prescription drugs) 
(3) Drug-allergy interactions 
(4) Drug-disease contraindications 
(5) Incorrect drug dosage or duration of drug treatment 
(6) Clinical abuse/misuse  
PH.2457_Drug Utilization Review 
3 
2. Pharmacy Technicians 
a. Pharmacy Technicians will ensure that Patient Medication profiles are accurate and up-
to-date during interactions with patients. 
3. The Pharmacy Operating System 
a. alerts staff to potential complications including but not limited to: 
(1) Allergy 
(2) Drug interaction 
(3) Duplicate therapy 
b. The DUR database is updated as part of pharmacy software clinical updates available 
through service pack updates which is updated no less than biannually. 
c. The DUR is tested annually 
d. On at least a quarterly basis, DUR findings are reported to the Quality Management 
Committee. [SDrM 5] 
 
D. With the  utilization of the Pharmacy Operating System and electronic prescribing, many of the drug 
management requirements, including therapeutic appropriateness and interchange, generic drug utilization 
and identification of d uplicate t herapies are identified. Similarly,  these el ements a re imbed ded 
electronically in the claims software, clinical decision support tools and clinical review tools and will alert 
the staff so that appropriate action can be taken. The clinical decision support tools identify when outbound 
communication is warranted with the prescriber and/or consumer for potential consumer safety events.  
E. According to regulations and payer contracts, when a pharmacist identifies a potentially serious drug-
interaction, prescribing error or other such issue that might cause patient harm, the pharmacist will contact 
the prescribing office by phone or fax for clarification or to make a request to change a drug order. The 
pharmacist may use the prescribing information, patient history, patient prescription profile and print or 
online professional resources as well as their professional judgment. After careful and professional clinical 
review, the pharmacist believes dispensing a prescription order as written is not in the p atient’s best 
interest, the pharmacist is authorized and obligated to decline to dispense the prescription, as ordered.  
 
F. The pharmacy shall respond to inquiries from the Pharmacy Benefit Managers in accordance with the 
terms of the contractual agreement including matters related to DUR of specialty medications.   
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC Standards: DRX5-7A.01 
• URAC Standards: SDrM 4, 5 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 