 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Administration and 
Personnel 
Title: Dress Code  Policy Reference #: PH-01-04 
Supersedes #: PH-02-11O 
Date of Origination: 03/28/2005 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised: 11/01/2023 
 
POLICY: 
 
This policy defines department specific standards of attire for Pharmacy employees that are reflective of 
and promote the professionalism of Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Service Excellence Standards. Any 
apparel that is monogrammed must have the approved OLOL Hospital Logo.  This policy is applicable 
for work and training on all shifts, seven days a week.  Please refer to Human Resources Organization 
Policy for all other dress code requirements. (HR.06.004) 
 
 
POLICY: 
A. All personnel are required to wear identification badges.  The badge must be prominently 
displayed upon the person, clipped no lower than six inches below the shoulders. 
1. Lanyards may not be used to display the identification badge in a Patient Care Location.  
B. If a team member reports to work without an identification badge, they shall obtain a temporary 
badge or obtain a replacement badge from OLOL Security. 
C. Team members are expected to maintain good personal hygiene and to dress in neat, clean, and 
wrinkle free clothing.  Clothing must fit appropriately, not be a distraction and should not 
interfere with the work being performed.   
D. Workforce Members shall wear attire that projects a professional image. Workforce Members 
may wear blue scrubs appropriate Business Professional or Casual Attire. Team members must 
wear appropriate undergarments which shall not be visible while working.  No part of the midriff 
shall be exposed while working.  Skirts and dresses should be not shorter than three (3) inches 
above the knee.  Blouses, shirts and dresses should be modest with no plunging neck lines.  
E. Clothing made of denim fabric of any color may not be worn in patient care locations unless the 
denim is part of the OLOL Uniform.  Team members attending training, meetings, etc. may not 
wear denim.  Organization approved T-shirts can be worn on designated days in accordance with 
OLOLRMC leadership. 
F. In all job classes wearing scrubs, solid color tee shirts may be worn under the approved polo shirt 
or scrub top. 
 
Dress standards: 
 
1. Clinical Pharmacists  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 3 
• Navy blue scrubs or dress attire along with a white lab jacket. 
2. Pharmacists 
• Navy blue scrubs or dress attire is acceptable. No jeans or T-shirts are allowed. A white lab 
jacket may be worn. 
3. Technicians 
• All technicians must wear navy blue scrubs. 
4. Exceptions  
• Team members working in clean room environments must follow all clean room policies and 
procedures in regard to attire. 
 
A. Footwear standards:  Shoes shall confirm to established safety and infection prevention standards 
and promote a quiet environment.  Flip-flops are not acceptable footwear. 
B. Jewelry:  Jewelry maybe worn provided that it does not distract or interfere with the work being 
performed or create a safety hazard.  Certain clinical areas may have additional standards related 
to jewelry that must be adhered too (i.e., Operating Division and Oncology).  No facial jewelry is 
permitted. 
C. Tattoos:  Tattoos may be visible, provided that they are not obscene, offensive, or violative of 
another policy, otherwise not supportive of FMOLHS core values. 
D. Makeup: Make-up may be worn provided that the amount is not excessive or a distraction and 
does not interfere with the work being performed.  The use of perfumes, colognes, aftershave, 
particularly in areas where patient care is provided, is discouraged. 
E. Hair: Hair should be clean and well groomed, styled in a manner that is not a distraction and 
does not interfere with the work being performed.  Hair color shall be a color that naturally 
occurs in humans. 
F. Hats:  Hats may not be worn unless an official part of the FMOLHS or Affiliate uniform or 
approved by the Department Head.  Headscarves may be worn provided that they are not a 
distraction and do not interfere with the work being performed. 
G. Fingernails:  Shall be clean and well-manicured.  The length of fingernails should not interfere 
with the ability to perform the job.  Infection control policy should be followed related to nail 
length and enhancements. 
H. Ear buds, Bluetooth devices or headphones:  May only be worn if needed to perform their work 
or while completing on-line training.  These devices are not allowed for non-work activities 
while working. 
I. The chewing of gum is unacceptable. 
J. Any team member attending a work-related activity must be appropriately dressed and 
professional in accordance with the policy. 
K. Team members who report to work dressed or groomed in a manner inconsistent with this policy 
may be subject to any of the following: 
1. Instructed to clock out with the understanding that they correct the situation and return to  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 3 
work as soon as possible. 
2. Appropriate disciplinary action. 
 
I. Role specific standards: 
1. Pharmacy:  
Pharmacist may wear dress attire with a white lab coat OR navy-blue scrub.  Pharmacy 
technicians may wear navy blue scrubs.  Both pharmacists and technicians may wear a polo shirt 
in any solid color with approved monogrammed Children’s Hospital logo with navy blue scrub 
bottoms.   
2. Retail Pharmacy:  
Pharmacists and pharmacy technicians may wear blue scrubs.  Gray, white or navy-blue jackets 
or sweatshirts are permitted. 
 
 
 
 