NIV-004 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Patient Care Services 
Title: Parenteral Nutrition (PN) 
Policy 
Reference #: PH-02-21 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: October, 1996 Review Date: 03/24/2024 
Revision Date: 2/20/2020 
 
PURPOSE:  To provide pertinent information regarding the administration of parenteral nutrition 
 
DEFINITIONS:   
 
Parenteral Nutrition:  for the purposes of this document, refers to customized parenteral nutrition.  The 
term parenteral nutrition will not be used to refer to pre-mixed intravenous nutrition products (e.g.  
Clinimix). 
 
POLICY: 
 
A. Prescribing 
a. When consulted by prescribers, the Pharmacy department and Nutrition services shall be 
responsible for initiating and monitoring parenteral nutrition. 
b. Pharmacists ordering parenteral nutrition will consult with nursing to confirm central line access 
prior to entering orders.  If central access is not available, the pharmacist shall contact the 
prescriber to discuss additional measures. 
c. Basic serum chemistries should be current (within 24 hours).  If chemistry results are not current, 
a stat order will be entered. Basic serum chemistries should be re-drawn at a minimum of every 
72 hours while the patient is receiving PN until the patient is at goal nutrition and is stable on 
regimen for at least one week. Once achieved, basic serum chemistries may be drawn at a 
minimum of 1-2 times weekly. 
d. Parenteral nutrition orders for adult patients are to be entered into the electronic medical record 
by 1300 daily.  The standard hang time is 2000. 
i. Orders for new PN and orders for changes to existing PN received after 1300 will be 
processed to hang at 2000 the following day.  
ii. If the PN infusion has been completed prior to the next scheduled 2000 infusion, a 
physician’s order must be obtained to hang an alternative fluid (e.g. Dextrose 10%, 
Clinimix®) until the next PN infusion can be prepared and delivered for the standard 
2000 hang time. 
iii. Should any component of the PN currently infusing be changed, including but not 
limited to electrolytes removed and/or decreased, a new order shall be entered into the 
electronic medical record with the necessary changes.  This order should also include 
an interim fluid such as Dextrose 10% or Clinimix® with a prescribed rate until the 
modified PN order can be hung at the next standard hang time of 2000. 
e. All PN orders must be entered into the electronic medical record.  During downtime procedures, 
a pre-printed order form should be used. 
f. Continued use beyond the initial PN order requires a new PN order daily. 
g. A maximum dextrose concentration of 10% may be used for peripheral PN. NIV-004 
Page 2 of 2 
h. The pharmacist should contact the prescriber to replace electrolytes when they are out of range.  
i. The pharmacist should contact the prescriber to clarify the need for concurrent fluids while the 
TPN is hanging. 
 
B. Preparation 
a.   Parenteral nutrition solutions are to be prepared and dispensed by the Our Lady of the Lake 
(OLOL) inpatient pharmacy.   
b. Parenteral nutrition with volumes greater than 500mL will have 50mL of overfill. 
 
C. Administration 
a. Intravenous parenteral nutrition is to be administered only by a registered nurse. 
b. Parenteral nutrition solution along with the administration set and filter shall be infused               
and discarded within 24 hours of the administration set being attached. 
c. An IV pump is required to administer the therapy. 
d. The parenteral nutrition catheter line shall not be used for central venous pressure monitoring.  
e. When no other route can be obtained for IV piggyback or IV push medications, compatibility 
should be verified with pharmacy prior to administration. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
Ayers, P., Guenter, P., Holcombe, B., & Plogsted, S. (2014). The A.S.P.E.N. parenteral nutrition 
handbook. United States of America: American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. 
  
Infusion Nurses Society. (2011). Infusion nursing standards of practice.  Journal of Infusion Nursing, 
34(1S).  
 
Mosby’s Nursing Skills: Central Parenteral Nutrition. Adapted from Perry AG, Potter PA & Ostendorf, 
WR. (2014). Clinical nursing skills & techniques, ed 8, St. Louis: Mosby.Mueller, C.M. (Ed.). (2017). 
The ASPEN Adult Nutrition Support Core Curriculum, 3rd Edition. Silver Spring, MD: American 
Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. 
 