OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Patient Care 
Services 
Title: Pharmacist-Managed Vancomycin & 
Aminoglycoside Dosing 
Policy Reference #: PH0224 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 06/20/2017 Last Date Reviewed: 6/3/24 
Last Date Revised: 09/01/2021 
 
PURPOSE: To communicate expectations of pharmacists participating in the Therapeutic Drug Monitoring 
(TDM) consult services for intravenous vancomycin and aminoglycosides (gentamicin, tobramycin, amikacin).  
 
POLICY: 
I. Pharmacists will be deemed competent to participate in the vancomycin and aminoglycoside dosing 
service without restriction or supervision once the following have been met: 
a. Successful completion of training modules and competency exam  
b. Approval by pharmacy clinical specialist in charge of respective antimicrobial dosing  
II. Orders for injectable vancomycin or aminoglycosides will result in an automatic consult to 
pharmacy. 
a. Exception:  perioperative prophylactic doses not ordered to exceed twenty-four hours 
III. Pharmacists will utilize the Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee (P&T)-approved vancomycin 
and aminoglycoside dosing protocols.  
IV. Monitoring will occur daily.  Pharmacists will adjust initial and maintenance doses and order follow-
up testing per protocol.  
V. Pharmacists will communicate their assessment and plan to providers via a progress note within 
twenty-four hours of the initial consult and within twenty-four hours of any dose change or change 
in the patient’s clinical condition.  
a. Exception: timing may exceed twenty-four hours for patients admitted to unit after 15:30 
VI. All vancomycin and aminoglycoside consults will be terminated when the drug is electronically or 
verbally discontinued by the prescriber or if the patients care is transferred to Louisiana Organ 
Procurement Agency (LOPA) status.  
VII. Pharmacists will notify the physician when: 
a. An appropriately drawn vancomycin or aminoglycoside trough exceeds the recommended 
threshold per the P&T approved dosing protocol.  
b. Once the prescriber is notified, a safety event report should be generated.  
VIII. Pharmacists will notify physicians via electronic medical record (EMR) notes when: 
a. A vancomycin or aminoglycoside trough is drawn inappropriately but pharmacokinetic 
parameters suggest the trough will be above the recommended threshold.  
b. Any serum creatinine increase of  ≥0.3mg/dL from baseline while the patient is on therapy. 
 
QUALITY MANAGEMENT: 
I. All pharmacists participating in the TDM Service will receive annual education regarding dosing 
guidelines and complex situations. Routine review will occur to determine on-going competency and 
compliance with dosing guidelines and any safety or performance concerns will be addressed.  
a. Ongoing feedback will be provided by pharmacy clinical specialist in charge of respective 
antimicrobial dosing. 
II. Safety events will be evaluated on an on-going basis and reported in a manner consistent with the 
hospital’s Safety Event Reporting policy (OrgOps/GN/019)  
III. Quality and safety indicators will be trended at least quarterly and reported to the Antimicrobial 
Stewardship Committee for review and recommendations when necessary. 