   
 
 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Patient Care 
Services 
Title: Tikosyn® (dofetilide) Policy Reference #: PH-02-22 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 10/13/2014 Last Date Reviewed: 03/24/24 
Last Date Revised: 09/02/2021 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines for Tikosyn® (dofetilide) administration in Our 
Lady of the Lake (OLOL) hospital.   
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Tikosyn® (dofetilide) is a class III antiarrhythmic agent FDA approved for the maintenance of normal 
sinus rhythm in patients with chronic atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter of longer than 1 week duration 
who have been converted to normal sinus rhythm. Tikosyn® may also be used for conversion of atrial 
fibrillation and atrial flutter to normal sinus rhythm. 
 
POLICY: 
 
A. Tikosyn® may be ordered in the hospital as a continuation of therapy from home or as a new 
addition to the patient’s medication regimen 
1. New initiation of Tikosyn shall only be ordered by cardiology  (including mid -level 
providers) 
2. Continuation of a home medication may be ordered by any service line provider. 
 
B. Prior to verifying a Tikosyn® order  (continuation of home medication or new addition) , the 
pharmacist must also review the patient’s chart to assess renal function, electrolyte status, drug -
drug interactions, QTc interval, and appropriateness of therapy.  
1. If no labs are available, the pharmacist shall verify and dispense one dose only and 
subsequently order a stat BMP and magnesium level.  
2. If serum creatinine, potassium, and magnesium are available within the previous 30 days, 
the pharmacist shall use the reported labs for assessment of the ordered dose but ensure 
that a BMP plus magnesium has been ordered for the following day.  
3. Electrolytes may be ordered by pharmacist and replaced per protocol as follows:  
 
 
Potassium Level Dose to be given 
3.7 to 3.9 mg/dL Potassium chloride 20 mEq PO x 1 dose 
3.0 to 3.6 mg/dL Potassium chloride 40 mEq PO x 1 dose 
less than 3.0 mg/dL Contact provider 
    
 
 Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 3 
Magnesium Level Dose to be given 
1.9 to 2.4 mg/dL Magnesium oxide 400mg PO x 1 dose 
1.5 to 1.8 mg/dL Magnesium sulfate 2 gm IV x 1 dose 
1 to 1.4 mg/dL Magnesium sulfate 4gm IV x 1 dose 
less than 1 mg/dL Contact provider  
 
C. Creatinine clearance should be calculated using the Cockcroft -Gault equation and actual body 
weight. The provider must approve dose adjustments. The Tikosyn® dose should be adjusted for 
renal function as follows: 
Calculated Creatinine Clearance Tikosyn® Dose 
> 60 ml/min 500 mcg twice daily 
          40-60 ml/min 250 mcg twice daily 
          20- 39 ml/min 125 mcg twice daily 
            < 20 ml/min CONTRAINDICATED  
 
D. The prescribing physician may choose to initiate Tikosyn® at a lower dose than recommended 
based on the patient’s clinical status and baseline QTc. 
 
E. Tikosyn is contraindicated with ondansetron, verapamil, hydrochlorothiazide, cimetidine, 
ketoconazole, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (or trimethoprim alone), prochlorperazine, 
megestrol, and dolutegravir. Tikosyn is also contraindicated in patients with congenital or acquired 
prolonged QT syndromes, a baseline QT interval or QTc greater than 440 msec (500 msec in 
patients with ventricular conduction abnormalities), and severe re nal impairment (CrCl less than 
20 ml/min).  
 
F. Every patient initiated on Tikosyn® shall be counseled by a pharmacist and given a 7 day supply 
of medication prior to discharge from the hospital.  
 
1. Weekday Discharge: On the day of discharge, an electronic prescription for a 7 day supply 
of Tikosyn® will be send to RXOne pharmacy where the prescription will be filled. The 
filled prescription along with the Tikosyn® medication guide and patient education packet 
shall be hand-delivered to the patient by the RXOne pharmacy team member responsible  
for counseling the patient. 
a. Upon completion of the counseling session, the patient will acknowledge receipt of 
counseling by signing a pre-printed label, which should be returned to the RXOne 
pharmacy and retained for records. 
 
2. Weekend Discharge: for weekend discharge, the nurse will bring a prescription for a 7 day 
supply of Tikosyn® to the inpatient pharmacy where the prescription will be filled. The 
filled prescription along with the Tikosyn® medication guide and patient education packet 
shall be hand-delivered to the pharmacist responsible for counseling the patient 
a. Upon completion of the counseling session, the patient will acknowledge receipt of 
counseling by signing a pre -printed label, which should be returned to the main 
pharmacy and retained for records. 
 
    
 
 Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 3 
G. Tikosyn® initiation protocol:  
 
1. Patient must be placed on telemetry and baseline QTc must be obtained.  The pharmacist 
shall utilize an EKG obtained within the 24 hours prior to initiation.   
a. If QTc > 440 msec, Tikosyn is contraindicated, call physician.  
b. If QTc ≤ 440 msec, continue with initiation protocol  
2. Calculate creatinine clearance using the Cockcroft -Gault equation for estimating 
glomerular filtration rate. Actual body weight should be used when calculating creatinine 
clearance. Pharmacist must contact provider for adjustments.  
3. Pharmacist shall replace electrolytes and contact prescriber if needed.  
4. Check QTc 2-3 hours after first dose.  
a. If increase in QTc ≤ 15%, continue current dose.  
b. If increase in QTc > 15% or > 500 msec, decrease dose (see below): 
 
5. If at any time after the second dose, QTc increases to greater than 500 msec, Tikosyn® 
should be discontinued. Call physician. 
6. Any further dose adjustments may be made at the discretion of the ordering physician.  
 
H. Tikosyn continuation of home medication protocol:  
1. Patient must have an EKG obtained upon admission. Telemetry monitoring not required. 
(refer to Medications Requiring Special Monitoring) If the QTc is greater than 500 msec, 
Tikosyn should be discontinued. Call physician. 
2. Calculate creatinine clearance using the Cockcroft -Gault equation for estimating 
glomerular filtration rate. Actual body weight should be used when calculating creatinine 
clearance. Pharmacist must contact provider for adjustments 
3. Pharmacist shall replace electrolytes and contact prescriber if needed.  
4. Any further dose adjustments may be made at the discretion of the ordering physician  
 
References:  
1. Pfizer Laboratories.Tikosyn® Package Insert. January 2014.  
Dosing adjustments for QTc 
If starting dose is Adjusted dose is 
500 mcg BID 250 mcg BID 
250 mcg BID 125 mcg BID 
125 mcg BID 125 mcg Daily 