 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Patient Care 
Services 
Title: Pharmacist Communication Policy Reference #: PH-02-04 
Supersedes #: PH-05-08-O 
Date of Origination: 05/23/2006 Last Date Reviewed: 
 
5/21/2024 
 
Last Date Revised: 09/13/2021 
 
 
PURPOSE 
To identify the communication process between pharmacists at transfer of care. 
 
POLICY 
A standardized format for communication is used to convey patient information between pharmacy 
associates. 
 
DEFINITION 
Transfer of Care: In pharmacy there are various types of transfers, including but not limited to pharmacist 
shift change and temporary responsibility of pharmacists leaving the pharmacy for a short time (including 
meal breaks). 
 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
1. When responsibility for management of patient care is transferred from one pharmacist to another, 
information appropriate to the scope of service will be provided to assure continuity of care, 
treatment, and services. 
2. Whenever information is shared, an opportunity to ask and respond to questions must be provided. 
3. At times during transfer of care , interruptions should be limited to maximize the opportunity to 
convey all pertinent information. 
 
PROCEDURE 
1. The pharmacist transferring care will: 
a. Give a verbal report to the receiving pharmacist.  Information provided may be written as 
long as the opportunity for questions exists.  
i. A summary of the orders that need clarification. 
ii. A summary of clinical monitoring (i.e. heparin monitoring, aminoglycoside trough 
levels, etc.) functions that will need a pharmacists attention. 
iii. New medication information (i.e. medication shortages, non -formulary  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
medications, etc.). 
iv. Orders received without patient room assignment. 
v. IV medications that are being compounded and will need to be checked. 
vi. Staffing information. 
vii. Any other pertinent information the pharmacist deems appropriate. 
b. Provide an opportunity to respond to questions from the receiving pharmacist. 
c. Attempt to provide report in an interruption free manner. 
2. The pharmacist receiving care will: 
a. Receive the report. 
b. Clarify any questions regarding the report. 
3. Pyxis Connect (where in use) message capabilities should also be used as a communication tool. 
This system should be used to provide a record of documentation concerning orders that require 
clarification. 
 
 