 PH-03-02 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Medication Use, 
Storage and 
Handling 
Title: Medications: Formulas - Recipes Policy Reference #: PH-03-02 
Supersedes #: PH-08-07-O 
Date of Origination: 07/01/2000 Last Date Reviewed: 04/30/2024 
Last Date Revised: 04/30/2024 
 
PURPOSE:   
This policy aims to ensure the safety, efficacy and quality of medications by standardizing the processes 
for compounding existing recipes and submitting new recipes for extemporaneously prepared 
medications. 
 
POLICY: 
To ensure accurate and consistent compounding, the pharmacy shall maintain an electronic record of all 
oral and topical medication compound recipes.   
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
I. Formulary (Existing) Recipes: 
 
A. Recipe records shall include (as appropriate): 
a) Preparation name(s) (official, common, and/or unusual). 
b) Ingredients and amounts of each ingredient. 
c) Compounding instructions (including order of mixing, calculations, and technique to ensure a 
safe and effective final product). 
d) Equipment to be used. 
e) Precautions and warnings. 
f) Appearance of final product. 
g) Dispensing information (e.g., type and size of container or syringe). 
h) Final concentration. 
i) Storage requirements. 
j) Beyond use dating. 
k) Ancillary labeling recommendations. 
l) Preparation notes. 
m) Additional information to ensure that orders are filled accurately and that dispensing is 
consistent. 
n) Date last reviewed.  PH-03-02 
Page 2 of 2 
o) Supporting literature shall be referenced or attached to the records. 
 
II. Non-Formulary Recipes: 
When dispensing a non-sterile, compounded medication to a patient, every effort should be 
made to use a commercially available product.  If a commercially available product is not 
available, the pharmacy will compound an extemporaneous compound when appropriate.  
When a suitable dosage form is not commercially available, we must prepare a product 
extemporaneously.    
 
A. New recipes compounded from formulary medications: 
a. Pharmacy personnel will complete a Simplifi 797 Compound Addition Form (File Path 
T:Data/Pharmacy/Forms) for the new recipe.    
b. The recipe should: 
• be properly referenced using a reputable source 
• be easily prepared by pharmacy staff  
• have appropriate drug concentration and volume for accurate dispensing 
• have documented drug stability, beyond use dating, and storage information 
c. Notify department manager or designee of new compound.  
d.  The approved recipe will then be added to Simplifi 797.  
 
 
B. New recipes compounded from non-formulary medications: 
a. Pharmacy personnel will complete a Simplifi 797 Compound Addition Form for the new 
recipe.    
b. A non-formulary request will be completed and submitted for approval.  
c. The recipe should:  
• be properly referenced using a reputable source 
• be easily prepared by pharmacy staff 
• have appropriate drug concentration and volume for accurate dispensing 
• have documented drug stability, beyond use dating, and storage information 
d. Notify department manager or designee of new compound.  
e. The approved recipe will then be added to Simplifi 797.  
 
 