 Policy PH-03-32 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Medication Use, 
Storage, and 
Handling 
Title: 
Medications: Glucarpidase for Toxicity 
from High Dose Methotrexate in Adult 
Patients 
Policy Reference #: PH-03-32 
Supersedes #: N/A 
Date of Origination: February 2019 Last Date Reviewed: 02/03/2025 
Last Date Revised: 2/17/2024 
 
POLICY: This policy will serve to outline the criteria for use, ordering, administration, and monitoring of 
glucarpidase following toxicity from high dose methotrexate in adults. 
 
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:  Glucarpidase (Voraxaze®) is a recombinant carboxypeptidase-based bacterial 
enzyme that hydrolyzes methotrexate, an antifolate utilized in the treatment of various malignancies, into 
inactive metabolites. Glucarpidase is approved for the treatment of elevated serum methotrexate levels (> 1 
µmol/L), in the setting of renal dysfunction and delayed methotrexate clearance in both children and adults. 
This procedure seeks to ensure appropriate ordering, dosing, administration, and monitoring of adult inpatients 
who require therapy with glucarpidase.  Glucarpidase is on formulary with restrictions for use; it is not stocked 
as it is a high-cost medication.   
 
DEFINITIONS:  
• High Dose Methotrexate- doses greater than or equal to 1 gram/m2.  This list is not all-inclusive, but 
examples of treatment plans with high dose methotrexate include: 
o IP Lymphoma High-Dose Methotrexate (8000 mg/m2) 
o IP Lymphoma High-Dose Methotrexate (3500 mg/m2) 
o IP/OP Lymphoma High Dose Methotrexate + Rituximab 
o IP ALL Hyper CVAD Even Cycle 
o IP ALL R-Hyper CVAD Even Cycle 
• Prescribing Physician – Attending oncology physician ordering glucarpidase. 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
I. Criteria for glucarpidase use in adult patients (a, b, c, d, and e must be present or occur)  
a. Patient is receiving leucovorin and aggressive intravenous hydration with urine alkalinization (to 
maintain urine pH of greater than or equal to 7) should be maximized based on the particular 
chemotherapy regimen and on patient-specific factors.  
b. The patient’s medications should be reviewed by the prescribing physician and any drugs which 
are known to interfere with methotrexate clearance or which are known to be nephrotoxic should 
be discontinued prior to considering glucarpidase use.   
c. Any third-spacing (pleural effusion, ascites, etc.) must be corrected by prescribing physician. 
d. Moderate to severe renal impairment must be present as evidenced by at least one of the 
following: 
i. An increase in serum creatinine from baseline of 100% or greater or a serum creatinine of 
greater than or equal to 1.5 times the upper limit of normal  Policy PH-03-32 
Page 2 of 4 
ii. An abrupt decline in urine output (to less than 0.5 mL/kg/hour for at least 4 hours) 
e. Elevated serum methotrexate levels as follows:  
i. For High Dose Methotrexate infusions of less than or equal to 24 hours, Methotrexate 
level is: 
Greater than 50 micromole/L at 24 hours from START of methotrexate infusion or  
Greater than 30 micromole/L at 36 hours from START of methotrexate infusion or  
Greater than 10 micromole/L at 42 hours from START of methotrexate infusion or  
Greater than 5 micromol/L at 48 hours from START of methotrexate infusion.  
ii. If the initial serum methotrexate level is close to the threshold for being considered 
elevated, or if there is uncertainty as to the timing or accuracy of the measured level and 
glucarpidase is considered, a second “STAT” methotrexate serum level may be requested 
by a Clinical Pharmacist.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Oncologist.  2018; 23(1):52-61. 
 
  Policy PH-03-32 
Page 3 of 4 
 
II. Ordering 
a. Only an attending oncology physician may order glucarpidase.  
b. Glucarpidase order must be placed within 50 hours of START of methotrexate infusion 
i. Glupcarpidase is less effective when given after more than 60 hours of exposure to high-
dose methotrexate.  It takes 12-14 hours to receive shipment of medication. 
c. Glucarpidase use is indicated for patients who received high-dose methotrexate (doses greater 
than or equal to 1 gram/m2). 
d. Glucarpidase administration must occur in the inpatient setting.   
e. Only one dose of glucarpidase may be ordered for each patient per cycle of high-dose 
methotrexate.  
f. Glucarpidase will not be stocked or ordered prior to meeting criteria in section I (a,b,c,d,e) above 
III. Dosing 
a. The dose of glucarpidase is 50 units/kg given as a single IV bolus. 
b. Each vial of glucarpidase contains 1000 units; the dose will be rounded to the nearest vial size. 
IV. Administration 
a. Glucarpidase should be administered as a single bolus intravenous dose given over 5 minutes. 
b. Leucovorin doses MUST be held for at least 2 hours prior to and 2 hours after glucarpidase 
administration. 
i. Leucovorin is a substrate of glucarpidase and if administered too closely to the 
glucarpidase dose, the efficacy of glucarpidase will be greatly reduced.  
c. The intravenous line must be flushed with 0.9% normal saline before and after glucarpidase 
administration. 
d. The most common adverse reactions (incidence >1%) with glucarpidase are paraesthesias, 
flushing, nausea and/or vomiting, hypotension, and headache. 
e. Leucovorin dosing should resume 2 hours after administration of glucarpidase. 
f. Aggressive intravenous hydration with or without urine alkalinization (to maintain urine pH of > 
7), should continue throughout the administration of glucarpidase. 
V. Pharmacy Ordering 
a. Available to receive within 12-14 hours regardless of time order is placed.  The emergency 
Voraxaze number is 1-844-293-0007.  GPO-692085 WAC-692111 340B-692104. 
b. Order based off of prescribed dose of 50 units/kg, round to nearest vial of 1000 units. 
c. Hand-off to pharmacy team to be alert for order and to prepare dose as soon as received. 
d. Dose is delivered to nurse with signature verification upon receipt.  Policy PH-03-32 
Page 4 of 4 
 
VI. Monitoring 
a. Following glucarpidase administration, serum methotrexate levels should be obtained at 48 hours 
post-administration, and every 24 hours after that until the serum methotrexate level reaches less 
than or equal to 0.1 µmol/L. 
i. Serum methotrexate levels drawn within 48 hours of glucarpidase administration may not 
accurately reflect the actual methotrexate level as the particular assay utilized may also 
be measuring the inactive methotrexate metabolite. High-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) is one assay utilized in the measurement of methotrexate 
concentrations which is not affected by prior glucarpidase administration. 
b. Leucovorin dosing should remain the same as the pre-glucarpidase leucovorin dosing for the first 
48 hours following glucarpidase administration. 
c. Adjustments to leucovorin dosing should be made beginning 48 hours after glucarpidase 
administration, and any dose adjustments should be based on measured serum methotrexate 
levels. 
d. Leucovorin dosing should not be discontinued based on a single serum methotrexate level below 
the leucovorin treatment threshold. Therapy with leucovorin should continue until the serum 
methotrexate concentration has been maintained below the leucovorin treatment threshold for a 
minimum of 3 days. 
e. All pertinent labs should continue to be monitored at least daily until the serum methotrexate 
concentration has been maintained below the leucovorin treatment threshold for a minimum of 3 
days. These labs include, but are not limited to: BUN, SrCr, potassium, phos, calcium, CO2, 
magnesium, and uric acid.  
  
REFERENCES: 
 
1. Voraxaze® (glucarpidase) injection for intravenous use. Product information. BTG International. 
January 2012. 
2. Cavone, JL, Yang, D, Wang, A. Glucarpidase intervention for delayed methotrexate clearance. Ann of 
Pharm.2014;48(7):897-907. 
3. Howard, SC, McCormick, J, Pui, C, et al. Preventing and managing toxicities of high-dose methotrexate. 
The Oncologist.2016;21:1471-82. 
4. Trifilio, S, Ma, S, Petrich, A. Reduced-dose carboxypeptidase-G2 successfully lowers elevated 
methotrexate levels in an adult with acute methotrexate-induced renal failure. Clin Adv in Hem & 
Onc.2013;11(5):322-5. 
5. Widemann, BC, Schwartz, S, Jayaprakash, N, et al. Efficacy of glucarpidase (carboxypeptidase G2) in 
patients with acute kidney injury after high-dose methotrexate therapy. 
Pharmacotherapy.2014;34(5):427-39.   
 
 