 PH-03-28 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Medication Use, 
Storage and 
Handling 
Title: Medications: Bulk Compounding Policy Reference #: PH-03-28 
Supersedes #: PH-11-09-O 
Date of Origination: 07/01/2000 Last Date Reviewed: 05/07/2024 
Last Date Revised: 08/11/2022 
 
POLICY: 
 
The Pharmacy  Department Leader  is responsible  for all oversight of the bulk compounding of 
pharmaceuticals in the facility.  The pharmacy does not manufacture pharmaceuticals.  The outlined policy 
refers to all non-sterile compounding of bulk pharmaceutical products.  
 
RESTRICTION TO INTERNAL USE 
 
Compounded products are intended for distribution to units/areas affiliated with this facility.  
Compounded products may not be sold or distributed to other hospitals, community pharmacies, or other 
facilities and organizations that are not directly associated with this facility.  To do so may require this 
facility to register as a manufacturer. 
 
BULK COMPOUNDING 
 
The Pharmacy Department Leader shall provide product specific guidelines for all bulk compounding 
done by the pharmacy. 
 
ROLE OF SUPPORTIVE PERSONNEL 
 
The role of supportive personnel in bulk compounding is limited to the regulations of this state. 
 
TRAINING 
 
Personnel who bulk compound medications shall be properly trained. 
 
QUANTITIES TO BULK COMPOUND 
 
Medications may only be bulk compounded in quantities suitable for internal distribution.  A pharmacist 
shall determine the quantities to be compounded. 
 
SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 
 
To ensure accuracy, the compounder shall: 
  PH-03-28 
Page 2 of 3 
• Bulk compound in a separate area, when possible. 
• Minimize traffic in the bulk compounding area. 
• Prepare only one medication at a time. 
• Keep other medications (or labels for other medications) out of the work area. 
• Clean and inspect the equipment between bulk compounding operations. 
 
EQUIPMENT 
 
Operation of the equipment shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's operating instructions. 
 
EXPIRATION DATES 
 
Assignment of expiration dates shall meet the requirements of the pharmacy's expiration dating policy. 
 
LOT (CODE) NUMBERS 
 
Quality control records shall positively identify the original manufacturer's lot number(s) for each 
ingredient.  The bulk compounded unit may be labeled with the manufacturer's lot number(s) or with a 
code number assigned by the pharmacy. 
 
A code number, if used, shall refer to the quality control records and shall positively identify the 
manufacturer's lot number(s) and expiration date(s). 
 
CONTAINERS FOR BULK COMPOUNDED MEDICATIONS 
 
Bulk compounded medications shall be packaged in containers that meet the specifications of the 
pharmacy's Containers policy. 
 
LABELS ON BULK COMPOUNDED MEDICATIONS 
 
Labels on bulk compounded medications shall meet the specifications of the pharmacy's Labels policy. 
 
BULK COMPOUNDING QUALITY CONTROL RECORDS/LOGS 
 
Quality control records/logs for these medications shall include: 
 
• Date bulk compounded. 
• Medication name, strength, and dosage form. 
• Original manufacturer. 
• Original manufacturer's lot number and expiration date. 
• Pharmacy lot (code) number, if applicable. 
• Expiration date.  PH-03-28 
Page 3 of 3 
• Quantity per package. 
• Number of packages. 
• Signature or initials of bulk compounder. 
• Signature of responsible pharmacist. 
 
QUARANTINE AND INSPECTION 
 
Stock packages, devices used in the process, bulk compounded units and control records shall be 
quarantined together until checked and released by a registered pharmacist. 
 
The inspection procedure shall ensure that the medication has been bulk compounded and packaged in 
accordance with this policy.  Particular attention shall be given to: 
 
• Equipment and devices. 
• Correct medication. 
• Correct strength. 
• Correct number of units. 
• Container appropriate for the product. 
• Seal intact, if applicable. 
• Label conforms-- to Labels policy. 
• Lot (code) number properly-- determined and agrees with containers and quality control records. 
• Expiration date properly-- determined and recorded. 
• Quality control records complete. 
 
Items that do not meet the requirements of this policy shall be recycled or destroyed as directed by the 
pharmacist. 
 
CERTIFICATION OF FINAL PRODUCT 
 
A pharmacist's electronic authorization shall certify that the medication has been properly prepared, 
packaged and labeled.  After certification, the product may be placed in active stock. 
 