 Policy SOS050 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Digital Image Capture & Retention  Policy Reference #: PH0526 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 04/15/2016 Last Date Reviewed: 6/2/2024 
Last Date Revised: 05/07/2018 
 
POLICY: 
Digital images taken during the preparation of Intravenous Admixtures and Patient Specific Doses of Oral 
Liquids* should be stored and readily retrievable. 
 
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE: 
In the event of  an audit, recall or patient safety event , pictures or digital images of key elements during 
the preparation of specific patient medications should  be digitally capture d and retained for potential 
review.   
 
DEFINITIONS: 
• Compounding – the act of mixing or constituting products for a final product intended to be 
administered to a patient.  
• DoseEdge - enterprise solution that interfaces with  the Pharmacy Information System (PIS) to 
automate the process of routing, preparing, inspecting, tracking and reporting on IV and oral liquid 
doses. 
• Key Elements – items in the process of compounding that should be captured digitally.  
o Drug Name as indicated on manufacturer’s product label  
o Drug Dose, strength, or concentration as indicated on manufacturer’s product label 
o Drug Diluent – name and concentration where applicable 
o Drug Lot as indicated on manufacturer’s product label 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
Using the IV Workflow system , DoseEdge, digital images will be captured during the preparation of IV 
and/or applicable oral admixtures by personnel compounding an ordered medication.  This will include a 
series of images in the order of events for compounding the product.   
 
For each patient specific compounded product, images taken will capture the drug name, dose or strength, 
drug diluent, and drug lot information.  The images will be retained and readily retrievable in DoseEdge 
for 30 days.   
 
Should images need to be retrieved and/or reviewed, only authorized parties may review images according 
to Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) laws.   
 
Commented [LD1]: added asterisk to separate out 
Ascension  Policy SOS050 
Page 2 of 2 
* - activity not recorded at Ascension campus.  Ascension will use Simplifi to capture lot and expiration 
of original packaging. 
 
Commented [LD2]: Asterisk comment added to explain  