OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Hazardous Drug Training and Safety 
Program 
Policy Reference #: PH0551 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the procedures for the Hazardous Drug Safety and Training Program where 
Hazardous Drugs (HDs) are handled within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
1.2. Harm to healthcare personnel from occupational exposure to HDs can occur throughout the 
medication-use process including receipt, storage, transport, compounding, administration, 
disposal, and spill control. Types of occupational exposure to HDs can include dermal absorption, 
mucosal absorption, inhalation, injection, and ingestion. 
1.3. Damage to healthcare workers from HDs can include but are not limited to chromosomal 
aberrations, reproductive toxicities, and organ toxicities.  
1.4. Healthcare workers can experience either an acute exposure and/or long-term exposure over an 
entire career.  Proper HD training, use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), and use of 
environmental controls are mechanisms used to limit occupational exposure to HDs and to limit  
HD contamination to the healthcare environment.  
1.5. FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies may exempt some dosage forms of HDs from full USP 
<800> containment strategies and work practices (as long as they are not Active Pharmaceutical 
Ingredients (API) or antineoplastic drugs requiring manipulation (beyond counting or 
repackaging)) if an Assessment of Risk (AoR) is performed. 
2. Policy  
2.1 FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies maintain an organization specific list of HDs based on 
the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health List of Antineoplastic and Other 
Hazardous Drugs in Healthcare Settings, 2016 (NIOSH List). The organizational list is maintained 
by the Designated Person (DP) and is reviewed at least annually. Any new medications added to 
inventory and/or formulary at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies  are included on the 
organization specific HD list if the drug has simila r structure and/or mechanism of action to 
NIOSH list drugs.   
2.2 All personnel who handle HDs, not exclusively compounding personnel, receive training and 
demonstrate competency in the required procedures for the safe handling of HDs before performing any job duties independently. Job duties that require HD training include receiving, 
stocking, labeling, packaging, transport, administration, cleaning, and transport of HD products 
or HD waste.   
• Training is specific to job duty  
• Cleaning includes:  areas associated with HD preparation or storage, HDs administration 
areas, patient rooms, and bodily fluids from patients receiving HDs. 
2.3 Compounding personnel complete all required trainings, competencies, and assessments 
associated with sterile and/or nonsterile compounding prior to initiating training, competencies, 
and assessments for HD sterile and/or nonsterile compounding.  
2.4 Safety Data Sheets (SDS) are available for all drugs on the organizational HD list.  
 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Person (DP): 
• Ensures job-specific competency and documentation of competency for personnel handing 
HDs within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. Personnel who may handle HDs within 
the organization include, but are not limited to: pharmacy personnel, engineering, nursing, 
certified nursing assistants, environmental services, and transport. 
• Ensures all HDs are identified per the NIOSH list and maintains the organizational list of HDs 
specifically handled at this facility.  
• Provides immediate access to the SOPs, USP <800> and supporting Chapters and supporting 
regulations, and other expert documentation to perform job duties successfully and safely. 
3.2 Personnel who handle HDs or work in the HD compounding and /or storing environment: 
• Understand the fundamental job-specific practices and precautions for handling HDs 
• Continually evaluate procedures and the quality of the final HDs to prevent harm to patients 
and personnel handling HDs. 
• Follow all procedures for handling HDs to minimize HD exposure to personnel. 
• Follow all procedures for handling HDs to minimize contamination of the work and patient 
care environment. 
4.  Procedures 
4.1 Organizational List of Hazardous Drugs: 
• The DP oversees and validates the creation of an organizational list of HDs and dosage forms 
handled at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies by comparing drugs on the NIOSH list 
of Hazardous Drugs to the formulary and identifies drugs that are on both the NIOSH list and 
on formulary.  
o DP performs this review annually.   
• New drugs that are added to formulary at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies that are 
either identified as hazardous per the manufacturer or have similar structure and/or 
mechanism of action to other drugs already on the NIOSH list, are added to the organizational 
list of HDs.  • Handle all drugs on the organizational HD list with full USP <800> precautions unless an AoR 
defines specific drug and dosage form handling instructions.    
• Train all personnel that handle HDs at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies on the 
organizational list of HDs and how to access organizational HD list ; training is specific to 
individual job duties. 
 
 
HD Training and Competency: 
4.2 All personnel entering controlled compounding spaces first comply with all aspects of USP <797> 
and <795> including but not limited to hand hygiene and garbing policies, conduct in controlled 
spaces, and personnel training and competencies.  
4.3 Hazardous Drug training and competency evaluation based on job specific requirements: 
 
 
Training and Competency Criteria  
 Organization
al HD List 
Job-
specifi
c HD 
SOPs 
Require
d PPE 
and use 
Deactivation, 
decontamination
, and cleaning  
HD 
compoundin
g techniques 
Containmen
t 
engineering 
controls 
HD 
Exposur
e 
respons
e 
HD Spill 
Managemen
t 
HD 
Disposa
l  
HD 
Compoundin
g personnel x x x x x x x x x 
Inventory, 
Receiving, 
and 
Stocking 
Personnel 
x x x x  x x x x 
Pharmacy 
Cleaning 
Personnel x x x x  x x x x 
Labeling, 
Packaging, 
and 
Transport 
Personnel 
x x x    x x  
Engineering 
and/or 
Maintenance 
Personnel  x x   x    
Other 
personnel 
and/or 
visitors 
  x      x 
4.4 Successful or “passing” results for the HD Core Competencies and Knowledge Assessment per 
job-specific competencies and assessments are: 
• Validation of USP <800> safe HD handling principles knowledge exam with >80% 
• Observation through a competency-based checklist with 100% proficiency 
4.5 When requested, FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies provide options of alternate duty 
for personnel required to handle HDs under the following circumstances: 
• Females who are pregnant  • Females who are breastfeeding 
• Personnel actively trying to conceive 
 
Hazardous Drug Safety Program: 
4.6 Hazardous Drug Risk Acknowledgement: 
• All personnel who handle HDs in any capacity at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies 
read and electronically acknowledge the HD Risk Sign Off form in SoleSource® Simplifi 797®. 
The HD risk acknowledgement occurs prior to performing any HD handling activities and 
annually. This HD Risk Acknowledgement includes: 
o Understanding that HDs are used at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
o Awareness that HDs have risks associated with them and those risks are understood by 
the individual. 
o Agreement that HD training has been provided to the individual and all tests, 
competencies and assessments have been completed and passed.  
o Attestation that all HD SOPs associated with job-specific duties have been provided to the 
individual, those SOPs are understood by the individual and the individual has been 
afforded the opportunity to ask questions and have questions answered.   
4.7 NIOSH List of Hazardous Drugs Acknowledgement:  
• All personnel who handle HDs in any capacity at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies 
read and electronically acknowledge the NIOSH List Review Acknowledgement  form. The 
NIOSH List Review & Sign -off occurs prior to performing any HD handling activities and 
annually. This sign-off includes: 
o Understanding that NIOSH list drugs are used at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market 
Pharmacies. 
o Awareness that an organizational list of NIOSH list drugs exists at the FMOLHS Baton 
Rouge Market Pharmacies and the individual knows where to find an up-to-date copy of 
the list.  
o Awareness that NIOSH list drugs have risks associated with them and those risks are 
understood by the individual. 
 
Hazardous Drug Exposure Follow-Up Plan:  
4.8 The FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies’  HD exposure follow-up plan serves as a plan to 
assess personnel who have experienced an acute exposure to HDs.  
4.9 The following actions are taken by FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies  during the HD 
exposure follow-up plan: 
• A post-exposure examination is performed: 
o Physical exam is tailored to the type of exposure and focuses on the involved area as well 
as other organ systems commonly affected. 
o Treatments and laboratory studies follow as indicated and are guided by FMOLHS Baton 
Rouge Market Pharmacies’ emergency protocols. 
• An assessment of the extent of exposure is conducted confidentially and an incident report is 
completed.  
o Develop and document action plan to determine source of exposure and/or prevent 
additional exposure of personnel.  o Compare performance of engineering controls to applicable standards. 
o Verify and document all engineering controls in proper operating condition. 
o Verify and document the involved personnel complied with all applicable SOPs. 
o Review SOPs for the use of proper PPE and review employee training and compliance with 
PPE use and SOPS.  
o Review Quality Assurance audits of personnel work practices and compliance.  
o Ensure all required PPE is available for personnel. 
• Provide and document a follow -up medical survey to demonstrate the implemented plan is 
effective.  
• Ensure any exposed personnel receive confidential notification of any adverse health effect. 
Offer alternative duty or temporary reassignment. 
 
5. Definitions 
5.1 Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (API): Any substance or mixture of substances intended to be 
used in the compounding of a drug preparation, thereby becoming the active ingredient in that 
preparation and furnishing pharmacological activity or other direct effect in the diagnoses, cure, 
mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans and animals or affecting the structure 
and function of the body. 
5.2 Assessment of Risk (AoR) : Evaluation of risk to determine alternative containment strategies 
and/or work practices. 
5.3 Containment Primary Engineering Control (C-PEC): A ventilated device designed and operated to 
minimize worker and environmental exposures to HDs by controlling emissions of airborne 
contaminants. 
5.4 Containment Secondary Engineering Control (C-SEC): The room with fixed walls in which the C -
PEC is place. It incorporates specific design and operational parameters required to the contain 
the potential hazard within the compounding room.  
5.5 NIOSH: National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health 
5.6 Safety Data Sheets (SDS): An informational document that provides written or printed material 
concerning a hazardous chemical. The SDS is prepared in accordance with the HCS. 
5.7 Trace HD Waste : Materials that have come into contact with or may contain only a residual 
amount of HD. Usually less than 3% of HD material by weight.   
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <795> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.3 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version. 
6.4 NIOSH List of Antineoplastic and Other Hazardous Drugs in Healthcare Settings, 2016 -161. 
Retrieved 12/2022.  
6.5 Kienle P. The Chapter <800> Answer Book. Bethesda, MD: ASHP; 2017. 6.6 American Society of Health-System Pharmacists. ASHP Guidelines on Handling Hazardous Drugs. 
Am J Health-Sys Pharm. 2018; 75:1996-2031. Retrieved 12/20/22.   
 
 
 
 
 
7. Approval and Review Summary 
 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2025 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2023.  
7.2 Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
7.3 Reviewed with no changes 11/2024. 
 
 