OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Microbiological Air and Surface 
Monitoring Program 
Policy Reference #: PH0536 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 5/30/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy serves as the comprehensive microbiological air and surface monitoring program for 
all sterile compounding areas where Compounded Sterile Preparations (CSP) are prepared within 
FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
1.2. The microbiological monitoring program at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies provides 
information on the environmental quality of the compounding area(s) including data that is used 
to:  
• determine if a state of microbial control exists within Primary Engineering Controls (PECs), 
Secondary Engineering Controls (SECs), and the sterile compounding area collectively  
• assess the effectiveness of cleaning procedures and agents  
• identify environmental quality trends over time  
• identify potential routes and risks of contamination  
• allow for implementation of corrective actions to minimize the risk of CSP contamination 
• detect trends over time 
1.3. The microbiological monitoring program includes data collected via two sampling methods: 
• Viable airborne sampling – volumetric active air sampling conducted in classified areas to 
detect and assess microbial air quality. 
• Surface sampling – sampling of high touch, materials staging, and direct work surfaces to 
evaluate facility and work surface cleaning and disinfecting procedures, materials handling 
procedures, and personnel competency in related work practices.  
2. Policy  
2.1 It is the policy that FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies maintain a microbiological air and 
surface monitoring program in all sterile compounding areas to include 1) viable impact 
volumetric airborne particulate sampling and 2) surface sampling.] Refer to Sterile Compounding 
Program Overview for all sterile compounding locations.  
2.2 The microbiological monitoring program includes viable impact volumetric airborne particulate 
sampling (air sampling) under dynamic operating conditions and surface sampling at the end of 
a compounding activity or shift and before the area has been cleaned and disinfected. 2.3 Viable impact volumetric airborne particulate sampling is performed by an independently 
certified testing agency.  
2.4 Surface sampling is performed by an independently certified testing agency or by the DP or AT.   
• Monthly surface sampling is performed by internal staff and semi -annual and/or ad hoc 
sampling is performed by an independent 3rd party.  
2.5 All classified ISO locations at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies are maintained under the 
following action levels: 
o ISO Class 
Viable Air Sample 
CFU/cubic meter of air 
per plate 
Viable Surface Sample 
CFU per sampling 
device 
ISO 5 > 1 >3 
ISO 7 > 10 > 5 
ISO 8 > 100 > 50 
 
2.6 The frequency of microbiological sampling occurs based on the category of CSPs compounded.  
 
Sample Type Category 1 CSPs Frequency Category 2 CSPs Frequency 
Air Sample Every 6 months Every 6 months 
 
Surface Sample 
Monthly Monthly 
In conjunction with media fill testing 
 
 
2.7 All personnel who perform microbiological air and surface sampling at FMOLHS Baton Rouge 
Market Pharmacies are trained and competent in all sampling procedures and this training is 
documented in SoleSource® Simplifi 797®.  
• The DP determines personnel who are trained in microbiological monitoring. 
• Training in microbiological monitoring is annual and includes: 
o Surface sampling procedures 
o Incubation of sample procedures 
o Analysis and documentation of microbiological sampling results and trends 
2.8 Microbiological air and surface sampling are performed under the following circumstances: 
• Upon the opening of the sterile compounding area to establish a baseline of control 
• In conjunction with the certification of new facilities and new equipment 
• After any servicing of facilities or equipment • In response to identified problems  
• In response to identified trends 
• In response to changes that impact the sterile compounding environment 
 
2.9 The locations for microbiological air and surface sampling are denoted on the sterile 
compounding facility diagram Appendix One and represent locations posing the highest potential 
for CSP contamination. 
• Air sampling locations are established in all ISO Class 5 PECs, all ISO Class 7 rooms and ISO 
Class 8 rooms in selected high traffic areas.  
• Each sampling location on the sterile compounding facility diagram has an associated Sample 
ID. All Sample IDs are unique, duplicating Sample IDs is not allowed within the facility even if 
the sterile compounding area is in a physically different location within the facility. The 
designation is as follows: 
o Air Samples: A1, A2, etc. 
o Surface Samples: S1, S2, etc. 
2.10 All active air sampling devices are calibrated yearly or per manufacturer recommendation and 
preventative maintenance occurs as required by the manufacturer and documented per the 
independent testing agency’s policy.  
2.11 All microbial air and surface monitoring procedures, testing results, investigations into 
actionable results and corrective actions are documented the independent testing agency’s 
reports and SoleSource® Simplifi797®.  Monthly surface sampling results are scanned into the 
shared T: drive. 
2.12 Personnel performing microbiological sampling in Hazardous Drug (HD) compounding locations 
follow all policies and procedures associated with USP <800>.  
• All equipment used in HD locations is deactivated and decontaminated upon the conclusion 
of testing per USP <800> policies. 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Person(s): 
• Compiles and evaluates results from microbial air and surface sampling. The data is 
reviewed to determine if contamination is present in the sterile compounding areas at 
unacceptable levels and detect trends. The DP also assesses: potential risks for 
contamination of CSPs, potential routes of contamination of CSPs, that proper personnel 
practices are being followed, and the adequacy of cleaning and disinfecting agents and 
procedures.  
• Reviews results from microbiological air and surface sampling in conjunction with sterile 
compounding staff training records, personnel visual observations and personnel 
competency assessments to assess the state of microbial control in the sterile compounding 
area and to identify potential risks of contamination. 
• Formulates corrective action plans in response to any adverse findings with microbiological 
air and/or surface sampling with the involvement and input of subject matter experts (e.g. 
microbiologist, facilities and HVAC systems engineers, etc.) as needed.  • Reviews results and data after corrective action plans are implemented to confirm that the 
actions taken are effective in achieving a state of microbial control in the sterile 
compounding area. 
 
3.2. Microbiological sampling personnel: 
• Complies with hand hygiene and garbing requirements 
• Only enters controlled areas under the supervision and guidance of the Designated 
Person(s). 
• Ensures all equipment and supplies introduced into a classified sterile environment are 
appropriately cleaned and disinfected.  External vendor equipment that has been exposed 
external environmental conditions is cleaned of all visible dirt and contaminati on and then 
wiped with a sporicidal agent prior to entry into a controlled area.  The equipment is then 
cleaned and disinfected as it is introduced into the sterile area (i.e., crossing the line of 
demarcation) and again before being placed inside of a PEC, if applicable.     
4.  Procedures 
Viable Air Sampling: 
 
4.1 Volumetric active air sampling occurs in all ISO classified areas during dynamic operating conditions 
• Air sampling locations are identified on the sterile compounding facility 
diagram in Appendix One.  
• Air sampling is performed in hazardous drug compounding areas. When 
performing air sampling in hazardous drug areas, follow all USP <800> 
precautions, including donning appropriate PPE. 
• Air sampling occurs under static conditions upon the opening of a new sterile 
compounding location or after major repair and/or construction in the sterile 
compounding location.  
 
4.2 Air sampling occurs:  
• Initially upon opening of sterile compounding facility and every 6 months 
 
4.3 The unidirectional airflow inside the Primary Engineering Control (PEC) is not disturbed when air 
sampling is conducted. Refer to volumetric air sampler manual for instructions of use, including 
the direction of airflow after media impaction occurs. Never compromise first air inside the Direct 
Compounding Area (DCA) of the PEC when performing air sampling.   
 
4.4 Microbiological growth media used for air sampling supports the growth of bacteria and fungi.  
• Certificate of Analysis (COA) for all growth media used for air sampling is obtained from the 
manufacturer. 
o All COA documents are verified to be sure the media meets the expected growth 
promotion and sterilization requirements and are retained. 
 
4.5 Incubate air samples at temperatures that promote growth of bacteria and fungi. The incubator 
temperatures are monitored the independent testing agency or their contracted laboratory.  
• Two incubators are used: o One set for 30 to 35oC 
o One set for 20 to 25oC  
• The incubators are located outside of the sterile compounding area in a dedicated area 4.6 Complete air sampling documentation forms every time an air sampling activity occurs. Include the 
following information (at minimum) on the form: 
• Date and time of air sampling 
• Individual(s) sampling 
• Growth media used – including manufacturer, type, lot number and 
expiration 
• Air sampler used 
• Volume of air drawn 
• Sampling conditions (dynamic or static, regular scheduled testing or testing 
after remediation) 
• Sampling locations 
• Incubation temperatures and length of incubation 
• Final growth media reading results 
 
4.7 Active air sampling procedure:  
• Remove sampling plates from the refrigerator and check the expiration date. 
Wipe the outside of the manufacture’s overwrap with Sterile Isopropyl 
Alcohol (sIPA). 
• Collect all supplies needed for air sampling and disinfect with Peridox RTU® 
or sIPA prior to moving components into the ISO 7 environment.  
• Allow sampling plates to come to room temperature prior to sampling. 
• Complete all hand hygiene and garbing procedures prior to the beginning of 
air sampling procedures 
• Follow all instructions supplied for the active air sampling device, this includes 
placement of media 
• The device used for air sampling is cleaned with sIPA and allowed to dry. 
• Move all components into the ISO 5 environment. 
• Sanitize gloved hands with sIPA and remove required plates from overwrap 
• Collect two samples, one TSA for bacteria and one Sabouraud Dextrose Agar 
(SDA) for fungi. of at least 1 cubic meter (or 1000 L) of air at each sampling 
location indicated on the facility testing diagram.  
• Sanitize gloved hands and retrieve growth media from testing device upon 
completion, replace lid and apply tape or a clear wax seal if needed to secure. 
Label sampling plate on the base using a permanent marker with the Sample 
ID per facility diagram sampling plan, the date of air sample and the initials of 
the individual performing the air sample.   
• Invert sampling plate and incubate: 
o Place each sample from every location in separate incubators 
o Incubate one sample from each location at 30o – 35oC for a minimum 
of 48 hours for bacterial growth 
o Incubate the second sample from each location at 20 o – 25oC for a 
minimum of 5 days for fungal growth  
Count and record the total number of discrete colonies detected as CFU per cubic meter of air for each 
media type. Record all information on the active air sampling environmental sampling form indicating: 
type of environmental sample (air), location of air sample, date of sample, and number of CFUs observed.  Surface Sampling: 
4.8 Surface sampling occurs in all ISO classified areas during dynamic operating conditions 
• Surface sampling locations are identified on the sterile compounding facility diagram in 
Appendix One.  
• Surface sampling is performed in hazardous drug compounding areas. All USP 
<800> precautions are followed when surface sampling occurs in this type of 
compounding location.  
• Surface sampling occurs under static conditions upon the opening of a new 
sterile compounding location or after major repair and/or construction in the 
sterile compounding location. 
 
4.9 Surface sampling is performed:  
• Monthly at the end of compounding activity or shift and before the area has been cleaned 
and disinfected. 
• In conjunction with media-fill testing to assess aseptic manipulation competency 
o Surface sampling is performed on the DCA following media-fill testing 
• Every 6 months by an independent testing agency during recertification. 
 
4.10 The microbiological growth media devi ces used for surface sampling support the growth of 
bacteria and fungi. For monthly surface sampling, plates of TSA with lecithin and polysorbate 80 
is used for both bacteria and fungi. The independent testing agency is to use TSA for bacteria and 
MDA for fungi during recertification testing. 
• Surface sampling devices contain general microbial growth media supplemented with 
neutralizing additives to neutralize the effects of any residual disinfecting agents. 
• Surface sampling devices have a raised convex surface 
• Sterile swabs wetted with sterile water or a sterile neutralizing buffer may be used to sample 
irregular surfaces and hard to reach locations such as crevices, corners, and spaces between 
surfaces  
• Certificate of Analysis (COA) for all growth media used for air sampling is obtained from the 
manufacturer. 
o All COA documents are verified to be sure the media meets the expected growth 
promotion, pH, and sterilization requirements. 
 
4.11 Incubation of surface samples occurs at temperatures that promote growth of bacteria and fungi. 
Monitoring of incubator temperatures occurs  by the independent testing agency or their 
contracted laboratory, or manually by pharmacy staff for monthly surface sampling.  
Documentation of incubator temperatures for monthly surface sampling  occurs in SoleSource® 
Simplifi 797®. • Two incubators are used: 
o One is set for 30 to 35oC 
o One is set for 20 to 25oC 
• The incubator is located outside of the sterile compounding area in a 
dedicated area 
 
4.12 Complete surface sampling documentation forms every time a surface sampling activity occurs. 
Include the following information (at minimum) on the form: 
• Date and time of surface sampling 
• Individual(s) sampling 
• Growth media used – including manufacturer, type, lot number and 
expiration 
• Sampling conditions (dynamic or static, regular scheduled testing or testing 
after remediation) 
• Sampling locations 
• Incubation temperatures and length of incubation 
• Final growth media reading results 
 
4.13 Surface sampling procedure for monthly testing:  
• Remove sampling devices from the refrigerator and check the expiration 
date. Wipe the outside of the manufacture’s overwrap with sIPA. 
• Collect all supplies needed for surface sampling and disinfect with Peridox 
RTU® or sIPA prior to moving components into the ISO 7 environment.  
• Allow sampling devices to come to room temperature prior to sampling. 
• All hand hygiene and garbing procedures are completed prior to the 
beginning of surface sampling procedures. 
• Move all components into the ISO 5 environment, wiping each component 
with sIPA. 
• Sanitize gloved hands with sIPA and remove the cover from the surface 
sampling device. 
• Using a rolling motion, firmly press the growth media surface onto the surface 
being sampled. 
• Place the cover back on the surface sampling device and apply tape to secure 
cover if needed. 
• Sampled area is wiped with 70% sterile Isopropyl Alcohol (IPA) to remove 
residue 
• Sampling devices are covered and stored so that condensation does not drip 
onto the agar  
• The growth media is incubated: 
o At 30o – 35oC for a minimum of 48 hours for bacterial growth 
• Examine growth media daily if possible, and at the completion of 48 hours. Count 
and record the total number of discrete colonies detected as CFU per surface 
sample. Record all information on the surface sampling environmental sampling 
form indicating: type of environmental sample (surface), location of surface sample, 
date of sample, and number of CFUs observed.  
o The surface sample is then incubated at 20 o – 25oC for a minimum of 5 days for fungal 
growth • Examine growth media daily if possible and at the completion of 5 days. Count and 
record the total number of discrete colonies detected as CFU per surface sample. 
Record all information on the surface sampling environmental sampling form 
indicating: type of environmental sample (surface), location of surface sample, date 
of sample, and number of CFUs observed. 
• At the conclusion of surface sampling all sites in the sterile compounding area, thoroughly 
clean all sampled locations with Peridox RTU® followed by sIPA prior to resuming sterile 
compounding. 
 
4.14 Surface sampling procedure for semiannual recertification:  
• Remove sampling devices from the refrigerator and check the expiration 
date. Wipe the outside of the manufacture’s overwrap with sIPA. 
• Collect all supplies needed for surface sampling and disinfect with Peridox 
RTU® or sIPA prior to moving components into the ISO 7 environment.  
• Allow sampling devices to come to room temperature prior to sampling. 
• All hand hygiene and garbing procedures are completed prior to the 
beginning of surface sampling procedures. 
• Move all components into the ISO 5 environment, wiping each component 
with sIPA. 
• Sanitize gloved hands with sIPA and remove the cover from the surface 
sampling device 
• Using a rolling motion, firmly press the growth media surface onto the surface 
being sampled 
• Place the cover back on the surface sampling device and apply tape or a clear 
wax seal to secure cover if needed 
• Sampled area is wiped with 70% sIPA to remove residue. 
• Sampling devices are covered and stored so that condensation does not drip 
onto the agar  
o Place each sample from every location in separate incubators 
o Incubate one sample from each location at 30o – 35oC for a minimum 
of 48 hours for bacterial growth 
o Incubate the second sample from each location at 20 o – 25oC for a 
minimum of 5 days for fungal growth  
o Count and record the total number of discrete colonies detected as 
CFU per surface sample device. Record results as CFU per surface 
sample device. Record all information on the surface sampling 
environmental sampling form indicating type of environmental 
sample (surface), location of surface sample, date of sample, and 
number of CFUs observed.  
• At the conclusion of surface sampling all sites in the sterile compounding 
area, thoroughly clean all sampled locations and disinfect per policy prior to 
resuming sterile compounding.  
 
Shipping Microbiological Samples:: 
 
4.15 Microbiological samples not incubated at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies are shipped 
to a vendor within 24 hours of collection for incubation, CFU counting and identification.   
4.16 Microbiological samples not identified at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies are shipped 
to a vendor within 24 hours for identification.  
 
4.17 Complete the necessary chain of custody forms and prepare, package, and ship/deliver media 
per the specifications provided by the 3rd party laboratory, ensuring samples are protected from 
damage and environmental extremes during transit.  
 
Reading and Interpreting Results: 
4.19 Compare all CFUs recovered to previous sample data to identify adverse results or trends over 
time.  
• This comparison occurs even when the results fall below the action level for the 
sample taken. 
4.20 Consult a microbiologist and /or a member of Infections Disease/Infection Prevention 
department to assist in determining appropriate remediation steps and assess trends in resulted 
alert or action levels. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
o ISO Class 
Viable Air Sample 
CFU/cubic meter of air per plate 
Viable Surface Sample 
CFU per sampling device 
Alert Level Action Level Alert Level Action Level 
ISO 5 >0 > 1 >0 >3 
ISO 7 >5 > 10 >0 > 5 
ISO 8 >50 > 100 >25 > 50 Actionable Findings:  
 
4.21 If levels of CFUs measured at any of the air sampling or surface sampling testing locations 
exceeds the action level, attempt to identify the microorganisms present down to the genus level 
with the assistance of a microbiologist. Take immediate action, investigate the cause of the out 
of limits sample and begin a corrective action plan. 
• The microbiologist assists with determining the risk of compromising the sterility of 
CSPs based on the results; especially in the case of any concerning organisms. 
• The microbiologist assists with determining the appropriate remediation steps for the 
ISP classified locations with actionable findings. 
 
4.22 The corrective action plan is dependent on the number of CFUs resulted and the microorganism 
recovered. 
• Examples of corrective actions include: process or facility improvements, personnel training, 
cleaning and disinfection, or HEPA filter repair and/or replacement 
o The corrective action investigation includes evaluation of any trends reviewed at each sampling 
location.  
o Immediate action is dependent on the ISO classification of the sample location. Examples of 
immediate action based on location: 
 
Immediate Actions based on ISO Classifications and Occurrence Frequency 
 
ISO 
Classification: 1st Occurrence 2nd Occurrence 
ISO 5 PEC - Sporicidal clean PEC 
- Decrease BUD to 12 hours 
- Schedule repeat testing 
- Cease compounding in ISO 5 PEC until 
repeat testing passes 
- Triple clean (sporicidal, germicidal and 
sIPA) 
- Schedule repeat testing 
ISO 7 SEC  
Buffer or Ante 
-Sporicidal clean 
-Schedule repeat testing  
-Decrease BUD to 12 hours until repeat 
testing passes 
-Triple clean (sporicidal, germicidal and 
sIPA) 
-Schedule repeat testing 
ISO 8 SEC  -Sporicidal clean 
-Schedule repeat testing 
-Triple clean (sporicidal, germicidal and 
sIPA) 
-Schedule repeat testing 
**Any subsequent occurrences, drop BUD 
to 12 hours until repeat testing passes 
o The corrective action investigation includes a team consisting of but not limited to: 
• Pharmacy/facility leadership 
• Infection prevention specialist 
• Engineering and/or facilities operations leadership 
• Environmental Services 
• Outside cleaning services 
• Microbiology department or microbiologist o All members contributing to a corrective action are documented on the corrective 
action plan. 
o The investigation and corrective action are contingent a number of factors including, 
but not limited to: 
• ISO classification of area with actionable environmental findings  
• Magnitude of actionable finding  
• First or repeated actionable finding upon retest 
• Environmental trends in actionable sites and controlled area(s) over time 
• ISO certifications current and in good standing 
• HEPA filter repairs and/or replacements 
• Maintenance of air flow systems current (e.g. air conditioner, exhaust and/or supply 
fans) 
• Maintenance and repairs of facility and compounding area current 
• Personnel training and competencies current and in good standing 
• Controlled and observed access for all non -compounding personnel and 3 rd parties 
entering the controlled environment 
• Proper selection, use, and timing of use of cleaning, disinfecting, and application of 
sporicidal agents 
• Other potential factors (e.g. major facilities repair or construction projects inside or in 
the vicinity of the controlled area; actionable environmental findings elsewhere in the 
facility(ies) or community; etc.) 
• Following implementation of the corrective action and abatement of the assumed 
contamination(s), re-test the location(s) per steps outlined previously. 
• To confirm action plan effectiveness, compile and review data obtained from re -
testing and update action plan with this data.  
• Document the corrective action and all follow up air and surface sampling Solesource® 
Simplifi 797®. 
 
5. Definitions 
5.1 Certificate of analysis (COA): A report from the supplier of a component, container, or closure 
that accompanies the supplier’s material and contains the specifications and results of all 
analyses and a description of material 
5.2 Designated Person (DP) : One or more individuals assigned to be responsible and accountable 
for the performance and operation of the compounding facility and personnel in the preparation 
of CSPs. 
5.3 Dynamic operating conditions:  Conditions in the compounding area in which operating 
personnel are present and simulating or performing compounding. The conditions should reflect 
the largest number of personnel and highest complexity of compounding expected during 
routine operations.  
5.4 ISO Class: An air-quality classification from the International Organization for Standardization 
5.5 Primary Engineering Control (PEC):  A device or zone that provides and ISO Class 5 air quality 
environment for sterile compounding. 
5.6 Restricted-access barrier system (RABS) : An enclosure that provides HEPA -filtered ISO Class 5 
unidirectional air that allows for the ingress and/or egress of materials through defined openings that have been designed and validated to preclude the transfer of contamination and that 
generally are not to be opened during operations. 
5.7 Secondary Engineering Control (SEC): The area where the PEC is placed (e.g. a cleanroom suite 
or SCA). It incorporates specific design and operational parameters required to minimize the risk 
of contamination within the compounding area.  
5.8 Triple clean:  consists of two separate and distinct applications of an approved one -step 
disinfectant cleaner (allowing for full wet contact time between applications) followed by a 
separate application of an approved sporicidal disinfectant; remove cleaning agent residue with 
sIPA. 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 proposed version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version. 
6.3 CAG-009:2020 CETA Certification Application Guide USP Viable Environmental Sampling & 
Gowning Evaluation.  
7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 5/2025 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2022.  
7.2 Revised 5/2024 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
  APPENDIX ONE – Facility Diagrams 
OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy 
  
OLOL Non-Oncology Infusion 
  
North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy
  
 
OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy 
  
 
OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient Pharmacy 
  
 
OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
 
 
