OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Labeling, Packaging and Transport of 
Hazardous Drugs 
Policy Reference #: PH0553 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the procedures for labeling, packaging and transport activities where 
Hazardous Drugs (HDs) are prepared and/or handled within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market 
Pharmacies.  
1.2. Proper labeling of HDs conveys and alerts personnel handling HD products to the specific 
handling, storage, and transport requirements and the need to don appropriate PPE designed to 
protect personnel, patients, and the environment.  
1.3. This SOP refers to all HD API, antineoplastic HDs requiring manipulation (beyond counting or 
repackaging), and other non-antineoplastic and reproductive risk only HD dosage forms for which 
an assessment of risk (AoR) has not been performed. 
2. Policy  
2.1 Access to areas where HDs are received, stored, and prepared is limited to authorized staff only. 
2.2 HD storage locations have proper signage indicating that HDs are stored inside. 
2.3 HDs are labeled, packaged, and transported using methods outlined in USP <800> that protect 
employees, the surrounding environment, and others who may encounter them inside and 
outside the healthcare facility. 
2.4 Any employee who may be expected to label, package, and/or transport any form of HDs during 
normal job duties wear appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) as defined in the HD 
PPE Policy. 
2.5 Any employee who may be expected to  label, package, and/or transport any form of HD during 
normal job duties is trained and has documented competency on proper handling of HDs per HD 
Training Policy. 
2.5. HD medications are packaged in containers and materials that maintain physical integrity, 
stability, and sterile (if appropriate) during transport. 
2.6. Transported HDs are labeled, stored and handled in accordance with applicable federal, state, 
and local regulations.  2.7. Pneumatic tube systems are not used to transport liquid HDs or any antineoplastic HDs to reduce 
the risk for container or packaging damage or contamination. 
2.8. When repackaging oral dosage forms of HD medications (unless specified differently in AoR), 
automated counting or automated packaging machines are not utilized.   
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Person (DP): 
• Ensures all HDs are identified per the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) list and maintains the list of organizational HDs specifically handled at this facility. 
• Ensures all personnel have education and training in the foundational knowledge and skills 
needed to handle HDs and perform labeling, packaging, and transport job duties successfully 
and safely; per this policy and in order to minimize HD exposure in the facility. 
• Provides immediate access to the SOPs, USP <800> and supporting Chapters and supporting 
regulations, and other expert documentation to perform job duties successfully and safely.   
3.2 Personnel involved in HD handling: 
• Remain current and in good standing on all required education, trainings, evaluations, and 
assessments pertaining to handling HDs.  
• Ensure all HDs are labeled, packaged, and transported appropriately per this SOP 
• Follow all procedures for wearing appropriate PPE for the handling of HDs. 
• Follow all procedures for handling HDs in order to limit the potential for harm to healthcare 
personnel from occupational exposure to HDs 
4.  Procedures 
 
Labeling of Hazardous Drugs: 
4.1 All HD Compounded Sterile Preparations (CSPs) are labeled with the required label elements per 
applicable state and local regulations and per USP <797> and per CSP labeling policy. 
4.2 All HD Compounded Nonsterile Preparations (CNSPs) are labeled with the required label 
elements per applicable state and local regulations and per USP <795> and per CNSP labeling 
policy. 
4.3 FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies have specific labeling elements to differentiate and 
designate HDs from non-hazardous drugs throughout the life cycle of the drug in the facility.  
4.4 Apply HD labels to both the final HD dosage form and to the transport packaging, if needed, in 
which the final dose is placed. 
4.5 Apply labels, whenever possible, to the final dosage form of CSP and CNSP outside of the C -PEC 
once the final CSP and CNSP has been decontaminated.  
4.6 When the final dosage form is delivered outside of the primary facility, labeling on the transport 
container includes instructions on storage, disposal, and identification of the HD category in a 
format that is compatible with the third-party carrier’s requirements.  
 
Packaging of Hazardous Drugs: 
4.7 Use clean equipment and supplies when packaging HDs. 4.8 Maintain HD only dedicated equipment and supplies and segregate these supplies within 
FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. Always utilize HD dedicated supplies and equipment 
when packaging HDs.   
4.9 Depending on the final dosage form, FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies may employ all 
potential exposure-reducing strategies to reduce the risk of exposure to HDs during transport 
and administration. These strategies include: 
• Unit-dose products are purchased when available 
• Luer-lock connectors 
• Packaging final dosage forms of CSPs with Closed System Transfer Devices (CSTDs) 
• HD Labeling 
• Removing HD residue from the final dosage form of CSPs and CNSPs 
• Placing final decontaminated dosage forms of CSPs and CNSPs into amber bags, which are 
then placed into preprinted zippered hazardous or chemotherapy bags for transport  
4.10 Select containers to package final doses of CSPs that have been verified to maintain the physical 
integrity, stability, and sterility of the HD CSP.  
4.11 Place final dosage forms of CSPs and CSNPs in HD labeled transport packaging (zippered plastic 
bags).  
 
Transport of Hazardous Drugs: 
4.12 Personnel transporting HDs in HD labeled transport packaging (zippered plastic bags) wear one 
pair of chemotherapy gloves during transport.  
4.13 Final dosage forms of CSPs and CNSPs (already in transport bags) that are transported outside of 
FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies’ physical location are transported in a manner that 
minimizes risk of damage during delivery and will contain leaks if damage does occur to the final 
dosage form. 
4.14 For HDs being delivered outside the healthcare facility; follow all applicable labeling, storage, 
and handling requirements per federal, state, and local regulations. 
4.15 Ensure packaging of the final HD dosage form for transport maintains the required storage 
temperature associated with the assigned Beyond -Use Date (BUD). Proper storage conditions 
are met the entire time the HD is in transport to the final location or patient.  
4.16 Personnel involved in the transport of HDs are trained in all steps required to identify and clean 
an HD spill per HD Spill Policy.  
 
5. Definitions 
5.1 Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (API): Any substance or mixture of substances intended to be 
used in the compounding of a drug preparation, thereby becoming the active ingredient in that 
preparation and furnishing pharmacological activity or other direct effect in the diagnoses, cure, 
mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans and animals or affecting the structure 
and function of the body. 
5.2 Assessment of Risk (AoR) : Evaluation of risk to determine alternative containment strategies 
and/or work practices. 5.3 Automated Dispensing Cabinet (ADC): A computerized cabinet that allows for medications to be 
stored and dispensed near patient care areas while controlling and tracking medication 
distribution. 
5.4 Chemotherapy glove: A powder -free medical glove that meets the ASTM Standard Practice for 
Assessment of Resistance of Medical Gloves to Permeation by Chemotherapy Drugs (D6978) or 
its successor. Gloves are either sterile or non-sterile depending on use.   
5.5 Containment segregated compounding area (C-SCA): A type of C-SEC with nominal requirements 
for airflow and room pressurization as they pertain to HD compounding 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
6.3 American Society of Health-System Pharmacists. ASHP Guidelines on Handling Hazardous Drugs. 
Am J Health-Sys Pharm. 2018; 75:1996-2031. Retrieved 12/20/22.  
6.4 Kienle P. The Chapter <800> Answer Book. Bethesda, MD: ASHP; 2017. 
6.5 American Society of Health-System Pharmacists. ASHP Guidelines on Handling Hazardous Drugs. 
Am J Health-Sys Pharm. 2018; 75:1996-2031. Retrieved 12/20/22.  
7. Approval and Review Summary 
 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2025 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2023.  
7.2 Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
7.3 Reviewed with no changes 11/2024. 
 
 