OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Facilities and Engineering Controls for 
Sterile Compounding Areas 
Policy Reference #: PH0534 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 12/02/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the design standards and acceptance criteria for sterile compounding 
facilities and engineering controls within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
• Sterile compounding facilities must be designed, outfitted, and maintained properly to 
minimize the risk of contamination of compounded sterile preparations (CSPs).  
1.2. These design standards and specifications guide new construction, remodels, and maintenance 
of existing spaces to ensure compliance with USP <797> and other applicable standards or 
regulations.  
1.3. Primary Engineering Controls (PECs) and Secondary Engineering Controls (SECs) aid in achieving 
required air quality classifications. Proper design and controls are required to minimize the risk 
of exposure of CSPs to airborne contaminants.  
• Primary Engineering Controls (PECs) are devices or zones that provide an ISO Class 5 air 
quality environment for sterile compounding.  
• Classified areas in which the air quality is controlled include ante rooms, buffer rooms, and 
PECs.  
• Anterooms are areas where personnel hand hygiene and garbing are performed, as well as 
staging of components, and other activities that generate higher levels of particulates.  
Anterooms are also transition areas to ensure proper air classification and pressure 
relationships are maintained between classified and unclassified areas.   
• Buffer rooms are where ISO Class 5 PECs are located and CSPs are prepared.   
• Together, the anteroom and buffer room(s) comprise the Cleanroom Suite.  
• Segregated Compounding Areas (SCAs)  are unclassified areas without an ante room or 
buffer room. PECs may be located in an SCA, but limited to Category 1 compounding.  
• The ISO standards for air quality in controlled environments are provided below and 
referenced throughout this policy.  
 
ISO CLASSIFICATION OF PARTICULATE MATTER IN ROOM 
AIR 
ISO Class Particle Count per Cubic Meter 
3 35.2 
4 352 
5 3520 6 35,200 
7 352,000 
8 3,520,000 
• Refer to the Sterile Compounding Program Overview for a summary of the types of PECs 
and SECs used at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
 
2. Policy  
2.1. Cleanroom suites and segregated compounding areas (SCA) are separated from areas not directly 
related to compounding.  
2.2. Facility designs take into account the number of personnel and their movements, and the impact 
the placement of equipment, supplies, and components could have on the maintenance of air 
quality.   
2.3. Compounding facilities must be designed so that air quality improves with movement through 
separate operational areas to the PEC.  
2.4. Design and Acceptance Criteria for PECs 
• The PEC provides the direct compounding area for preparation of CSPs.  Unidirectional 
airflow must be maintained in the PEC.   
• The PEC selected must meet ISO 5 classification during dynamic operating conditions and 
be designed to minimize the risk of contamination during compounding of CSPs.  
• Placement of the PEC within the SEC or SCA must allow for cleaning around the PEC. 
2.5. Design and Acceptance Criteria for the Cleanroom Suite: 
• The surfaces of ceilings, walls, floors, doors, door frames, fixtures, shelving, work surfaces, 
counters, and cabinets in the classified area must be smooth, impervious, free from cracks 
and crevices, and non -shedding so they can be cleaned and disinfected  and to minimize 
spaces in which microorganisms and other contaminants can accumulate.   
Surfaces should be resistant to damage (e.g., rust) by cleaning agents, sporicidal and other 
types of disinfectants, and tools used to clean.  
• Junctures between the ceiling and the walls and between the walls and the floor must be 
sealed to eliminate cracks and crevices where dirt can accumulate.  
If ceilings consist of inlaid panels, the panels must be caulked around each panel to seal them 
to the support frame.  
• Walls must be constructed of, or may be covered with, durable material (e.g., epoxy painted 
walls or heavy-gauge polymer) and the integrity of the surface must be maintained.   
Panels must be joined together and sealed to each other and the support structure.  
• Floors must include coving to the sidewall, or the juncture between the floor and the wall 
must be caulked.  
• Classified areas should minimize dust-collecting overhangs, such as utility pipes, and ledges, 
such as windowsills.   
If overhangs and ledges are present, they must be easily cleanable.   
The exterior lens surface of ceiling light fixtures must be smooth, mounted flush, and sealed.  
Any other penetrations through the ceiling (e.g., fire sprinklers, HEPA testing ports), must be 
sealed.   
• Ante Room design considerations 
The ante room must have a line of demarcation to separate the clean side from the dirty side.  
 
2.6. Design and Acceptance Criteria for the SCA: • The SCA must contain a PEC and is suitable for compounding of Category 1 CSPs only.   
• The SCA and all surfaces (e.g., walls, floors, counters, and equipment) in the SCA must be 
clean, uncluttered and dedicated to compounding.   
• Surfaces in the SCA should be smooth, impervious, free from cracks and crevices, and non-
shedding so they can be easily cleaned and disinfected and to minimize spaces in which 
microorganisms and other contaminants can accumulate.   
Surfaces should be resistant to damage (e.g., rust) by cleaning agents, sporicidal and other 
types of disinfectants, and tools used to clean.  
• Dust-collecting overhangs, such as utility pipes, and ledges, such as windowsills, should be 
minimized.   
If overhangs or ledges are present, they must be easily cleanable.  
• The SCA must be located away from unsealed windows, doors that connect to the outdoors, 
and traffic flow, all of which may adversely affect the air quality in the PEC.   
• The SCA must not be located in where environmental control challenges (e.g., restrooms, 
warehouses, or food preparation areas) could negatively affect the air quality of the PEC 
within the SCA.   
• The area within 1 m of the PEC should be dedicated only for sterile compounding and 
defined with a Perimeter Line, if the SCA is not physically separated by walls.  
 
2.7. Water Sources 
• Sink placement for hand hygiene and garbing is considered based on workflow and function 
of the PEC and SEC.  
Sinks should enable hands-free use. 
• Cleanroom Suite:  
If the sink is located outside the ante room, it must be located in a clean space to minimize 
the risk of bringing contaminants into the ante room.  
If the sink is located inside the ante room, it may be placed on either the clean side or the 
dirty side of the ante room.   
[Note: the order of hand washing and garbing depends on the placement of the sink.] 
The buffer room must not contain plumbed water sources.  
The ante room must not contain floor drain(s).  
If installed, sprinkler systems should be recessed and covered, and the covers should be easily 
cleanable.  
• Segregated Compounding Area: 
A hand-washing sink must be placed not closer than 1m to the PEC and may be either inside 
the SCA or in close proximity to the SCA.  
 
2.8. Other design considerations for maintaining the compounding environment: 
• Sterile compounding facilities must be designed to provide a well -lighted and comfortable 
working environment.  Refer to USP <1066>:  Physical Environment That Promote Safe 
Medication Use for additional details and considerations.  
• Temperature: The cleanroom suite should be maintained at a temperature of 20°C  or cooler 
to minimize the risk of microbial proliferation and provide comfortable compounding 
conditions for personnel.  
Temperatures will not exceed 20 -25°C/68-77°F  for controlled room temperature, per USP 
<659> Packaging and Storage Requirements.  o Temperature is monitored in unclassified areas e.g., SCAs and all medication storage 
areas to ensure appropriate storage conditions.  
• Humidity: The cleanroom suite should be maintained at a relative humidity of 65% or below 
to minimize the risk of microbial proliferation and provide comfortable compounding 
conditions for personnel.   
o Free-standing air conditioners, humidifiers and dehumidifiers must not be used within 
the classified area or SCA.  
• Temperature and humidity must be monitored in each room of the cleanroom suite each 
day that compounding is performed, either manually or by a continuous recording device, 
and results documented at least once daily or stored in the continuous recording device.  
• Temperature and humidity monitoring devices must be verified for accuracy at least every 
12 months or as required by the manufacturer.  
• Pressure: Pressure differentials minimize airflow between areas of different classifications.   
Positive pressure of at least 0.02” w.c. is required between adjacent ISO classified areas e.g. 
between the buffer room and ante room; and between the ante room and unclassified 
main pharmacy area.   
Where pressure differentials are required, a monitoring device must be used to continuously 
monitor the pressure differential.  Results must be reviewed and documented at least 
daily on the days when compounding occurs.  
No pressure differential is required for unclassified SCAs.  
Refer to USP <800> for pressure requirements for hazardous drug compounding areas.  
 
2.9. Design and Acceptance Criteria for Air Quality and Air Exchange:  
• Air returns in the cleanroom must be low on the wall unless a visual smoke study 
demonstrates an absence of stagnant airflow.  
• Air quality requirements e.g., ISO classification must be met during dynamic operating 
conditions.  
• Anterooms providing access to positive-pressure buffer rooms must meet at least ISO Class 
8 classification.  
• Anterooms or buffer rooms providing access to negative-pressure buffer rooms must meet 
at least ISO Class 7 classification.  
• A buffer room must meet at least ISO Class 7 air quality.  
• If passthrough chambers are used, both doors must never be opened at the same time.  
• HEPA filters must be placed in the ceiling.  
o Adequate HEPA-filtered airflow to the buffer room and ante room(s) is designed with 
consideration for number of personnel working in the area, number of particles 
generated from activities in the area, equipment located in the room and room 
pressure.   
• Refer to the table below for a summary of requirements for ISO classification, pressure 
differential and air changes.  Additional requirements for HD compounding are found in USP 
<800>.  
If the PEC is used to meet the minimum total ACPH requirements, the PEC remains in 
operation unless turned off for maintenance.  
 
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR ISO CLASSIFICATION, PRESSURE DIFFERENTIAL AND AIR EXCHANGES  
SEC type ISO class Pressure Differential 
(in “w.c.”) 
Air Changes Per 
Hour (ACPH) SCA Unclassified N/A N/A 
C-SCA Unclassified -0.01 to -0.03 ≥ 12 
Non-HD cleanroom 
suite 
Ante room: ISO 8 0.02 ≥ 20* 
Buffer room: ISO 7 0.02 ≥ 30* 
HD cleanroom suite Ante room: ISO 7 
Buffer room: ISO 7 
Ante to Buffer: 0.02 
HD Buffer: -0.01 to -
0.03 
≥ 30 
o *at least 15 ACPH must come from the room HVAC system 
• Refrigerators, freezers and other particle-generating equipment are placed near air returns 
whenever possible.   
• When adding new equipment to an SEC, impact to airflow and air quality is considered.  
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Person(s):  
• Ensure each area related to CSP preparation meets the classified air quality standards 
appropriate for the activities to be conducted in that area.  
• Ensure the ISO Class 5 areas are located, operated, maintained, monitored, and certified to 
have the appropriate air quality.  
• Determine the definition of dynamic operating conditions for each PEC and SEC in use.  
• Coordinate with building facilities and certification professionals to ensure preventive 
maintenance activities and/or repairs are completed with minimal impact to pharmacy 
operations.  
• Coordinate with Infection Prevention and Construction Management regarding any planned 
construction to assess and mitigate impact to pharmacy operations.  
• Direct corrective action and preventive action procedures to ensure facilities remain or 
return to as designed specifications.   
3.2        Compounding Personnel: 
• Know appropriate operating conditions for PECs and values and ranges for temperature, 
pressure, humidity for SECs.  
• Record environmental monitoring data.  
• Report out of specifications facility issues to the Designated Person for corrective action.  
4. Procedures 
o 4.1. Documentation of Environmental Monitoring Specifications  
• Pharmacy personnel  document temperature, humidity, and pressure on SoleSource® 
Simplifi 797® for each compounding area daily on days of operation. 
• If any value is out of specifications, report to the Designated Person and follow the 
procedure described in the Out of Specifications policy.  
 
4.2 Preventive Maintenance for PECs 
• Change prefilters for all PECS every six (6) months or as indicated by the manufacturer or 
operating conditions. Prefilter changes are documented on semiannual Allometrics 
recertification reports. 
• Visual assessment of HEPA filters for staining, rips or tears occurs every six months by 
Allometrics during semiannual recertification. Visual inspection is completed by looking 
through the protective screen.  Do not remove the diffuser screen.  • Visually assess all inside and outside surfaces PEC during the monthly clean, inspecting for 
signs of rust or damage.  
 
5. Definitions 
5.1 ACPH: Air changes per hour 
5.2 Airlock: A space with interlocked doors, constructed to maintain air pressure control when items 
move between two adjoining areas.  
5.3 Anterooms:  and ISO 8 or cleaner room with fixed walls and doors where personnel hand hygiene 
and garbing are performed, as well as staging of components, and other activities that generate 
higher levels of particulates.  The ante room is the transition room between the unclassified area 
of the facility and the buffer room.  
5.4 Buffer rooms: an ISO 7 or cleaner room with fixed walls and doors where ISO Class 5 PECs are 
located and CSPs are prepared.  The buffer room may only be access through the ante room or 
another buffer room.  
5.5 Classified area: an area that maintains an air quality classification based on the ISO standards 
required in this chapter.   
5.6 Cleanroom suite: the anteroom and buffer room(s). 
5.7 Dynamic operating conditions: conditions in the compounding area in which operating personnel 
are present and simulating or performing compounding. The conditions should reflect the largest 
number of personnel and highest complexity of compounding expected during routine operations 
as determined by the designated person.  
5.8 HVAC: heating, ventilation, and air conditioning. 
5.9 Pass-through chamber: an enclosure with sealed doors on both sides that should be interlocked; 
positioned between two spaces for the purpose of minimizing particulate transfer while moving 
materials from one space to another.  
5.10 Perimeter: a visible demarcation (such as a door, walls, or visible marking on the floor) 
that defines the SCA. 
5.11 Primary Engineering Control (PEC): a device or zone that provide an ISO Class 5 air quality 
environment for sterile compounding.  
5.12 Secondary Engineering Control (SEC): the area where the PEC is placed e.g., a cleanroom 
suite or an SCA.  
5.13 Segregated Compounding Area (SCA): a designated space, area, or room that is 
unclassified and defined with a visible perimeter.   
5.14 Unclassified space:  a space not required to meet any air cleanliness classification based 
on the ISO.  
 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
6.3 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <1066> Physical Environment That Promote Safe 
Medication Use. Most current version.  
6.4 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <659> Packaging and Storage Requirements. Most 
current version.  
 7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 5/2024 
Next review: 12/2025 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2023.  
7.2 Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
7.3 Reviewed with no changes 12/2024. 
 