OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Equipment, Supplies & Components for 
Sterile Compounding 
Policy Reference #: PH0539 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1.       Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the requirements for, and assessment of the equipment used in controlled 
compounding areas and the supplies and components used in the preparation of Compounded 
Sterile Preparations (CSPs) by FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
1.2. Selection of equipment and furniture specifically designed for use in and constructed of materials 
appropriate for sterile compounding environments is integral in helping to maintain a state of 
control in classified and controlled areas. Durability, cleanability, and minimal, if any, sheddin g 
or particle generation are also important characteristics of equipment and furniture used within 
controlled areas.  
1.3. Selection of high-quality sterile supplies and components from appropriately credentialled and 
inspected manufacturers is essential in maintaining the integrity of aseptic processes and the 
ultimate sterility and apyrogenicity of final CSPs.  
1.4. Diligence in vetting and selecting reputable vendors, wholesalers, and FDA -registered 
manufacturers; carefully reviewing quality data on purchased products used in sterile 
compounding (e.g., Certificate of Analysis or Conformance); and conducting in -process quality 
control inspections and tests all contribute to ensuring CSP veracity and patient safety. 
2. Policy  
2.1 Equipment and furniture used in sterile compounding environments is constructed of material 
appropriate for controlled areas, is easily cleanable, and can withstand cleaning agents used in 
sterile compounding environments. Equipment surfaces coming into contact with CSPs are 
additionally not reactive or sorptive. 
2.2 Equipment, furniture, supplies, and components are thoroughly cleaned and disinfected per 
policy prior to introduction into the clean side of the ante room or within the perimeter of a 
Segregated Compounding Area (SCA).  Equipment, supplies, and components are sanitized again 
with sterile 70% isopropyl alcohol (sIPA) as they are introduced into an ISO Class 5 PEC. 
2.3 Equipment is placed within the SEC or PEC in a manner that facilitates compounding operations 
and does not obstruct laminar airflow during compounding manipulations. 2.4 Sterile compounding equipment is calibrated, maintained, cleaned, and used per manufacturer’s 
instructions and recommendations and as described in the related SOPs.  
• Cleaning, maintenance, and calibration of equipment is documented and readily retrievable.  
2.5 Equipment designed to deliver specific volumes of solution(s) automatically during the 
compounding process, such as automatic compounding devices (ACDs) or repeater pumps, 
undergo an accuracy assessment when initially installed and prior to use on days whe n the 
compounding with the equipment occurs.   
• Daily accuracy measurements are recorded  and evaluated over time to detect variation in 
the precision of the equipment. 
• Corrective actions are taken if accuracy measurements are outside of manufacturer’s 
specifications. 
2.6 Weighing, measuring, or otherwise performing particle generating manipulations (e.g., weighing 
and wetting dry powder APIs) is conducted inside of a PEC.  
2.7 Supplies used in the compounding of CSPs (e.g., beakers, utensils, needles, syringes, filters, tubing 
sets) are made of materials that are not reactive or sorptive. Supplies coming in direct contact 
with CSPs are sterile and depyrogenated.  
2.8 Conventionally manufactured sterile products and components are used when available and 
appropriate for the intended use. 
• Compounding CSPs from nonsterile starting ingredients or components only occurs when 
conventionally manufactured or, alternatively, 503B manufactured sterile products are not 
available.  
2.9 Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) and components are: 
• Designed for the intended use 
• Manufactured at FDA -registered facilities (required for APIs and recommended for 
components) 
• Comply with USP-NF monograph quality and release testing criteria (if available) 
• Accompanied by quality indicating documentation and data (e.g., COA and/or labeling).  
2.10 When components cannot be obtained from an FDA -registered facility, a reliable source 
is selected, and validation of the component’s identity, strength, purity, and quality is conducted.   
2.11 Commercially available container closure systems are accompanied by a COA showing 
conformance with sterility, apyrogenicity, and other established quality specifications. 
2.12 Upon receipt into a classified area, each lot of components used in sterile compounding 
is: 
• Inspected for signs of tampering, packaging or product deterioration, or loss of integrity. 
Components with known or suspected suboptimal quality or sterility are promptly rejected, 
labeled as such, and stored in a segregated area away from active stock pe nding disposal 
per policy. 
• Checked for a manufacturer’s expiration date. In the absence of a manufacturer’s expiration 
date, components (or their direct packaging) are labeled with the date of receipt and an 
expiration not to exceed 1 year from the date of receipt.  
2.13 Prior to use in a CSP, each API and component is evaluated and visually inspected for: • Correct identity, appropriate quality (e.g., per COA), within expiry date, and stored under 
appropriate conditions 
• Container closure defects that could impact the quality and/or sterility of the API or 
component (e.g., loose container lids, cracked or leaking containers) 
• API or component appearance, aroma, and/or texture potentially indicating altered quality 
2.14 Components are handled and stored in a manner that prevents contamination, mix -ups, 
and deterioration.  Components are stored in closed containers per the manufacturer’s 
recommendations or as indicated in the USP-NF Monograph. 
2.15 Temperature in drug storage areas is monitored and documented at least once daily on 
days the facility is open or by a continuous temperature recording device. Deviations are promptly 
investigated, and appropriate corrective actions are taken and documented. 
2.16 Temperature monitoring equipment is calibrated or verified for accuracy per the 
manufacturer or once every 12 months if not specified by the manufacturer.  
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Person(s) (DP): 
• Ensure sterile equipment, supply, and component suppliers, wholesalers, and 
manufacturers are fully vetted for USP <797> compliant quality manufacturing and 
documentation standards. 
• Ensure sterile compounding equipment is maintained and calibrated on a timely basis and 
that documentation of equipment calibration, maintenance, and cleaning is stored in a 
readily retrievable format. 
• Review and evaluate COAs of supplies and components to ensure all expected quality 
specifications are met or exceeded and identifies any product conversions and adjustments 
needed (for addition to MFRs) to ensure CSP potency and integrity.  
• Ensure APIs and components are received, handled, and stored properly including 
expiration dating, evaluation for product adulteration or sterility impacting defects, and  
• Investigate, oversee, and document corrective actions related to equipment, supply, and/or 
component defects or failures.  
3.2. Compounding Personnel: 
• Prior to use in every CSP, evaluate and inspect APIs and components for correct identify, 
quality, expiration date, storage conditions, and the integrity of the container closure 
system.   
• Reject and quarantine APIs and components which are expired, have suspected or known 
defects that could impact the quality, potency, and/or sterility of the CSP.  Notify the DP 
promptly of all defects. 
• Conduct and document daily calibrations of compounding equipment automatically 
measuring component volumes (e.g., ACDs, repeater pumps). Notify DP or Lead Pharmacist 
of equipment that is out of specification and do not use the equipment until the equipment 
can be successfully calibrated. 
• Clean equipment with the appropriate cleaning agent and observing required dwell times 
per the Cleaning, Disinfection, & Application of Sporicidal Agents  policy and document 
cleaning activities appropriately. 4. Procedures 
4.1. Selection of Compounding Equipment and Supplies 
• Identify and vet reputable wholesalers and distributors of equipment and supplies for use 
in sterile compounding environments and aseptic processes.  
• Select sterile compounding equipment constructed of materials suitable for compounding 
environments (e.g., stainless steel) including nonreactive or sorptive surfaces that come into 
direct contact with CSPs and designed to withstand cleaning processes and agents.   
• Ensure sterile equipment and supplies are accompanied by appropriate end user 
documentation, instructions for use, and quality testing data including: 
Equipment Supplies 
• User manual providing instructions for 
proper use, cleaning, and maintenance 
• Required calibration or recertification 
requirements, procedure, and 
frequency 
• Specifications and acceptance 
parameters for normal operation 
• Manufacturer’s release testing results 
and Certification of Conformance  
• Lot number and expiration date 
• User instructions including any quality 
control testing procedure(s) and expected 
results, if applicable (e.g., bubble point 
expected PSI for sterilizing filters)  
• Manufacturer’s release testing results and 
Certification of Analysis 
4.2. Selection of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) & CSP Components 
• Identify and vet reputable wholesalers and distributors of APIs and components for use in 
pharmaceutical grade compounding.  
• Confirm APIs and components meet the following criteria: 
 APIs Other Components 
Comply with USP-NF 
monograph criteria  
Required 
(if the monograph exists) 
Required 
(if the monograph exists) 
Accompanied By 
Quality Indicating 
Documentation 
COA required including 
specifications ad test results 
showing API meets expected 
quality standards 
Documentation required (e.g., COA, 
labeling) including specifications and 
test results showing component 
meets expected quality standards 
Manufactured by FDA-
Registered Facility*  Required Recommended 
Designed for Intended 
Use, Patient 
Population, and/or 
Route of 
Administration 
Confirm intended use and abide by labeling indicating  
“not for pharmaceutical use”, “not for injectable use”, “not for 
human use” (or “for veterinary use only”), or equivalent 
*Outside of the United States, component manufacturers comply with the laws and regulations 
of the applicable regulatory jurisdiction.  
•  Identify, vet, and select a reliable vendor or source when components cannot be obtained 
from an FDA -registered facility. Validate component identity, strength, purity, and quality 
by any reasonable means, including, but not limited to:   
o Evaluation of COA (if available) o Visual inspection 
o Analytical testing of a sample to confirm conformance with expected quality 
specifications and standards 
4.3. Receipt, Evaluation, Handling, & Storage of CSP Components  
• Move component shipping/delivery containers to receiving area and garb per facility policy 
Refer to the Hazardous Materials Handling policy for the garbing and receiving procedures 
related to hazardous drug components. 
• Upon receipt into a classified area, examine the external and internal packaging of each lot 
of CSP for signs of product deterioration or other quality impacting defects (e.g., 
temperature-sensing indicators indicate product has been exposed to excessive 
temperatures). Reject, quarantine, and notify DP of components with suspected or known 
defects. 
• Once unpacked, examine components and container closure systems for cracks, leaks, or 
other indicators of product adulteration. Reject, quarantine, and notify DP of components 
with suspected or known defects. 
• Confirm component expiration dating.  
o If component is expired or within 1 month of expiration, quarantine and notify DP. 
o When manufacturer’s expiration date is not visible on label or labeling, clearly write or 
label container with an expiration date not to exceed one year from the date of receipt.  
• Apply additional component/container labeling as needed. 
• Handle and store components in a manner that prevents contamination, mix -ups, and 
deterioration. 
• Store components in a designated, temperature controlled and monitored storage areas per 
manufacturer or official monograph instructions 
o Controlled Room Temperature: 20°C - 25°C 
o Refrigerated Temperature: 2°C - 8°C 
o Frozen Temperature: -25°C - -10°C 
• Monitor and record temperature in the area(s) where components are stored at least once 
daily on days that the facility is open or by a continuous temperature recording device.  
• Record temperatures manually or electronically and ensure temperature logs are readily 
retrievable.  
• Calibrate or verify accuracy of temperature monitoring equipment as recommended by the 
manufacturer or every 12 months if not specified by the manufacturer. 
4.4. Introduction of Equipment, Supplies, & Components into Controlled Compounding Areas 
• Prior to introduction into a controlled compounding area, clean all visibly soiled equipment 
or furniture with a sporicidal disinfectant, EPA -registered disinfectant cleaner, or hospital 
grade cleaning agent. 
• Clean all equipment, furniture, supplies, and components as they are moved across the line 
of demarcation (LOD) between the dirty and clean sides of the ante room or moved across 
the perimeter line of the SCA. W ipe individual items with a sporicidal disinfectant, EPA -
registered disinfectant, or sterile 70% isopropyl alcohol (sIPA) and low-lint wipers. 
• Place equipment and furniture within the SEC or SCA perimeter in a manner that facilitates 
compounding operations and does not impede airflow, workflow or traffic patterns. 
• Refer to the Workflow and Aseptic Technique for Sterile Compounding policy.  
4.5. Use of APIs and Components in Compounding of CSPs • Prior to use, conduct visual inspection of all components for defects in containers or product 
quality potentially occurring during handling or storage including, but not limited to: 
o Container Closure Systems: cracks, leaks, looseness of the cap or closure  
o Components: deviations from the expected appearance, aroma, and/or texture 
• Reject, quarantine, and notify DP of components with suspected or known defects. 
o Examine all other lots of the rejected component and obtained from the same vendor 
to determine whether other lots have the same defect. 
4.6. Calibration, Maintenance, Cleaning, and Use of Sterile Compounding Equipment 
• Refer to Cleaning, Disinfecting, and Applying Sporicidal Disinfectants in Sterile Compounding Areas 
policy for detailed procedures, frequency, and approved agents used for equipment cleaning.  
Equipment / 
Device 
Calibration, 
Maintenance, & 
Cleaning 
Use 
ACD(s) Calibration: 
Daily (prior to use) 
 
Maintenance: 
Per manufacturer’s 
instructions  
and as needed 
 
Cleaning: 
Daily & Per Use: 
sIPA; Weekly: 
sporicidal followed 
by sIPA 
• Clean dedicated PEC and equipment 
• Install valve set, tubing, and small and large volume 
components 
• Conduct accuracy assessment of load cell and ACD 
pumping accuracy; ensure accuracy within + 3%; results 
are recorded in compounder’s database 
• Get Pharmacist verification of setup and accuracy 
assessments 
• Place and aseptically connect appropriate volume bag 
and program and/or scan patient formulation 
• Pump formulation 
• After completion, aseptically remove bag, inject 
additives (if applicable), conduct visual inspection, seal 
injection port, and label 
Repeater 
Pump(s) 
Calibration: 
Daily (prior to use) 
 
Maintenance: 
Per manufacturer’s 
instructions  
and as needed 
 
Cleaning: 
Daily & Per Use: 
sIPA 
Monthly: sporicidal 
followed by sIPA 
• Clean equipment and tubing housing 
• Aseptically install tubing, supplies and complete set up 
for intended use 
• Calibrate prior to use and get Pharmacist or tech-on-
tech verification of calibration accuracy; record results 
on Repeater Pump Calibration Log or electronically on 
SoleSource Simplifi 797® task 
• Program pump for intended use 
• Pump formulation and aseptically connect/disconnect 
containers 
• After completion, aseptically remove container, inject 
additives (if applicable), conduct visual inspection, seal 
injection site, and label 
Reusable PPE 
(e.g. goggles, 
respirators) 
Cleaning: 
Per use: Peridox 
RTU® followed by 
sIPA 
• Clean reusable PPE before and after monthly cleaning 
activities. 
• Place in plastic bag for storage until next use 
Reusable 
cleaning 
supplies 
(mop/wand 
handles, 
holders) 
Cleaning: 
Per use: Peridox 
RTU® followed by 
sIPA 
• Clean reusable cleaning supplies before and after 
use. 4.7. Hazardous Materials Handling Requirements 
• Refer to the Hazardous Materials Handling  policy for the hazardous materials and 
component selection, handling, storage, and delivery/shipping. 
5. Definitions 
5.1. ACD: Automated compounding device. 
5.2. Active pharmaceutical ingredient (API): Any substance or mixture of substances intended to be 
used in the compounding of a preparation, thereby becoming the active ingredient in that 
preparation and furnishing pharmacological activity or other direct effect in the diagnosis, cure, 
mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans and animals or affecting the structure 
and function of the body. Also referred to as Bulk drug substance. A conventionally manufactured 
drug product is not an API but is typically manufactured from an API(s).  
5.3. Certificate of analysis (COA): A report from the supplier of a component, container, or closure 
that accompanies the supplier’s material and contains the specifications and results of all 
analyses and a description of the material. 
5.4. Classified area: An area that maintains an air quality classification based on the ISO standards 
required in this chapter (see also the definition for ISO class). 
5.5. Component: Any ingredient used in the compounding of a preparation, including any active 
ingredient, added substance, or conventionally manufactured product. 
5.6. Compounded sterile preparation (CSP): A preparation intended to be sterile that is created by 
combining, admixing, diluting, pooling, reconstituting, repackaging, or otherwise altering a drug 
product or bulk drug substance. 
5.7. Compounding area: The area where compounding is occurring (i.e., a cleanroom suite, inside the 
perimeter of the SCA, or AECA). 
5.8. Compounding record (CR): Documents the compounding of each CSP. 
5.9. Container closure system: Packaging components that together contain and protect the dosage 
form. This includes primary packaging components and secondary packaging components, if the 
latter are intended to provide additional protection. 
5.10. Containment ventilated enclosure (CVE): A non-ISO classified full or partial enclosure that uses 
ventilation principles to capture, contain, and remove airborne contaminants through HEPA 
filtration and prevent their release into the work environment. 
5.11. Conventionally manufactured product: A pharmaceutical dosage form, usually the subject of an 
application approved by the applicable national regulatory agency, that is manufactured under 
current good manufacturing practice conditions. 
5.12. Master formulation record (MFR): A detailed record of procedures that describes how the CSP 
is to be prepared 
5.13. Specification: The tests, analytical methods, and acceptance criteria to which any component, 
CSP, container closure system, equipment, or other material used in compounding CSPs must 
conform to be considered acceptable for its intended use 6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
6.3. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <71> Sterility Tests. Current version. 
6.4. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <85> Bacterial Endotoxins Test. Current version 
6.5. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <1229> Sterilization of Compendial Articles. 
Current version. 
6.6. United States Food & Drug Administration (FDA). Hospital and Health System Compounding 
Under Section 503A of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act Guidance for Industry. October 
2021.  
7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2024 
7.1. Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2022.  
7.2. Revised 11/2023 for use at all Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
7.3. Reviewed with formatting changes 11/2024. 
 