OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Immediate-Use Compounding Policy Reference #: PH0527 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
 
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL 
Non-Oncology Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, 
OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
  
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1 This policy provides the requirements and procedures for Immediate Use Compounded Sterile 
Preparations (CSPs) prepared and intended for direct and immediate administration within 
FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.   
1.2 The goal of this procedure is to minimize the risk to medications prepared under immediate use 
conditions from: 
• Contact with nonsterile surfaces 
• Introduction of particulate matter or biological fluids 
• Mix-ups with other conventionally manufactured products or CSPs 
1.3. Immediate Use CSPs are compounded in less than ISO Class 5 conditions (e.g., bedside, 
countertop, operating room), with 3 or fewer sterile products, and a maximum beyond use date 
(BUD) of 4 hours starting from the initiation of compounding.   
• CSPs exceeding these parameters adhere to the requirements of Category 1, 2, or 3 CSPs. 
1.4. Certain drug preparation activities occurring in non-classified compounding areas fall outside the 
scope of USP <797> and, by definition, this SOP.  Alternatively, they are governed by other USP 
<797> regulations or related USP Chapter requirements, including: 
• Allergenic extract prescription sets  – are compounded according to USP <797> regulations 
specifically defined for this type of sterile drug product.  
• Blood-derived and other biological materials manipulations  – manipulations are visibly 
separated from other compounding activities and equipment used in CSP preparation and are 
governed by other internal protocols and SOPs.   
• Conventionally manufactured sterile medications prepared per approved labeling – mixing, 
reconstituting, or other manipulations performed according to the manufacturer’s approved 
labeling and directions are not governed by this SOP if the following conditions are met (if 
not, they are subject to all of the regulations in USP <797> including this SOP): 
o Product prepared for a single dose given to a single patient only 
o Manufacturers approved labeling instructions for the diluent, resultant strength, the 
container closure system, and storage time are upheld. 
• Proprietary bag and vial systems –  
o Immediate Administration - docking and activation per the manufacturer’s labeling 
for immediate administration to an individual patient is not considered compounding.  o Future Activation & Administration - docking of proprietary bag and vial systems for 
future activation and administration is considered compounding and is governed by 
this and related sterile practice SOPs depending on the BUD assigned (the maximum 
BUD for Immediate Use Compounding is < 4 hours; if a BUD in excess of 4 hours is 
assigned, the docking manipulation must occur in a classified sterile compounding 
area and follows requirements the related Category 1 or 2 compounding).  
• Hazardous CSPs – are compounded within negative pressure-controlled environments unless 
a hazardous drug risk assessment has been performed and documented allowing for 
immediate use compounding outside of a controlled environment. 
 
2. Policy  
2.1. CSPs are eligible for immediate use compounding when all of the following criteria are met:  
• Personnel are trained and demonstrate competency in aseptic technique and other skills 
necessary to perform immediate use compounding. 
• When preparing immediate use CSPs, personnel use proper aseptic technique. 
• No more than 3 sterile products are used in the compounding of an immediate use 
medication. An IV fluid bag, diluent used for reconstitution, or similar component count as 
one of the sterile products. 
• BUDs are determined from the start of the compounding process and do not exceed 4 hours, 
independent of storage conditions (e.g., room temperature or refrigeration) and are subject 
to evidence-based stability considerations that require a shorter BUD. 
• Single dose starting components are only used for one patient. Unused drug or components 
drawn from a single-dose container are properly discarded after the preparation of the CSP.   
• Immediate use CSPs are labeled if the medication does not remain in the direct line of site of 
the preparer from the time of compounding until administration. Immediate use CSP labeling 
includes 
o Names and amounts of all active ingredients 
o Name or initials of the person who prepared the CSP 
o Date and time from start of CSP preparation  
o Exact 4-hour time period within which the administration of the CSP must occur 
2.2. Administration of immediate use compounds begins within 4 hours of the start of CSP 
preparation or is promptly and appropriately discarded. 
2.3. Other considerations are made, depending on the urgency of the patient care situation, to help 
ensure the sterility of the immediate use CSP, including but not limited to: 
• Ensure the area where immediate use compounding occurs is not located immediately 
adjacent to a water source, under or around a high particle generating source (e.g., directly 
under an air vent or next to a printer), or in a high traffic area.  
• If the only area for preparation is near a sink, ensure a splash guard is installed to prevent 
cross-contamination.  
2.4. A Master Formulation Record is created for immediate use CSPs prepared for more than one 
patient.  When these preparations are compounded, the Master Formulation Record is followed, 
and a Compounding Record is created in a written or electronic format that  is retained and 
readily accessible.  
 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Person(s) (DP): • Oversees training and competency assessment of personnel performing Immediate Use 
Compounding; determine corrective action plans for competency deficiencies. 
• Ensures ongoing compliance with this SOP.  
• Collects and retains training and competency documentation for Compounding Personnel in 
a readily retrievable format.   
• Partners with other departments and health care professionals performing immediate use 
compounding (e.g., nursing, anesthesiology) to ensure personnel who compound immediate 
use sterile preparations receive appropriate education and training necessary to s afely 
perform related job duties. Review immediate use training records every 12 months. 
3.2 Personnel performing immediate use compounding: 
• Successfully complete all required training and competencies prior to performing immediate 
use compounding.   
• Participate in ongoing training and competencies as determined by the DP. 
 
4. Procedure 
4.1 Training and Competency Assessments 
• Personnel compounding immediate use CSPs are trained and demonstrate competency in the 
skills and foundational knowledge required to perform their job duties prior to compounding 
independently.  Training, knowledge assessments, and observed competencies ar e 
documented, readily accessible, and include the following core skills:  
o Immediate use CSP component definition and related requirements 
o Hand hygiene, gloving, and garbing  
o Selecting, cleaning, and staging of compounding area 
o Calculations, measuring, and mixing  
o BUD assignment, stability considerations, and storage conditions 
o Aseptic technique and achieving and/or maintaining sterility 
o Labeling conditions and requirements 
o Documentation of the compounding process 
• Successful or “passing” results for the observed Sterile Core Competencies and Knowledge 
Assessment are: 
 
Observation Validation Initial 
Prior to Compounding 
Independently 
Ongoing 
Every 12 Months or As 
Needed 
Competency-based 
checklist with 100% 
proficiency 
USP<797> & 
Sterile 
Compounding 
Principles 
Knowledge Exam 
> 80% cumulative 
score 
> 80% cumulative 
score 
 
 
• Observed Competency Assessments are performed initially and assessed every 12 months to 
validate sterile practice and aseptic technique competency including:  
o Hand hygiene, gloving and garbing 
o Preparing and cleaning the compounding area 
o Aseptic technique • Failure of observed competencies or knowledge assessments (requiring > 80% passing score) 
results in retraining and reevaluation.  Repeated failures and/or a pattern of failures over time 
are assessed and investigated by the Designated Person(s) or a designee.  A remediation plan 
is developed up to, and including, formal corrective action and suspension of immediate use 
compounding duties until required knowledge and skills have been successfully performed 
under direct observation and by written or electronic assessments.  
4.2 Immediate Use Compounding Procedure 
• Select and prepare a work surface that is free of clutter and is sanitized with an approved EPA-
registered one-step cleaner prior to starting the compounding process. 
• Stage medications and supplies in such a way as to reduce the risk of introduction of particulate 
matter or biological fluids, or mix-up with other conventionally manufactured products or CSPs 
before, during, and after preparation of the CSP. 
• Perform hand hygiene and don medical grade gloves at a minimum, don other personal 
protective equipment (PPE) as available and the situation warrants.  Sanitize gloves with 70% 
isopropyl alcohol (IPA) prior to compounding and as needed during compounding u p to 
administration of CSP.  Change gloves if they become torn or punctured. 
• Sanitize critical sites (e.g., vial stoppers, ampule neck, injection port of an IV bag) with sterile 
70% isopropyl alcohol wipes prior to puncture or entry.  
• Prepare CSPs in accordance with evidence -based information for physical and chemical 
stability including, but not limited to, approved labeling mixing and storage requirements, 
stability and compatibility studies and data.  
• Use proper aseptic technique during CSP compounding manipulations. 
• Assign the most conservative BUD to the CSP possible that does not exceed 4 hours from the 
start of compounding.  If administration does not occur within the assigned BUD ( < 4 hours), 
promptly and appropriately discard the CSP. 
• Ensure single dose starting components are only used for one patient and dispose of unused 
drug or components drawn from a single-dose container appropriately. 
• When immediate use CSPs are compounded for more than one patient as a batch, refer to the 
Master Formulation Record for compounding instructions and ensure a Compounding Record 
is created, retained, and readily accessible. 
• If the CSP(s) cannot remain in the direct line of site of the preparer from the time of 
compounding until administration, label the CSP (or individual dosing units if prepared for 
multiple patients) with the following: 
Names and amounts of all active ingredients 
Name or initials of the person who prepared the CSP 
Date and time from start of CSP preparation  
Exact 4-hour time period within which the administration of the CSP must occur. 
• Prior to dispensing, perform a final visual verification of the CSP(s) and reject the preparation 
if visual contamination  is found.  
• Ensure administration of the CSP begins within 4 hours of the start of compounding.  Promptly 
and safely discard of the CSP if administration does not occur within the 4-hour timeframe. 
 
5. Definitions 
5.1. Administration: The direct application of a sterile medication to a single patient by injecting, 
infusing, or otherwise providing a sterile medication in its final form. 5.2. Aseptic technique: A set of methods used to keep objects and areas free of microorganisms and 
thereby minimize infection risk to the patient. It is accomplished through practices that maintain 
the microbe count at an irreducible minimum. 
5.3. Beyond-Use Date (BUD):  The date and time after which a CSP shall not be used, stored, or 
transported. The date is determined from the date and time the preparation is compounded. 
5.4. Classified area: An area that maintains an air quality classification based on the ISO standards (see 
also the definition for ISO class). 
5.5. Component: Any ingredient used in the compounding of a preparation, including any active 
ingredient, added substance, or conventionally manufactured product.  
5.6. Compounded sterile preparation (CSP):  A preparation intended to be sterile that is created by 
combining, admixing, diluting, pooling, reconstituting, repackaging, or otherwise altering a drug 
product or bulk drug substance. 
5.7. Conventionally manufactured product: A pharmaceutical dosage form, usually the subject of an 
FDA approved application, and manufactured under current good manufacturing practice 
conditions. 
5.8. Critical site: A location that includes any component or fluid pathway surfaces (e.g., vial septa, 
injection ports, and beakers) or openings (e.g., opened ampules and needle hubs) that are 
exposed and at risk of direct contact with air (e.g., ambient room or HEPA filtered), moisture (e.g., 
oral, and mucosal secretions), or touch contamination. 
5.9. Designated person(s): One or more individuals assigned to be responsible and accountable for 
the performance and operation of the compounding facility and personnel in the preparation of 
CSPs. 
5.10. Garb: Items such as gloves, garments (e.g., gowns), shoe covers, head and facial hair covers, 
masks, and other items designed to reduce particle -shedding from personnel and minimize the 
risk of contamination of CSP(s).  
5.11. Hazardous drug (HD):  Any drug identified by at least one of the following six criteria: 
carcinogenicity, teratogenicity or developmental toxicity, reproductive toxicity in humans, organ 
toxicity at low dose in humans or animals, genotoxicity, or new drugs that mimic existing HDs in 
structure or toxicity. 
5.12. Immediate Use CSP:  CSP aseptically compounded outside of ISO classified air for direct and 
immediate administration to a single patient with a maximum BUD of 4 hours from the initiation 
of compounding. 
5.13. IPA: Isopropyl alcohol. 
5.14. PPE: Personal protective equipment. 
 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
 
7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review:                        11/2025 
 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2022.  7.2 Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
7.3 Reviewed with formatting changes 11/2024. 
 
 
 
 