OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Labeling of Compounded Sterile 
Preparations 
Policy Reference #: PH0542 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 5/8/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the labeling requirements for Compounded Sterile Preparations (CSP) 
prepared within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
1.2. Label and labelling represent distinct but important and legally required documentation affixed 
to (or surrounding) each CSP. 
• The label designates the part of labeling that is on the immediate CSP container.  
• Labeling refers to all of the labels (including auxiliary labels) - written, printed, or in graphical 
presentation - on the immediate container  or on the inside of any package or wrapper 
(excluding shipping containers) in which the CSP in enclosed.     
2. Policy  
2.1. All Category 1, and  2  CSPs dispensed are labeled with appropriate and legible identifying and 
administration information to prevent errors or CSP mix ups during storage, dispensing, and use.  
ISMP and FDA labeling recommendations (including tall man lettering, sound -alike look -alike 
distinctions, and abbreviations) are incorporated into labeling conventions. 
2.2. All labeling complies with the laws and regulations of the applicable regulatory jurisdiction. 
2.3. The label on each immediate CSP container prominently and legibly displays, at a minimum: 
• Assigned internal identification number (e.g., barcode, prescription, order, or lot number) 
• Active ingredients(s) and their amount(s), activity(ies), or concentration(s) 
• Storage conditions if other than controlled room temperature 
• Beyond-use date (BUD) or date and time 
• Dosage form 
• Total amount or volume of the CSP unless it is obvious from the container 
• If space allows, a statement indicating if the CSP is a single-dose or multi-dose container 
2.4. The CSP labeling, at a minimum, displays: 
• Route(s) of administration • Special handling instructions 
• Warning statements 
• Compounding facility name and contact information if the CSP is to be sent outside of the 
facility or healthcare system in which it was compounded 
2.5. Prior to final release and dispensing, the label of each CSP is verified to ensure it conforms with 
the prescription or medication order, Master Formulation Record (MFR), and Compounding 
Record (CR) if required.  
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 Designated Person(s) (DP): 
• Ensure label and labeling requirements for CSPs are met in IV workflow systems, electronic 
documentation systems or manual label templates. 
• Ensure MFRs and CRs reflect additional label and labeling requirements per CSP, when 
applicable. 
• Educate compounding personnel on labeling requirements. 
3.2. Compounding Personnel: 
• Comply with all of the labeling requirements for each CSP and notify the DP if suspected 
labeling elements are missing from the instructions (e.g. storage conditions or other 
important auxiliary labeling) 
• Affix appropriate labeling in a neat and professional manner that does not obstruct required 
manufacturer, product, or measurement annotations on the dispensing devise or container 
closure system 
3.3. Verifying Pharmacist: 
• During final verification and before release or dispensing, ensure each CSP label and labeling 
meets all of the regulatory, legal, and organizational requirements per this policy. 
4. Procedures 
7.1. Labeling of Single Dose and Multi-dose CSPs 
• For patient-specific preparations, the compounder affixes the label to the final container for 
dispensing once the volume or quantity has been prepared to ensure no mix up occurs. If 
labeling cannot occur immediately, place label(s) and CSP(s) in an individual basket or bin to 
reduce the risk of mixing up products and labels. 
• Prior to placing label, verify the label, prescription or medication order, and CSP to be 
labeled match.   
• Position label in a neat and well positioned manner so it has a professional appearance and 
does not cover critical dispensing container information such as manufacturer, product 
name, and/or product ID (e.g., NDC, manufacturer’s product id code), and/or measurement 
indicators. 
• If space permits, label as single-dose or multi-dose with appropriate BUD.  
7.2. Labeling of Multiple Single Doses of a CSP or Batched Preparations • During the compounding process, segregate all compounded dosage units, labels and 
components needed for final verification (e.g., vials, diluents, etc.) in a separate basket, bin, 
or container. 
• Immediately following the visual inspection of each dosage unit (e.g., syringes, bags, vials, 
cassettes, etc.), label the CSP.  
• Ensure labels affixed to smaller dispensing devices or container closure systems do not cover 
volume or dose markings. 
• If multiple single doses are prepared for a single patient, ensure all labels are consistent and 
labeling indicates total number of ordered doses.  
7.3. Labeling of Compounded Stock Solutions:  
• Label the stock solution bag with the following:  
o Active ingredients(s) and their amount(s), activity(ies), or concentration(s)  
o Storage conditions if other than controlled room temperature 
o BUD 
o Total amount or volume of the CSP unless it is obvious from the container  
o Name or initials of the compounder and the verifying Pharmacist 
7.4. Labeling for Multi-dose, Nonpreserved, Aqueous Topical and Topical Ophthalmic CSPs 
• Ensure label or labeling clearly states that once the CSP is opened, it must be discarded after 
24 hours when stored at controlled room temperature and /or 72 hours when stored 
refrigerated. 
7.5. Immediate use CSPs are labeled with the following information unless directly administered by 
or the preparation remains in possession of, and administration is witnessed by the preparer of 
the CSP: 
• Names and amounts of all active ingredients 
• Name or initials of the person who compounded the preparation 
• The specific 4-hour timeframe during which the drug administration must begin (from the 
time the compounding process was initiated) 
7.6. Special Labeling Considerations:  
• All CSPs for outpatient dispensing are labeled with the following caution statement:  
o CAUTION: Federal Law prohibits the transfer of this drug to any person other than the 
patient for whom it was prescribed. 
• CSPs intended for use in dialysis, hemofiltration, or irrigation are labeled to indicated 
contents are not to be administered intravenously or intra-arterially. 
• Concentrations of electrolytes given for replacement therapy are stated on the label in 
milliequivalents per volume (mEq/volume); phosphorus containing CSPs are expressed in 
milliMoles per volume (mM/volume).   
• Abbreviations for common salts of drugs are allowed when abbreviating names of the salts 
of organic acids, but are not allowed at the beginning of an official title (e.g., Phenobarbital 
NA is acceptable, but NA Salicylate is not).  The abbreviations for the following c ommonly 
known salts are allowed: 
o HCl for hydrochloride 
o HBr for hydrobromide 
o Na for sodium 
o K for potassium • The use of “white-out”, paper correction fluid or crossovers is not permitted at any time on 
prescription labels.  
7.7. Labeling of CSPs during storage, transport, and shipping 
• When shipping outside of the facility, shipping cartons are clearly labeled with: 
o Name, address, and phone number of specific FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market 
Pharmacy 
o Instructions for proper storage conditions upon receipt (i.e. Refrigerate upon arrival, 
Store in Freezer upon arrival). 
7.8. Refer to Hazardous Drug Handling policy(ies) for additional labeling requirements for hazardous 
drug products.    
5. Definitions 
5.1. Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient is any substance or mixture of substances intended to be used 
in the compounding of a preparation, thereby becoming the active ingredient in that preparation 
and furnishing pharmacological activity or other direct effect in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, 
treatment, or prevention of disease in humans and animals or affecting the structure and 
function of the body. Also referred to as Bulk drug subs tance. A conventionally manufactured 
drug product is not an API but is typically manufactured from an API(s).   
5.2. Beyond Use Date (BUD) is the date, or hour and the date, after which a CSP must not be used, 
stored, or transported. The date is determined from the date and time the preparation is 
compounded.  
5.3. Compounded stock solutions are a sterile mixture of components that is used to compound 
additional CSPs.  
5.4. Label is the part of the labeling on the immediate container 
5.5. Labeling is all labels and other written, printed, or graphic matter on the immediate container or 
on or inside any packaging system or wrapper in which the article is enclosed, except any outer 
shipping container. 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <7> Labeling. Current version.  
6.3. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
6.4. Institute for Safe Medication Practice (ISMP). List of Error Prone Abbreviations, Symbols, and 
Dose Designations. 2012 
6.5. ISMP. Draft Guidelines for Safe Electronic Communication of Medication Orders. Medication 
Safety Alert. 2003. 
6.6. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER). Name 
Differentiation Project. 2009. 7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 05/2025 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2022.  
Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies 