 
 
USP 797 Complaint, Adverse Drug Reactions, & CSP Recall Handling Page 1 of 9 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Complaints, Adverse Drug Reactions & 
Recall Handling 
Policy Reference #: PH0546 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 12/02/2024 
Last Date Revised: 5/10/2024 
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the procedures for documenting, assessing risk of patient harm, and 
determining response urgency and approach for quality related complaints and adverse drug 
reactions (ADRs) concerning Compounded Sterile Preparations (CSPs) prepared within FMOLHS 
Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. The policy also provides the procedures to rapidly implement 
a CSP recall when serious patient harm is known or suspected.   
1.2. Complaints and reports of ADRs can come from a variety of sources including, but not limited to, 
patients, caregivers, prescribers/providers, regulatory bodies, or other healthcare related 
source.  
1.3. CSP recalls are initiated based on the severity of risk of serious or life -threatening patient harm 
associated with product quality -related issues, with special consideration given to risk 
assessment of high-risk patient populations and routes of administration, including: 
• Reported serious or life-threatening ADR due to CSP quality 
• Failure of CSP release tests (e.g., sterility, endotoxin, purity, potency) when results are 
received after dispensing 
• Manufacturer recall of components, containers or supplies used during sterile 
manipulations and processing of dispensed CSPs 
• Facilities, sterile compounding equipment, or engineering control failures detected after 
CSPs are compounded and dispensed and that present a substantial risk of compromising 
CSP sterility, endotoxin burden, potency, or similar quality attribute 
1.4. CSP complaint and ADR handling and quality related product recalls are performed according to 
regulatory and statutory requirements for Louisiana. 
2. Policy  
2.1. CSP related complaints and ADRs are promptly logged and documented electronically in 
RLDatix®.  
2.2. Adverse reactions with known or highly suspected potential to cause patient harm are reported 
to the Designated Person (DP) or Pharmacy Manager immediately upon receipt. The reported  
USP 797 Complaint, Adverse Drug Reactions, & CSP Recall Handling   Page 2 
of 9 
 
event is reviewed within 2 hours of receipt of report by the Designated Person (DP) or a member 
of Pharmacy management or leadership if the DP is unavailable. CSP recall procedures, if needed, 
are initiated within 4 hours of review. 
2.3. Complaints or concerns about CSPs are reviewed within 2 business days of receipt of the report 
by the Designated Person (DP). Based on a risk assessment, an investigation and appropriate 
corrective actions, up to and including CSP recall, are initiated in a timely manner.  
2.4. If a CSP recall is initiated, the following actions are required: 
• Immediate notification of the prescriber regarding the CSP quality failure with the potential 
to cause patient harm 
• Recall of unused dispensed CSPs and quarantine of stock remaining in the pharmacy 
• Investigation to determine if other CSP lots are affected and recalled if necessary 
• Risk severity and recall urgency assessment 
• Determination of the distribution and disposition of affected CSPs 
• Determination of the patients and corresponding prescribers in receipt of affected CSPs 
• Documentation and disposal of recalled CSPs 
• Investigation and determination of reason for quality failure  
• Implementation of corrective action plan and verification of its effectiveness 
2.5. Serious or life -threatening adverse events potentially associated with the quality of CSPs are 
reported to the FDA and Louisiana Board of Pharmacy per the laws and regulations of the 
jurisdiction in which the CSP was compounded and/or where the patient was treated. 
2.6. Investigations are conducted, and corrective action plans are implemented in response to ADRs 
or complaints regarding CSP quality. The extent of investigations and corrective action plans are 
consistent with the deviation and consider historical trends.  
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Person(s) (DP): 
• Performs timely review  and risk assessment of all reports of CSP -related complaints or 
adverse drug reactions. 
• Leads investigations and corrective action plan development, implementation, and follow 
up to corrective action plans related to CSP complaints and adverse reactions.  
• Partners with Pharmacy Leadership, Compliance and Administration when serious or 
potentially life-threatening ADRs are reported to:  
o Finalize the risk assessment 
o Initiate CSP recalls procedures including prescriber and patient notifications, CSP 
retrieval and destruction, investigation and root cause analysis, and corrective actions  
o Notify appropriate regulatory bodies per policy 
o Conduct in process and post recall assessments to determine the effectiveness of 
corrective actions and resulting reduction in patient risk 
3.2. Compounding Personnel: 
• Complete initial documentation per policy of complaints and ADRs reported directly to or 
received by the individual from a patient, caregiver, provider, or similar source. 
• Notify DP or Pharmacy Leadership of reports of suspected or known serious ADRs 
immediately upon receiving a report.  
USP 797 Complaint, Adverse Drug Reactions, & CSP Recall Handling   Page 3 
of 9 
 
• Participate in investigations and corrective actions as directed by the DP. 
3.3. Pharmacy Leadership: 
• Partners with the DP to conduct risk assessment and response urgency assessment for 
serious or potentially life-threatening ADRs associated with CSPs. 
• Ensures recall process complies with all Federal, State, and Accrediting body procedural and 
reporting requirements. 
4. Procedures 
4.1. Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) and Complaint Receipt & Documentation 
• When a known or suspected serious or life -threatening ADR or quality -related complaint 
associated with a CSP is received, immediately notify the DP or Pharmacy Manager, if the 
DP is not available.  
• Document all reported ADRs and CSP quality related complaints RLDatix® within 24 hours of 
receipt of report. Initial document at time of report includes: 
Information to Collect ADR Complaint 
Date and time of report ✓ ✓ 
Name of person submitting report (if other than the patient), 
relationship to the patient and contact information ✓ ✓ 
Patient name or unique identifier (e.g., medical records number 
or similar) and contact information ✓ ✓ 
Prescriber name, address, phone number, email, and/or other 
contact method, if available ✓  
Date of occurrence (and occurrence time, if available) ✓  
CSP name or unique identifier (e.g., prescription or order 
number), lot number, and expiration date ✓ ✓ 
Description of exact nature of the ADR or complaint ✓ ✓ 
Description of known or suspected patient harm (e.g., illness, 
injury, death), if applicable ✓  
Description of any healthcare related intervention or follow up as 
a result of reported event ✓  
• During the subsequent investigation and response, document the following for ADRs and 
CSP quality-related complaints: 
o Results of the investigation 
o Corrective action plan or response 
o Verification of corrective action plan effectiveness, if applicable 
4.2. Risk Severity Assessment & Response Urgency Determination 
• Designated Person reviews reports and initiates a risk assessment to CSP quality related 
ADRs and complaints in a timely manner based on the severity of the initial ADR or 
compliant report ranging from: 
o Serious or life-threatening patient harm: reviewed within 2 hours  
o Low to moderate risk of patient harm: reviewed within 2 business days of report. 
• Use the Risk Severity Assessment & Response Urgency Decision Matrix to determine 
investigation and if a CSP recall is warranted and the timeframes for prescriber and patient 
notification as well as physical collection of CSPs.  
  
USP 797 Complaint, Adverse Drug Reactions, & CSP Recall Handling   Page 4 
of 9 
 
 
 
Risk Severity Assessment & Response Urgency Decision Matrix 
Conditions Examples Investigation 
Timeframe 
MD/Patient 
Notification 
Timeframe 
Product 
Recall 
Timeframe 
HIGH RISK CONDITIONS & RESPONSE URGENCY: 
CSP(s) 
defect/failure 
with HIGH RISK of 
Patient Harm 
AND/OR 
CSP(s) dispensed 
to HIGH RISK 
Patient 
Populations 
AND/OR 
CSP(s) 
administered via 
a HIGH RISK 
route of 
administration  
HIGH RISK CSP Defects or Failures: 
• Known or Suspected Adverse Reaction 
associated with a CSP 
• CSP quality issue (e.g., identify, purity, 
potency, etc.) 
• Facilities, engineering control, or 
equipment failure with the potential to 
impact CSP sterility, endotoxin burden, or 
other quality attribute* 
• Recall of CSP component* 
High Risk Patient Populations: 
• Pediatric 
• Geriatric 
• Critically Ill 
• Immunocompromised 
 
HIGH RISK Route of Administration: 
• Intrathecal 
• Epidural 
• Intracranial 
• Intraventricular 
• Via Central Line* 
• Topical or Intraocular Ophthalmic* 
 
Initiated 
within  
2 hours  
of notification 
of CSP failure 
 
Preliminary 
Investigation 
Results within  
5 business 
days 
 
Final 
Investigation 
Results within  
2 weeks 
Outbound calls & 
emails Initiated 
within  
4 hours  
of notification of 
CSP failure 
(continued at 
least daily until 
MD or 
representative 
reached or CSP 
BUD exceeded) 
 
 
Within  
4 hours of 
notification 
& in 
conjunction 
with 
MD/patient 
notification 
effort 
LOW TO MODERATE RISK CONDITIONS & RESPONSE URGENCY: 
CSP(s) 
defect/failure 
with LOW to 
MODERATE RISK 
of Patient Harm  
AND/OR 
Compounding 
Personnel, 
Facilities, and/or 
Equipment 
Failures 
LOW to MODERATE RISK Defects or 
Failures: 
• Incomplete and/or nondocumented 
release inspections, tests, or final 
Pharmacist verification 
• CSP failure of release inspections or tests 
not impacting the CSP purity, potency, 
sterility, or endotoxin burden (e.g., 
appearance, pH) 
• Recall of CSP component* 
 
Compounding Personnel, Facilities, and/or 
Equipment Failures: 
• Compounding personnel evaluation 
and/or competency failure or delinquency 
• Facilities (e.g., SEC/PEC) certification 
failure or delinquency   
• Environmental controls or equipment 
calibration or maintenance delinquency  
• Facilities, environmental controls, or 
equipment operational failures (e.g., 
Initiated 
within  
2 business 
days  
of notification  
 
Preliminary 
Investigation 
Results within  
7 business 
days 
 
Final 
Investigation 
Results within  
2 weeks 
 
If patient harm 
risk deemed 
likely, escalate to 
HIGH RISK 
timeframes 
 
If patient harm 
risk deemed 
unlikely but 
possible,  
outbound calls & 
emails Initiated 
within  
3 business days  
of notification  
 
 
If patient 
harm risk 
deemed 
likely,  
escalate to 
HIGH RISK 
timeframes 
 
If patient 
harm risk 
deemed 
unlikely but 
possible,  
within  
3 business 
days of 
notification 
& in 
conjunction 
with 
MD/patient  
USP 797 Complaint, Adverse Drug Reactions, & CSP Recall Handling   Page 5 
of 9 
 
Conditions Examples Investigation 
Timeframe 
MD/Patient 
Notification 
Timeframe 
Product 
Recall 
Timeframe 
extended power outages or functioning 
out-of-specification) 
• Actionable microbiological air & surface 
sampling results** 
• Noncompliance with other USP <797> or 
<800> regulatory requirements 
 
notification 
effort 
*Impacted CSPs are identified and assessed when information is received regarding individual CSP component recalls or 
serious facilities, engineering control, or equipment failures are detected. 
**Risk of actionable microbiological air and/or surface sampling is based on organism, quantity, location(s), and historical 
trends and potential risk of CSP contamination.  
4.3. Identification of Affected CSPs  
• Initial Investigation: 
o Based on the data and CSP description received from the report, identify the CSP and 
lot number.  
o If the CSP was part of a batch, identify the disposition of the remaining dose units.  
o If the exact CSP or CSP batch cannot be immediately determined, determine the 
timeframe and potentially suspect CSPs compounded during that timeframe meeting 
the description of the CSP in question. Include all suspected CSPs in the investigation 
and recall. 
• Broader Investigation: 
o Once the CSP/CSP batch in question has been determined, expand the investigation 
to determine if additional CSPs are potentially impacted by the same quality issue.  
o Consider researching CSPs compounded within the same timeframe:  
• By the same compounder  
• In the same PEC 
• With the same compounding equipment, components, or supplies 
• Sterilized via the same method (if applicable) 
o Consider performing analytical testing onsite or via an analytical testing lab on any 
undispensed doses of CSPs identified as potentially having the same/similar quality 
issue identified in the reported CSP/CSP batch  
4.4. Identification and Notification of Affected Patients & Providers 
• Once the CSPs in question have been determined, refer to workflow or compounding system 
to identify patients and corresponding provider(s) who have received CSPs from the lot(s) 
in question. 
• Recall notifications include:  
Prescriber 
• Clear statement of recall 
• Description of recalled CSP (e.g., active ingredients, lot #, dosage form, packaging, 
intended use, BUD) 
• Reason for recall / potential for patient harm 
• Name(s) of corresponding patients receiving CSP 
• Information on potential side effects or patient harm to monitor for in CSPs that have 
been administered 
• Instructions for how recalled CSPs should be disposed of or returned 
• Recall contact information for communication and return of recalled CSP(s)  
USP 797 Complaint, Adverse Drug Reactions, & CSP Recall Handling   Page 6 
of 9 
 
Prescriber 
• MedWatch reporting information 
4.5. Collection, Disposal, & Documentation of Recalled CSPs 
• Create a Recall Log  of all CSPs under recall and record the disposition of all dose units 
including dispensed and undispensed dose units. 
• Collect and quarantine unadministered doses:   
Undispensed 
dose units: 
• Immediately quarantine during the initial investigation to prevent 
additional dispensing of dose  
Dispensed dose 
units that have 
not been 
administered: 
• Attempt to retrieve doses via courier or prepaid shipping method; 
alternatively, provide dose destruction instructions that are 
compliant with drug disposal laws and regulations.  Refer to drug 
disposal policy for additional information. 
• Log and quarantine retrieved doses. 
• Log disposition (e.g., disposed of by patient, unable to contact) of 
unretrieved doses. 
Dispensed and 
previously 
administered 
dose units: 
• Record the dose administration on the Recall Log, if possible, 
collect and document information pertaining to date and time of 
administration for future reference 
• Hold collected doses in quarantine until the end of the investigation or as determined by 
the Designated Person. 
• Dispose of or destroy quarantined doses per drug disposal policy. 
• Log the disposal or destruction date, method, and person responsible in the Recall Log. 
4.6. Investigation & Corrective Action 
• Conduct a thorough and timely investigation of all potential or suspected contributing 
factors to the reported ADR or CSP quality-related complaint including, but not limited to: 
Area of Compliance Investigation Considerations 
Facilities & 
Engineering 
Controls  
(PECs / SECs; HEPA Filters; 
airflow & exhaust 
systems) 
• Semi-annual certifications & detailed report 
• Technical or mechanical review of systems 
• HEPA filter efficacy review 
• External contributor factors (e.g., power surge) 
• Trends 
Environmental 
Controls  
(HVAC-controlled 
Temperatures & 
Humidity; Pressure 
Differentials) 
• Current maintenance, calibration, certification reports 
• Technical or mechanical review of system 
• External contributor factors (e.g., power surge) 
• Trends 
Personnel 
Competencies, 
Conduct, & 
Compounding 
Performance 
• Personnel training and competency assessment records  
• QA Audits of SOP & documentation compliance 
• CSP QC testing 
• Trends 
Cleaning, 
Disinfecting, & 
• Cleaning logs, agent selection, dwell times 
• Cleaning procedures  
USP 797 Complaint, Adverse Drug Reactions, & CSP Recall Handling   Page 7 
of 9 
 
Area of Compliance Investigation Considerations 
Application of 
Sporicidal Agents 
• Personnel training and competency assessment records  
• QA Audits 
• Trends 
Environmental 
Monitoring  
(Viable Air &/or Surface 
Sampling) 
• All of the areas of compliance shown above 
• Materials movement & cleaning 
• Personnel and visitor behaviors 
• External contributing factors (e.g., particle generating 
activities occurring immediately outside compounding area) 
• Types, locations, & quantities of actionable organisms 
• Trends 
Sterile Equipment, 
Components, & 
Supplies 
• COAs demonstrating compliance with specifications 
• For equipment, maintenance, calibration, & certification 
records 
• Manufacturer recalls 
• Personnel training and competency assessment records  
• Trends 
CSP Quality and/or 
Release Testing 
Results 
• Release testing policies & procedures 
• Compounding process, equipment, components, supplies  
• Personnel training and competency assessment records  
• Trends 
 
• As described above, consider if CSP quality-related issue(s) potentially affects other CSPs. 
• Determine immediate remediation to reduce the risk of further CSP quality issues until the 
investigation can be concluded including, but not limited to: 
o Halt of sterile compounding operations 
o Restriction of sterile compounding operations 
o Reclassification of compounding areas and reduction to the corresponding BUDs and 
compounding restrictions for an SCA or non -classified immediate use compounding 
area, as appropriate; refer to the Beyond Use Dating and Stabilities Considerations 
policy and Immediate Use Compounding policy for further information.  
o Remove or retrain compounding (or support) personnel involved 
• After the investigation has concluded, finalize, and implement the corrective action plan. 
Corrective actions address known and suspected deficiencies in all aspects of the sterile 
compounding operation. 
• Provide staff communication about the deficiencies and corrective action plan. Involve staff 
in the implementation of the corrective actions when appropriate. 
• During and after the completion of the corrective actions, collect data and information that 
allows for evaluation of the effectiveness of the actions taken. 
• If the corrective actions taken fully resolve the quality issue, ensure the process is fully 
documented, including the validations performed afterwards.  
• If the corrective actions have not been fully effective, continue or renew the investigation 
and determine additional or enhanced corrective actions. 
4.7. Serious or life-threatening ADR Reporting  
USP 797 Complaint, Adverse Drug Reactions, & CSP Recall Handling   Page 8 
of 9 
 
• Report serious or life -threatening ADRs to FDA Consumer MedWatch and/or similar 
regulatory body per policy and in accordance jurisdictional laws. MedWatch contact 
information:  
o Toll-free line: 1-800-332-1088 
o To report online: www.fda.gove/medwatch/report.htm 
o Information: www.fda.gov/reportinghelp 
 
5. Definitions 
5.1. Oversight: The review, monitoring, and supervision of actions taken by personnel, bearing 
responsibility for those actions, and being available for consultation if and when needed even if 
not physically present. 
5.2. Quality assurance (QA): A system of procedures, activities, and oversight that ensures that the 
compounding process consistently meets quality standards.  
5.3. Quality control (QC): The sampling, testing, and documentation of results that, taken together, 
ensure that specifications have been met before release of the CSP. 
5.4. Release inspection and testing:  Visual inspection and testing performed to ensure that a 
preparation meets appropriate quality characteristics. 
5.5. Specification: The tests, analytical methods, and acceptance criteria to which any component, 
CSP, container closure system, equipment, or other material used in compounding CSPs must 
conform to be considered acceptable for its intended use. 
5.6. Verify: To confirm that a method, process, system, or equipment will perform as expected under 
the conditions of actual use. 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 12/2025 
7.1. Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2023.  
7.2. Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
7.3. Revised 05/2024 (formatting only). 
7.4. Reviewed with no changes 12/2024. 
   
USP 797 Complaint, Adverse Drug Reactions, & CSP Recall Handling   Page 9 of 9 
 
ATTACHMENT ONE: Recall Log 
List each lot number and dose separately. 
 
CSP 
Name 
Lot # Exp 
Date 
Dose 
Dispensed? 
 
Dose 
Quarant’d? 
Patient 
Name 
Contact Date & 
Method 
Prescriber 
Name 
Contact 
Date & 
Method 
Dose 
Admin’d? 
Dose 
Returned? 
Date Destroyed Method Witness 
              
              
              
              
              
              
 
 
 