Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: LSU Surgical Center Pharmacy Section: Code Red Pharmacy 
Policy  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for OLOL Surgical Center 
at Perkins  
Policy 
Reference #: PH0559 
Supersedes #: ECLS-012 
Date of Origination: 11/22/17 Review Date: 01/06/2025 
Revision Date: 01/06/2025 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits Illuminated EXIT sign is located (1) at exit door as you leave pharmacy to left. 2) 
above each exit throughout the facility  
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Normal Operating Hours are Monday through Friday, 6am to 5pm 
• Pharmacy staff will exit the pharmacy and help any and all staff get patients out that are located 
on the same hall (ENT/Oral Surgery and Radiology). Page 2 of 2 
• Everyone will exit the back exit door and convene in the grass lot behind the building until the 
all clear is heard. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients the majority of the patient population is 
ambulatory. 
• Non ambulatory patients may be evacuated using wheelchairs. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• There is 1 fire pull just outside the pharmacy door in the hallway. There is 1 fire extinguisher hanging on 
the wall to the right as you exit the pharmacy.  
 
 
 
 