PH0060 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for OLOL Ascension 
Pharmacy  
Policy 
Reference #: PH0560 
Supersedes #: ECLS-012 
Date of Origination: 01/2020 Review Date: 02/03/2025 
Revision Date: 02/03/2025 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOLA) Ascension’s written Code 
RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLA department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLA Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
o The location of Adjacent Smoke Compartment(s) for the Main pharmacy entrance is 
either into Telemetry hallway from front vestibule or IV storage area.  Compartment J 
to I or I to J pending code location PH0060 
Page 2 of 2 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
(For areas with more than one set of operational hours state that operational roles will be different at different 
times with a designee covering the other position’s duties.) 
• Department manager or designee will ensure correct response unless not present then it would be 
the staff pharmacist on duty 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• The department does not have gas shut off valves.  We would follow the instructions of the units 
of evacuation if support is needed 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Manual pull station is located across from Cath Lab next to the elevator 
• Fire Extinguisher is located between exit doors next to dispensing window 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Identify any used/stored combustible products 
o Sterile 70% Alcohol (limited quantity and volume) 
• Identify any secured area that would require a special badge access or door key.  Explain how the 
Code RED Response Team would have access. 
o All access to the pharmacy is through the pharmacy entrance doors which is controlled by 
badge access only.   
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is to the Telemetry hallway (Left) to stairs opposite 
from Cath Lab and the destination is the smoke compartment J.  
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is to the Med/Surg hallway (right) to main area 
between unit halls and the destination is the smoke compartment I.  
• The primary vertical evacuation route is Telemetry hallway (left) to stairs opposite from Cath 
Lab, down to parking lot outside of ER, over to St. Elizabeth Blvd which is the designated 
meeting area 
• The secondary vertical evacuation route is through Telemetry hallway (right) to Med/Surg stairs, 
to front exit, to ER parking lot, to the final designated meeting area of St Elizabeth Blvd 
• The pharmacy department may need to utilize both horizontal and vertical evacuation routes 
 