 PH-2201 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Facility and Personnel Specifications Policy Reference #: PH-05-01 
Supersedes #: PH-22-01 
Date of Origination: January 14th, 2011 Last Date Reviewed: 01/06/2025 
Last Date Revised: January 6, 2025, 2017 
 
Purpose 
1) Definition and Purpose 
The purpose of this policy is to provide a general overview and frame of reference for the responsible 
operation of the sterile compounding pharmacy. 
Policy 
a) Our Lady of the Lake Baton Rouge Market Pharmacy operations will adhere to all state and 
federal regulatory requirements to operate as a licensed pharmacy. 
b) All pharmacy personnel are oriented and trained on the hospital’s mission statement, operating 
policy and procedures.  
c) All personnel are assessed as competent to perform and practice within the specific pharmacy 
setting. 
d) All equipment and controlled pharmacy environments are certified for operational use. 
Reference Documents 
a) Applicable Federal, State and Local regulations 
Procedures 
a) Facility 
i) Defined areas within the facility will be designated as a licensed pharmacy and will be licensed 
by the State Board of Pharmacy to operate as a pharmacy, with all licenses prominently 
displayed.   
(1) A current copy of the pharmacy regulations and all amendments for the states in which the 
facility services are kept on file. 
ii) The facility is equipped with a security system during non-business hours. 
b) Pharmacy Personnel 
i) All registered pharmacist’s licenses are in good standing and are electronically retrievable. 
ii) Pharmacists shall maintain individual records of personal CPE activities with CPE Monitor 
and shall authorize the board’s access to their file by recording their Louisiana pharmacist 
license number within that file and shall present a copy of their CPE Monitor transcript when 
requested by the board.  PH-2201 
Page 2 of 2 
iii) Pharmacists and technician training certificates/logs are to be kept in the employee’s 
personnel file or readily available electronically. 
c) Certification and Monitoring 
i) All balances and weights are to be certified annually. 
ii) Temperature monitoring of freezers, refrigerators, and incubators is conducted daily, in some 
circumstances twice daily, and required equipment is NIST certified (National Institutes of 
Standards and Technology). 
iii) The controlled pharmacy environments that are classified (ISO Class 5, 7, and 8) are to be 
inspected and certified biannually. .   
iv) The physical condition of all pumps and equipment utilized in the compounding process are 
calibrated to meet acceptable industry standards based on manufacturer recommendations. 
d) Reference Materials 
i) Current copies of textbooks and reference journals as mandated by the Louisiana Board of 
Pharmacy are to be kept in a readily accessible area. 
ii) The Pharmacy Director or designee is responsible for maintaining reference materials, 
standards and methods procedures and provisions of current practice trends and methods. 
(1) The Pharmacy Director or designee will review all policies and procedures, identify 
outdated or inaccurate methods. 
(2) Revise or draft new policies and procedures. 
(3) Upon approval review and acquaint the staff with the new or revised policy. 
(4) Update the facility copy of the Policy and Procedure Manual for future reference. 
iii) A list of regional poison centers is readily available and posted prominently.  
e) Pharmacy Staffing 
i) A pharmacist licensed to practice in the State of Louisiana is to be present at all times when 
the pharmacy is open to conduct business.  
ii) The ratio of support individuals and or pharmacy technicians will not exceed those stipulated 
by the Louisiana Board of Pharmacy. 
References: 
Louisiana State Board of Pharmacy (LABP) law and regulations  