OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Hand Hygiene and Garbing for Sterile 
Compounding in a Cleanroom Suite 
Policy Reference #: PH0532 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 12/02/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
Overview and Scope 
1.1 This policy describes the requirements and procedures for hand hygiene and garbing where 
Compounded Sterile Preparations (CSP) are prepared within a cleanroom suite within FMOLHS 
Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
1.2 Personal hygiene and proper garbing are essential to minimizing microbial control of the sterile 
compounding environment. The human body sheds squamous cells at a rate of 106 or more per 
hour and these skin particles are covered in microorganisms. Touch contamination is the leading 
cause of CSP contamination. To minimize the risk of contamination into the sterile compounding 
environment, all persons who enter the sterile compo unding environment must be properly 
garbed per this policy. 
1.3 This policy applies to compounding of non -hazardous CSPs. Refer to USP <800> for additional 
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) that may be required when compounding hazardous drugs.  
2. Policy  
2.1 It is the policy that all persons who enter the cleanroom suite of a FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market 
Pharmacy comply with all aspects of this Hand Hygiene and Garbing policy to maintain microbial 
control of the sterile compounding environment.  
2.2 Individuals entering the cleanroom suite are properly garbed and maintain proper personal 
hygiene and hand hygiene to minimize the risk of contamination to the environment and/or CSPs.  
• Bare skin is never exposed inside an ISO 5 PEC.  
2.3 Gloves worn in all rooms of the cleanroom suite are always sterile.  
2.4 Garb is replaced immediately if it becomes soiled or if the integrity is compromised. 
2.5 All garb is stored away from the sink to avoid splashing onto clean garb and is stored in a way that 
minimizes contamination.  2.6 All personnel responsible for sterile compounding are trained in hand hygiene and garbing and 
have their competency evaluated. Competency in hand hygiene and garbing is assessed by the DP 
or an Assigned Trainer (AT) and by passing a gloved fingertip test. 
2.7 All personnel who restock or clean the cleanroom suite (excluding the PEC) are trained in hand 
hygiene and garbing and have their competency evaluated. Competency in hand hygiene and 
garbing is assessed by the DP or AT and by passing a gloved fingertip test. 
2.8 Replace all garb that has become visibly soiled  (e.g., becomes moist or wet due to splashing of 
cleaning agents and/or perspiration) after cleaning and prior to resuming compounding duties; at 
a minimum, repeat hand hygiene and replace sterile gloves before returning to compounding. 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Person(s) (DP): 
• Oversee the personnel who enter the cleanroom suite and ensures they comply with all 
procedures in the Hand Hygiene and Garbing policy. 
• Evaluate if compounding personnel need to be excluded from sterile compounding based 
on individual special conditions. Special conditions include but are not limited to: rashes, 
recent tattoos, oozing sores, conjunctivitis, or active respiratory infections 
• Ensure that any non-compounding staff or visitors who enter the cleanroom suite comply 
with all procedures in the Hand Hygiene and Garbing policy. These may include but are not 
limited to engineering, environmental services, stocking personnel, inspectors or students. 
3.2 Compounding personnel: 
• Maintain the sterile environment by performing hand hygiene and garbing procedures.  
• Inform the Designated Person (DP) if they have any conditions that could contaminate the 
sterile compounding environment. Examples of these conditions include but are not limited 
to: rashes, recent tattoos, oozing sores, conjunctivitis, or active respiratory infections. 
3.3 Non-compounding staff and visitors: 
• Maintain the sterile environment by performing hand hygiene procedures. 
• Don appropriate garb according to facility SOP. 
4. Procedures 
4.1 All personnel entering a compounding area where Category 1 and Category 2 CSPs are prepared 
must take appropriate steps to minimize microbial contamination of the environment and of the 
CSPs, including hand hygiene, garbing, and consideration of needed materials to be brought into 
the compounding area. 
4.2 All individuals entering the cleanroom suite remove all items that are not easily cleanable or are 
not necessary for compounding. The DP may permit accommodations to the below list as long as 
the quality of the CSP and compounding area will not be affected, accommodations are 
documented. At a minimum, individuals must: 
• Remove personal outer garments (e.g., bandanas, coats, hats, jackets, sweaters, vests) 
• Remove all cosmetics 
• Remove all hand, wrist, and other exposed jewelry, including piercings that could interfere 
with the effectiveness of garbing. Cover any jewelry that cannot be removed. 
• Remove earbuds and headphones • Individuals will not bring in electronic devices that are not necessary for compounding or 
other required tasks into the compounding area 
• Nails are clean and neatly trimmed. No nail products may be worn (all nail polish, artificial 
nails and extenders are not allowed) 
• If eyeglasses are worn, they are cleaned with an eyeglass wipe on the lenses and with a 
disinfectant wipe on the frames 
• Employees entering the sterile compounding area will wear socks long enough to cover 
exposed skin on legs that may be present when the employee is sitting. 
4.3 Required garb for sterile compounding Category 1 and Category 2 CSPs include:  
• Low-lint gown with sleeves that fit snugly around the wrist and have an enclosed neck 
• Gowns with a thumb loop are used 
• Low-lint shoe covers  
• Low-lint face mask 
• Low-lint cover for head that covers the hair and ears, and if applicable, cover for facial hair 
• Sterile powder-free gloves 
4.4 Any person entering the sterile compounding area washes hands and forearms up to the elbows 
with soap and water. 
• Steps for hand hygiene: 
o Remove visible debris from underneath fingernails under warm running water using a 
disposable nail cleaner 
o Wash hands and forearms up to the elbows with soap and water for at least 30 seconds 
o Dry hands and forearms up to the elbows completely with low-lint disposable wipes 
• Do not use brushes and hand dryers. 
• A non-refillable soap dispenser is located next to the sink 
4.5 All garb is stored inside the classified area: 
• Head covers, masks, facial hair covers, and shoe covers are stored on the dirty side of the 
line of demarcation 
• Gowns and sterile gloves are stored on the clean side of the line of demarcation 
4.6 Order of hand hygiene and garbing is: 
• Outside the ante room: 
o Tie long hair back 
o Clean eyeglasses 
• Enter ante room: 
o Don head cover and facial hair cover if applicable, ensuring all hair is covered 
o Don mask 
o Don shoe covers one at a time while stepping over the line of demarcation  
o Perform hand hygiene 
o Don gown 
o Sanitize hands/wrists with alcohol-based hand sanitizer: 
• Apply alcohol-based hand sanitizer to dry skin on one hand (volume determined 
by manufacturer) 
• Rub hands together, covering all surfaces of fingers and hands, until hands are 
dry 
o Don sterile gloves 
4.7 Donning and doffing of garb do not occur in the anteroom at the same time 
4.8 Never don or doff sterile gloves inside the ISO Class 5 PEC. 4.9 Garbing for non-compounding staff and visitors: 
• When it is necessary for non-compounding staff or visitors to enter the cleanroom suite to 
perform maintenance, cleaning procedures  or inspections, the persons entering the area 
must perform all proper hand hygiene and garbing per this policy. 
4.10 Doffing of garb worn while compounding CSPs occurs on the clean side of the ante room, 
close to the line of demarcation and close to an air return vent. Order of doffing garb worn during 
sterile compounding: 
• Remove sterile gloves 
• Remove gown 
o Gowns are stored on the clean side of the ante room and away from sink for reuse 
during the same shift only if the gown is not visibly soiled or torn.  
• Remove and dispose of mask, facial hair cover, head cover, and shoe covers after stepping 
over the line of demarcation  
• Leave the ante room. 
5. Definitions 
5.1 Assigned Trainer (AT):  One or more individuals assigned by the Designated Person(s) to be 
responsible for directly providing the training, observation, and/or evaluation of personnel for the 
preparation of CSPs 
5.2 ISO: International Standards Organization 
5.3 Laminar Airflow System (LAFS): A device or zone within a buffer area that provides an ISO Class 
5 or better air quality environment for sterile compounding. The system provides a unidirectional 
HEPA-filtered airflow. Examples of LAFS are Laminar Airflow Workbenches (LAFWs), Integrated 
Vertical Laminar Flow Zones (IVLFZs) and Biological Safety Cabinet, Class II (BSCs). 
5.4 Low-lint: Material that exhibits few, if any, fibers or other contamination, visible without 
magnification, which is separate from, or easily removed from the material in a dry condition 
5.5 Line of Demarcation:  A visible line on the floor that separates the clean and dirty sides of the 
anteroom 
5.6 Primary Engineering Control (PEC):  A device or zone that provides an ISO 5 air quality 
environment for sterile compounding 
Restricted-access Barrier System (RABS):  An enclosure that provides HEPA -filtered ISO Class 5 
unidirectional air that allows for the ingress and/or egress of materials through defined openings 
that have been designed and validated to preclude the transfer of contamination, and that 
generally are  not to be opened during operations. Examples of RABS include Compounding 
Aseptic Isolators (CAIs) and Compounding Aseptic Containment Isolators (CACIs). 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 proposed version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 05/2024 7.1. Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2022.  
7.2. Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
7.3. Reviewed with no changes 12/2024. 
 
 
Next review: 12/2025 