OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Workflow and Aseptic Technique for 
Sterile Compounding 
Policy Reference #: PH0538 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised: 11/4/2024 
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the procedures for Sterile Compounding Workflow and materials handling 
within a cleanroom suite and Segregated Compounding Area (SCA) to maintain the quality of the 
compounding environment and minimize the risk of contamination to Com pounded Sterile 
Preparations (CSPs) prepared within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
1.2. This policy describes the procedures for Aseptic Technique of CSPs within a cleanroom suite and 
SCA where CSPs are prepared within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
• Aseptic technique is set of methods used to keep objects and areas free of microorganisms 
and thereby minimize infection risk to the patient. It is accomplished through practices that 
maintain the microbe count as an irreducible medium. 
1.3. Sterile compounding workflow includes all the movement of materials within the designated 
compounding and/or cleanroom area(s).  It is critical to control transfer of materials between 
areas of lower quality air to higher quality air to minimize the influx  of contaminants, especially 
activities such as: 
• Entering and exiting SCA  
• Entering and exiting ante room 
• Entering and exiting buffer room 
• Use of pass-through chambers 
• Aseptic technique during compounding 
1.4. This policy is not intended to describe the requirements and procedures for aseptic technique of 
CSPs for Immediate Use within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
• Policies and procedures for immediate use CSPs can be found in the Immediate Use 
Compounding policy. 
1.5. This policy outlines the steps for workflow and aseptic technique for compounding non-hazardous 
sterile preparations. While many of the aseptic technique steps are the same for hazardous and 
non-hazardous sterile compounding, additional workflow steps are required when working with 
hazardous drugs (HDs). Please refer to USP <800> when working with HD CSPs.  
2. Policy  2.1 It is the policy that compounding personnel maintain sterility of CSPs prepared within FMOLHS 
Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies by ensuring aseptic technique is followed in the entirety of the 
compounding process. 
2.2 All furniture, equipment and other materials necessary for performing sterile compounding 
activities that is moved into the classified areas and SCA are low-shedding and easily cleaned and 
disinfected. 
2.3 All furniture, equipment and other materials necessary for performing sterile compounding 
activities that is moved into the classified areas and SCA are cleaned per this policy.  
2.4 Cardboard and other outside shipping containers are not allowed into the classified areas and 
SCA.  
2.5 Personnel who compound CSPs within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies independently 
have successfully completed all required sterile compounding training and competency 
programs. 
2.6 All aseptic manipulations and processes occur inside an ISO Class 5 Primary Engineering Control 
(PEC). 
2.7 All personnel who compound CSPs within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies  follow all 
procedures in the Hand Hygiene and Garbing policy  including personnel conduct in the sterile 
compounding area(s).  All supplies, medications, fluids and equipment are cleaned upon 
entry/crossing the Line of Demarcation (LOD) with sIPA or sporicidal disinfectant.   
2.8 Visibly dirty or soiled items/equipment are cleaned with sporicidal agent before introduction into 
the sterile compounding area and then cleaned per this policy when crossing the LOD (and if 
introduced into the Primary Engineering Control).  
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Person(s) (DP): 
• Ensure all furniture, equipment and materials necessary for sterile compounding is low 
shedding and easily cleaned and disinfected  
• Ensure all personnel involved in sterile compounding move materials, medications, fluids, 
and supplies into sterile compounding locations and ISO classified areas per this policy in 
order to maintain the sterility of the CSPs 
• Ensure all personnel who compound CSPs are following aseptic technique throughout the 
entirety of the sterile compounding 
• Ensure technology supporting sterile compounding workflow is maintained and consistent 
with organizational policies and procedures  
• Communicate changes in workflow, procedures and systems to compounding staff.  
3.2 Compounding personnel: 
• Follow all policies and procedures for moving materials, medications, fluids, and supplies 
into and out of the sterile compounding locations per this policy 
• Follow aseptic technique throughout the entirety of sterile compounding  
3.3 Pharmacist:  • Provide direct oversight of compounding personnel and procedures to ensure compliance.  
• Perform in-process checks and final verification checks of CSPs per policy.  
• Perform all CSP storage and/or dispensing processes per policy.  
4. Procedures 
Movement of Materials: Segregated Compounding Area (SCA): 
4.1 Remove all materials moving into the SCA from outer shipping containers and cardboard. Move 
these containers and carboard away from the immediate vicinity of the SCA and/or before 
crossing the line of demarcation (LOD) or perimeter line.  
4.2 Disinfect all materials that are introduced inside the perimeter of an SCA by wiping with a low-
lint wipe saturated with sporicidal disinfectant or sterile 70% Isopropyl alcohol (sIPA) prior to 
moving into the perimeter of the SCA. 
• Wear gloves when wiping down materials. 
• Ensure the integrity of all materials is not affected by wiping.  
• Sporicidal disinfectant remains on the materials for the proper contact time.  
• sIPA remains on the materials until it dries. 
4.3 Disinfect all carts moving into the perimeter line of the SCA by wiping with a low -lint wipe 
saturated with sporicidal disinfectant or sterile 70% Isopropyl alcohol (sIPA) prior to moving into 
the perimeter line of the SCA. Ensure castors are also wiped down thoroughly. 
4.4 Only introduce materials needed for sterile compounding activities inside the perimeter of the 
SCA. 
4.5 Move materials into their storage location within the SCA or use materials for compounding CSPs. 
 
Movement of Materials: Sterile Compounding Suite: 
4.6 Remove all materials moving into the sterile compounding suite from outer shipping containers 
and cardboard.  
4.7 Disinfect all carts moving into the ante room of the sterile compounding suite by wiping with a 
low-lint wipe saturated with sporicidal disinfectant or sterile 70% Isopropyl alcohol (sIPA) prior 
to moving into the sterile compounding suite. Ensure castors are also wiped down thoroughly. 
4.8 Disinfect all materials that are introduced inside the sterile compounding suite by wiping with 
and a low-lint wipe saturated with sporicidal disinfectant or sterile 70% Isopropyl alcohol (sIPA) 
prior to moving into the sterile compounding suite.  
• Gloves are worn when wiping down materials.  
• Ensure the integrity of all materials is not affected by wiping. 
• Sporicidal disinfectant remains on the materials for the proper contact time.  
• sIPA remains on the materials until it dries. 
4.9 Place wiped down items into a disinfected bin prior to moving into the sterile compounding suite.  
4.10 Movement of Materials: Non-classified area to classified area 
• Wiped down materials moving into the sterile compounding suite are placed inside the 
interlocking pass-through. 
• Wiped down materials moving into the sterile compounding suite are moved into the ante 
room and placed on a cart or table on the inside of the ante room. 
o Care is taken to ensure the ante room door is closed as soon as possible after passing 
materials into the ante room.   
4.11 Movement of Materials: Classified area to classified area  
• Move materials needed for sterile compounding into the buffer room by placing inside the 
interlocking pass-through. • Move materials needed for sterile compounding into the buffer room by opening the buffer 
room door and placing items on cart or table inside the buffer room. 
o Care is taken to ensure the buffer room door is closed as soon as possible after passing 
materials into the buffer room.  
• When moving a cart into the buffer room, the cart is wiped again with a low -lint wipe 
saturated with sporicidal disinfectant or sterile 70% Isopropyl alcohol (sIPA) prior to moving 
into the buffer room. Ensure castors are also wiped down thoroughly. 
o Care is taken to ensure the buffer room door is closed as soon as possible after passing 
a cart into the buffer room.  
4.12 Properly garbed personnel move materials into storage locations within the sterile compounding 
suite or use for compounding CSPs.  
 
Sterile Compounding Procedure: 
4.13 Personnel follow all policies and procedures outlined in Hand Hygiene and Garbing for Sterile 
Compounding policy prior to compounding CSPs and working in the SCA and/or Cleanroom Suite.  
4.14 Gather all materials needed for compounding CSPs prior to initiating compounding. 
4.15 Check expiration date on all vials, ampules, and fluids being used for sterile compounding. 
4.16 Check each vial, ampule, bag for: 
• Changes in color 
• Particles floating in the fluid 
• Cloudiness 
• Leakage or packaging defects that could impact the integrity of the sterile component 
o If any of these present, do not use for compounding CSPs 
4.17 All items necessary for compounding CSPs are wiped down with sIPA and a sterile low-lint wiper 
and allowed to dry before moving materials into the Primary Engineering Control (PEC). 
• The wiping procedure does not render the product label unreadable. 
• Sterile supplies in sealed containers moving into the PEC may be removed from the outer 
covering as the supplies are introduced into the PEC without needing to be wiped with sIPA 
4.18 Movement of Materials – LAFW, BSC, OR IVFLZ: 
• Spray gloved hands with sIPA 
• Move all necessary materials that have been wiped with sIPA and allowed to dry onto the  
side of the DCA of the PEC 
• Once all materials have been transferred to the PEC, spray gloved hands with sIPA 
4.19 Spray gloved hands with sIPA prior to beginning any CSP manipulations. Gloved hands remain in 
the ISO 5 PEC for the entire sterile compounding process. When hands removed from PEC, spray 
gloved hands with sIPA prior to putting them back into the PEC. 
4.20 Items used for compounding are arranged inside the PEC so that all items are receiving first air. 
All clean/unused items are located to one side of the DCA. All used items/discarded items are 
arranged on the other side of the DCA. Clean and dirty items are not intermingled.  
• Like items are arranged together to organize the direct compounding area (DCA) inside the 
PEC.  
4.21 IV workflow systems are arranged inside the PEC to the left or right of the DCA. First air is 
maintained across the surface of the IV workflow system when CSPs are arranged on the 
hardware. 
 
Aseptic Technique: 
4.22 Flip dust covers off vials, disinfect vial septum by wiping with an individual sIPA wipe three times 
firmly in a single direction and allow to dry.  • Critical sites always receive first air after disinfection with sIPA. If first air is interrupted, wipe 
the vial septum again with sIPA. 
4.23 Wipe ampule necks with individual sIPA wipes and allow to dry prior to manipulation. The 
individual sIPA wipes are used only once. 
• Ensure all liquid is in the body of the ampule; lightly tap the head of the ampule, causing liquid 
to drip down into the body of the ampule. 
• Open ampule by wrapping a sIPA wipe around the neck of the ampule and snapping the neck 
at the scored line if available, away from hands and body, and towards the side of the PEC.   
• The ampule is never opened toward the HEPA filter of the PEC. 
4.24 Assemble needle and syringe: 
• Remove appropriately sized syringe for volume being drawn up from outer packaging. Do not 
push syringe through paper backing, if present. Gently peel back the two sides of the 
packaging without touching any of the critical sites. Place packaging trash off to the side. 
Maintain first air across the luer lock of the syringe, as this is the critical site. Hold syringe in 
hand as needle is opened.  
• Remove outer packaging of appropriately sized needle and twist needle onto the syringe. Do 
not push needle through paper backing, if present. Gently peel back the two sides of the 
packaging without touching critical sites.  Care is taken to avoid twisting the needle cap off 
needle; instead pull straight back in a single movement to avoid finger sticks.  
4.25 Withdraw required volume from a vial: 
• Pull back on the syringe to fill the syringe with air less than or equal to the volume of fluid 
being removed from the vial 
• Hold syringe so that the needle shaft is at a 45 o angle to the middle of the vial septum and 
needle bevel is up. Pierce vial septum with tip of the needle, rotate the needle to 90o the vial 
septum and push down through the vial septum in one fluid motion. To avoid vial septum 
coring, do not twist the needle into the vial septum.  
• Push air into the air space of the vial, invert vial and hold vial so as to not block first air to the 
critical site. Ensure needle is now in the fluid space in the vial. 
• Pulling back on the plunger flange, withdraw required volume from vial, taking care only to 
touch the plunger flange and not the plunger shaft. 
• Ensure plunger seal is in-line with the correct volume markings on the barrel of the syringe to 
confirm correct volume withdrawn. 
• Check for air bubbles in the syringe barrel. If bubbles are present, flick the barrel of the syringe 
with fingers to move air bubbles to the top of the syringe. Push air into the vial into the air 
space, move needle to the fluid space and withdraw to required volume markings on syringe.  
• Withdraw needle from the vial and ensure required volume is still within the syringe. 
o If required volume not in the syringe, disinfect vial septum with sIPA wipe and follow 
all above steps. Do not enter the vial septum in the same location, always utilize an 
unpierced area on the vial septum to avoid coring.  
• Follow all the above steps to reconstitute other vials or withdraw volumes from more than 
one syringe. 
• Needles should not be used more than five (5) times, as this dulls the needle and contributes 
to coring. 
• Remove needle and replace with an unused needle if further manipulations need to be 
performed with that syringe. 
4.26 Withdraw required volume from ampule: • Ensure needle used in only one direction is a filter needle. The filter needle can be used to 
withdraw contents from an ampule or push syringe contents into final dose.  
• Insert filter needle or filter straw into the contents of the ampule 
• Pulling back on the plunger flange, withdraw more than the required volume from the 
ampule, taking care only to touch the plunger flange and not the plunger shaft. 
• Remove the filter straw or filter needle from ampule and turn the syringe upward. 
• Check for air bubbles in the syringe barrel. If bubbles are present, flick the barrel of the syringe 
with fingers to move air bubbles to the top of the syringe. 
• Remove filter straw or filter needle from the syringe and replace with a new appropriately 
sized needle.  
• Push the plunger flange upward to expel air bubbles and extra volume. Ensure plunger seal is 
in-line with the correct volume markings on the barrel of the syringe to confirm correct 
volume withdrawn. 
4.27 Withdrawing or adding required volume from or into IV bag: 
• Disinfect drug additive port of IV bag by wiping three times firmly in a single direction with 
sIPA wipe and allow to dry 
• With needle at a 90 o angle to the drug additive port, push needle into drug additive port 
through the center of the port. To avoid coring, do not twist the needle into the IV bag port.  
• Pulling back on the plunger flange, withdraw required volume from IV bag, taking care only 
to touch the plunger flange and not the plunger shaft. 
• Ensure plunger seal is in-line with the correct volume markings on the barrel of the syringe to 
confirm correct volume withdrawn. 
• Check for air bubbles in the syringe barrel. If bubbles are present, flick the barrel of the syringe 
with fingers to move air bubbles to the top of the syringe. Push air into the bag then pull back 
to withdraw required volume to markings on syringe.  
• Pull back on the syringe to remove needle from the IV bag.  
4.28 Medication reconstitution: 
• Withdraw the required amount of diluent from a bag or vial; following steps above for 
piercing bags and vials. 
• Inject the required diluent into the medication vial; verifying with medication package insert 
for the instructions for reconstitution (into the powder cake or into the side of the vial). 
• Withdraw air from the vial equal to the amount of diluent injected then withdraw needle. 
• Follow medication package insert for instructions on the method for ensuring the medication 
goes into solution (can the medication be shaken or only swirled). 
4.29 The following limits are always followed: 
• The maximum number of times a needle is used is five (5) times 
• The maximum number of times a single dose vial can be entered is five (5) times 
• The selection of syringe size to use is based on volume being measured 
4.30 When recapping needles, always utilize the one-handed scoop technique to avoid finger sticks: 
• With the syringe in dominant hand and needle cap laying on the DCA, scoop up the needle 
cap with the needle. Once cap resting over needle, press needle cap completely onto the 
needle. 
4.31 All steps (including taking all required pictures) and manipulations required for the IV workflow 
system DoseEdge® are followed for all CSPs. 
• First air to critical sites is maintained through all required steps. • All lot numbers and expiration dates are entered or captured in pictures, and all medications, 
diluents, and fluids are scanned prior to commencing any manipulations of ingredients. 
• The IV Workflow system is always used and IV workflow system data entry and compounding 
steps are performed in the correct order when compounding CSPs except for the following 
institutionally accepted bypass reasons:  
o Barcodes that cannot be scanned 
o Final volume on label is 1ml 
o Unmapped products 
4.32 Continuously inspect gloves during sterile compounding for holes, punctures, or tears. Gloves 
are replaced immediately upon discovery of these defects. 
• Do not don or doff gloves inside the PEC. 
• To replace gloves: 
o Step out of the buffer room or away from PEC when in a SCA 
o Remove torn, punctured, or soiled gloves 
o Reapply hand sanitizer to hands/wrists and allow to dry  
o Don new pair of sterile gloves 
4.33 Cover critical sites of completed CSPs with a tamper evident seal, cover, or cap as needed. 
4.34 Compounding personnel inspect completed CSPs for cores, visible particles, discoloration, or 
other defects before removal from the PEC. 
4.35 Move completed CSPs from the PEC to a cart in the buffer room, accumulate all trash in the PEC 
and discard, and place sharps into a hard-sided sharps container. 
4.36 Wipe the DCA of the PEC with sIPA and allow to dry prior to beginning the next CSP. 
4.37 Move completed CSPs from the SCA or sterile compounding suite through pass -throughs or 
doors. 
 
Conclusion of Compounding: Visual Inspection: 
4.38 Pharmacists check completed CSPs on the IV workflow system software DoseEdge® or in person 
on paper logs. Items checked include: 
• Correct ingredients: medication, diluents, and fluids are used 
• Correct measured volumes are removed from vials and/or fluid bags 
• Correct measured volumes are injected into vials and/or fluid bags 
• Correct/required supplies were used (i.e., filter needle/filter straw, correct needle size, 
correct syringe size) 
• All required steps are completed including lot number/expiration date recording and all 
required pictures are taken  
4.39 Compounding Personnel visually checks final CSPs for inappropriate physical appearance 
including: 
• Particles  
• Foreign matter such as vial coring pieces 
• Discoloration 
• Cloudiness 
• Other defects  
• Ensure the container closure integrity: 
o  Is free of leaks, cracks and improper seals 
4.40 Pharmacist visually inspects the final CSP to ensure the label matches the medication order or 
prescription. Refer to Release Inspections and Testing policy for additional criteria.  
4.41 Pharmacist ensures correct Beyond Use Date (BUD) is located on the label of the final CSP. • BUD is determined by Category of CSP and facility conditions during compounding. Refer to 
Establishing Beyond-use Dates policy for additional criteria.  
4.42 Pharmacist initials completed CSP dose to indicate all checks have been completed 
• Initials are either digital and printed on the CSP label or hand written 
4.43 Any CSP found to have unacceptable quality; the CSP is not signed and immediately rejected.  
• The CSP is clearly denoted by the pharmacist as rejected 
• The CSP is removed immediately and segregated, then appropriately destroyed 
4.44 Move completed, verified, and checked CSPs to the proper storage location and storage 
conditions within the facility for future dispensation or dispense to the patient. 
 
Visual Inspection Upon Release of CSP: 
4.45 All CSPs that have been stored and not released on the day of compounding, are visually 
inspected before dispensing by a pharmacist. 
4.46 Visual inspection includes checking for: 
• Precipitation  
• Cloudiness 
• Leakage  
4.47 Any CSP found to have unacceptable quality; the CSP is not signed and immediately rejected.  
• The CSP is clearly denoted by the pharmacist as rejected 
• The CSP is removed immediately and segregated, then appropriately destroyed 
4.48 Any defects found upon visual inspection are investigated as they may indicate a failure in closure 
integrity, sterility and/or stability. 
• The investigation is documented per the processes defined in the QA/QC policy.  
 
5. Definitions 
5.1 Beyond-Use Date (BUD):  The date and time after which a CSP shall not be used, stored, or 
transported. The date is determined from the date and time the preparation is compounded. 
5.2 Critical Site: A location that includes and component or fluid pathway surfaces (e.g., vial septum, 
injection port, and beakers) or openings (e.g., opened ampules and needle hubs) that are 
exposed and at risk of direct contact whit air (e.g., ambient room or HEPA filter ed), moisture 
(e.g., oral and mucosal secretions), or touch contamination.  
5.3 Designated Person(s) (DP): One or more individuals assigned to be responsible and accountable 
for the performance and operation of the compounding facility and personnel in the preparation 
of CSPs. 
5.4 Direct Compounding Area (DCA):  A critical area within the ISO Class 5 PEC where critical sites 
are exposed to unidirectional HEPA-filtered air, also known as first air. 
5.5 EPA: Environmental Protection Agency 
5.6 First Air: The air exiting the HEPA filter in a unidirectional air stream 
5.7 Hazardous Drug (HD):  Any drug identified by at least one of the following six criteria: 
carcinogenicity, teratogenicity or developmental toxicity, reproductive toxicity in humans, orang 
toxicity at low dose in humans or animals, genotoxicity, or new drugs that mimic existing HDs in 
structure or toxicity.  
5.8 High-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration: Being, using, or containing a filter designed to 
remove 99.97% of airborne particles measuring 0.3 -micron or greater in diameter passing 
through it.  5.9 Line of Demarcation (LOD): A visible line on the floor that separates the clean and dirty side of 
the anteroom 
5.10 Low-lint: Material that exhibits few, if any, fibers or other contamination, visible without 
magnification, which is separate from, or easily removed from the material in a dry condition 
5.11 Pass-through: An enclosure with sealed doors on both sides that should be interlocked. The pass-
through is positioned between two spaces for the purpose of minimizing particulate transfer 
while moving materials from one space to another. 
5.12 Primary Engineering Control (PEC):  A device or zone that provides an ISO Class 5 air quality 
environment for sterile compounding.  
5.13 Restricted-access Barrier System (RABS):  An enclosure that provides HEPA -filtered ISO Class 5 
unidirectional air that allows for the ingress and/or egress of materials through defined openings 
that have been designed and validated to preclude the transfer of contamination, and that 
generally are not to be opened during operations. Examples of RABS include Compounding 
Aseptic Isolators (CAIs) and Compounding Aseptic Containment Isolators (CACIs). 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2024 
7.1. Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2022. 
7.2. Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
7.3. Reviewed and revised with formatting changes 11/2024. 
 
 