OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Out of Specification Events Impacting 
Sterile Facilities, Controls & Systems 
Policy Reference #: PH0545 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 5/9/2024 
Last Date Revised: 5/9/2024 
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the procedures for managing power and airflow systems disruptions 
creating out of specification conditions for sterile facilities, engineering controls, and 
environmental controls where Compounded Sterile Preparations (CSP) are prepared within 
FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
1.2. The ability to maintain a state of control within classified and controlled sterile compounding 
areas is essential to maintaining CSP sterility and stability.  Sterile facilities and systems are key 
factors in establishing and maintaining consistent airflo w, pressure differentials, and SEC and 
storage area conditions including:  
• Facilities: Compounding area design and construction; HEPA filter placement and function; 
HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning), exhaust, and supply fan systems 
• Engineering Controls: SEC and PEC placement and contribution to airflow 
• Environmental Controls : Pressure differential, temperature, and humidity monitoring 
systems 
1.3. Planned and unplanned maintenance, power surges/outages, system malfunction, and natural 
disasters impact the proper functioning the sterile facilities and systems and can have significant 
impact to the ability to maintain ISO Class 5 PEC function; requisi te pressure differentials 
between adjacent areas; requisite temperature and humidity of SEC and storage areas; and 
proper airflow and HEPA filter contribution to removing airborne contamination. 
1.4. This policy primarily addresses situations that create out of specification (OOS) conditions in 
classified sterile suites consisting of positive and/or negative pressure areas; however, sections 
addressing remedial actions for PEC OOS conditions are direct ly applicable to PECs located in 
SCAs and Allergy Extract Handling Areas (AEHAs).   
2. Policy  
2.1. Sterile compounding facilities, engineering controls (PECs and SECs), and environmental control 
systems are maintained in good working order and undergo appropriate and timely certifications, calibrations, and accuracy validations per regulations and manufacturer recommendations. Refer 
to Facilities and Engineering Controls policy. 
2.2. Required pressure differentials and air exchanges per hour within classified areas are maintained 
at the following levels: 
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS PER ISO CLASSIFIED AREA  
SEC type  ISO class  Pressure Differential  
(in “w.c.”)  
Air Changes Per 
Hour (ACPH)  
Temperature & 
Relative Humidity 
SCA  Unclassified  N/A  N/A  
< 20°C & 
o < 65% 
(Recommended for 
employee comfort) 
C-SCA  Unclassified  -0.01 to -0.03  ≥ 12  
Non-HD 
cleanroom suite  
Ante room: ISO 8  0.02  ≥ 20*  
Buffer room: ISO 7  0.02  ≥ 30*  
HD cleanroom 
suite  
Ante room: ISO 7  
Buffer room: ISO 7  
Ante to Buffer: 0.02  
HD Buffer: -0.01 to -0.03  ≥ 30  
*At least 15 ACPH must come from the room HVAC system; the remainder can come from PECs located in the room 
2.3. PECs that contribute to the required air exchanges and airflow within the respective SEC are left 
on and remain operational continuously.  
2.4.  Controlled storage area and device temperatures are maintained at the following levels: 
• Controlled Room Temperature: 15°C - 25°C  
• Refrigerated Temperature: 2°C - 8°C  
• Frozen Temperature: -25°C to -10°C  
2.5. Environmental control systems are monitored via continuous monitoring systems and trigger 
alarms and alerts to key personnel including the Designated Person(s) (DP) and on -duty IV 
Pharmacists when conditions deviate from required values. 
2.6. When power outages or system malfunctions impact PECs, SECs, drug storage locations, or the 
airflow systems (e.g., HVAC, exhaust and/or supply fans) supporting these controlled areas, 
immediate action is taken to protect the integrity of CSPs, components, and the state of control 
within the controlled compounding areas.  
2.7. Until normal operations can be restored and appropriate remediation occurs (as described in this 
policy), compounding areas and BUDs assigned to CSPs are subject to the following changes, at 
the discretion of the Designated Person(s) (DP):  
AREA(S) IMPACTED 
BY POWER &/OR 
SYSTEM DISRUPTION 
IMPACT TO STERILE SUITE 
CLASSIFICATION &  
BUDS UNTIL RESOLVED 
IMMEDIATE ACTIONS 
PEC(s) Only Sterile Suite: no change 
unless pressure 
differentials not 
maintained 
CSP BUDs: No change* 
HD BUDs: No change*  
• Immediately halt compounding in affected PEC* ➔ 
OK to compound in functioning PECs  
• Record time of OOS event 
• Confirm HD Buffer Room maintains negative 
pressure within expected range 
SEC(s) Only 
(ante & buffer 
rooms) 
Sterile Suite: Segregated 
Compounding Area (SCA) 
• Continue compounding CSPs; note change to 
Category 1 BUDs^ 
• Record time of OOS event, pressure differentials, 
temperature & humidity in all areas AREA(S) IMPACTED 
BY POWER &/OR 
SYSTEM DISRUPTION 
IMPACT TO STERILE SUITE 
CLASSIFICATION &  
BUDS UNTIL RESOLVED 
IMMEDIATE ACTIONS 
CSP BUDs^: < 12 hr room 
temp & < 24 hr 
refrigerated 
HD BUDs: N/A* 
• Halt compounding in HD buffer room* 
PECs & SECs  
(Full sterile suite) 
Sterile Suite: Unclassified area 
CSP BUDs*: < 4 hr room temp 
& < 4 hr refrigerated 
HD BUDs*: N/A* 
• Halt all compounding 
• Record time of OOS event, pressure differentials, 
temperature & humidity in all areas 
* If emergency compounding performed in nonfunctiong PECs, use Immediate Use Compounding BUD of ≤ 
4 hour BUD (compounding in a non-ISO Class 5 environment). 
^ If docking proprietary bag and vial systems for future activation, may continue to utilize BUD included in 
the manufacturer’s labeling, as long as activity occurs within functioning ISO 5 PEC.  
2.8. Before the resumption of normal compounding operations, the Designated Person(s) validates 
all impacted systems and equipment have been restored to normal function, appropriate 
remediation has occurred and validated, and a state of control has been restore d to the 
compounding environment.  
2.9. PECs and/or SECs may need to be recertified before use if the outage or systems disruption 
exceeds 24 hours. If normal operations are restored more quickly, recertification is at the 
discretion of the Designated Person(s). 
2.10. Out of specification events impacting facilities, engineering controls, environmental controls, or 
drug storage areas are investigated, and appropriate corrective actions are taken. These efforts 
can occur concurrently with the immediate remediation effort s required to restore the sterile 
suite to a state of control and normal function. Corrective action efficacy is validated, and all 
aspects of the investigation, corrective actions, and efficacy validation is documented and 
retained in a readily accessible format. 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1. Designated Person(s) (DP): 
• Oversee and coordinate personnel, supporting departments, vendors, and subject matter 
experts (if needed) to expeditiously and safely restore impacted systems and areas. 
• In partnership with Pharmacy Management, conduct an impact assessment to 
compounding operations and BUD assignments. 
• Determine, coordinate, & communicate situational assessment and alternative 
compounding arrangements to impacted personnel, prescribers, and patients (as needed) 
for extended OOS events. 
• After repairs, system restoration, and remediation efforts have occurred, confirm impacted 
areas (e.g., sterile suite) have been returned to a state of control and authorize resumption 
of normal compounding operations and BUD assignments.  
• Lead OOS event investigation and corrective plan design, implementation, and validation; 
review and complete documentation and retain in a readily retrievable format. 
• Provide status updates and postmortem analysis and report/presentation as needed. 
3.2. Compounding Personnel: • Immediately contact DP and/or Supervising Pharmacist when power and/or systems 
disruptions occur that impact the proper functioning of PECs, airflow within the sterile suite, 
pressure differentials, temperature, and/or humidity. 
• Rapidly implement immediate actions as described in this policy and as directed by the DP 
and/or Supervising Pharmacist in response to power or system disruptions impacting 
normal operations within the sterile compounding areas. 
• Support all efforts to minimize actions that could contribute to the decline in the state of 
control within the sterile suite, such as unnecessary entry/exit of the compounding areas 
during OOS events 
• Consult the DP and/or Supervising Pharmacist as needed. 
3.3. On-duty IV Pharmacist (or proxy for DP): 
• When the DP is not immediately available, assume all DP responsibilities in coordinating the 
initial response and efforts to restore normal compounding operations as quickly and safely 
as possible. 
• Ensure available compounding personnel understand the immediate impact to the 
compounding operation, ability to compound CSPs, BUDs (if appropriate), and role and 
responsibilities as the OOS event is addressed. 
• Ensure the Facilities Department, external vendor(s), or other critical systems contacts are 
notified immediately; continue communication and coordination with these entities until 
the technical and/or mechanical issues have been restored and power and/or systems are 
restored to normal function. 
• When power and/or systems are restored, ensure compounding staff understands the 
required remedial activities (e.g., cleaning, microbial sampling) that need to occur as 
described in this policy. 
• When a hand -off to the DP or alternative Supervising Pharmacist occurs, provide a full 
debrief of actions taken, individuals contacted, and events that have occur to restore normal 
operations and ensure continuity in patient care. 
4. Procedures 
Managing Power Outages or Disruptions  
4.1. PEC Only: When the power to a PEC is turned off or if a power surge or outage (e.g., cutover to 
generator power) disrupts power to a PEC while SEC systems remain functional:  
• Stop compounding activities immediately in the impacted PEC(s) and restore power to the 
PEC(s) as soon as possible. 
• Notify DP or Supervising Pharmacist. 
• Determine disposition of CSPs and components inside the PEC at the time of the power 
disruption (see table below). 
• Once the power is restored, allow the PEC to run for 30 minutes or for the timeframe stated 
by the manufacturer to restore the ISO Class 5 environment. 
• Fully clean and disinfect all interior surfaces of PEC with an appropriate cleaning agent after 
the designated run time (above) and prior to resuming compounding activities as described 
below.  OUTAGE 
TIMEFRAME 
CLEANING OF PEC 
INTERIOR 
{{30 MINUTES}} AFTER POWER 
RESTORED 
HANDLING OF 
COMPONENTS 
HANDLING OF AFFECTED 
CSPS 
< 1 hour Sporicidal disinfectant 
followed by sIPA; 
observe dwell times 
Date & store 
components per policy 
 
Single use 
components:  
< 12 Hour BUD 
 
Multi-dose 
components:  
< 28 Days BUD 
 
Accessed 
components:  
Discard (spiked 
bags or vials with 
attached tubing or 
transfer sets) 
Completed: remove from 
hood and label; BUD 
unaffected 
 
Partially compounded or “in-
process” CSPs: discard or 
complete compounding as 
an Immediate Use CSP (< 
4-hour BUD) 
 
Uncompounded batched 
CSPs (components): move 
to another PEC or sanitize 
and compound after power 
is restored to PEC and it is 
cleaned 
1 to 24 
hours Sporicidal disinfectant 
followed by sIPA; 
observe dwell times 
> 24 hours Triple clean followed by 
sIPA; observe dwell 
times 
• When an outage extends beyond 24 hours, consider recertifying the PEC(s). 
• Investigate the OOS power outage event, implement corrective actions, and verify the 
corrective actions have been effective. Document all aspects of the investigation, corrective 
action plan, and data collected to verify effectiveness. Retain documentation in a readily 
retrievable format and location. 
4.2. SEC and/or Airflow Systems (i.e., HVAC system, exhaust fans, and/or supply fans) Only: When 
the power to the SEC(s) and/or HVAC system is disrupted (impacting airflow and air exchanges, 
pressure differentials, and/or temperature and humidity) while essential equipment including 
PECs, powered by emergency power (e.g., “red outlet” devices), remain functional:  
• Note the time of the power and/or HVAC system outage, pressure differentials at all doors, 
and temperature and humidity readings in all rooms 
• Notify DP or Supervising Pharmacist 
• Restrict or halt movement into/out of sterile suite and minimize entry/exit between rooms 
in the sterile suite; post signage at sterile suite entry points  (e.g., ante room and pass -
through doors with access to non-classified areas) 
• Contact the Facilities Dept. or external systems vendors for initial assessment 
• The sterile suite is reclassified as a Segregated Compounding Area (SCA) with non-classified 
air upon prolonged loss of the required pressure differentials within the sterile suite and/or 
with the external non -classified areas. Consequently, compounding operations are 
impacted as follows until the issue is resolved and the sterile suite is returned to a state of 
control. 
o Nonhazardous CSP compounding: can continue per Category 1 CSP requirements and 
BUDs including max BUDs of < 12 hours stored at controlled room temp or < 24 hours 
stored at refrigerated or frozen temps 
o Hazardous CSP compounding : is halted immediately since air adjacent to and pulled 
directly into the externally vented PECs is considered non-classified air. 
• Determine disposition of HD CSPs and accessed components inside the PEC at the time of 
the power disruption: 
o Completed: remove from hood and label; BUD unaffected o Partially compounded or “in -process” CSPs: discard or complete compounding as an 
Immediate Use CSP (< 4-hour BUD) 
o Uncompounded batched CSPs (components): place components in a sanitized bin with 
the compounding paperwork; sanitize and compound after power is restored and sterile 
suite has been restored and components cleaned or move to an alternative 
compounding room/site to complete 
o Accessed Components: discard hanging bags or vials that are accessed with transfer 
or other tubing. 
• Continue to monitor the pressure differentials, temperature and humidity for each room if 
restoration is expected within 1 -2 hours from the loss of power and/or airflow and 
nonhazardous compounding continues during that timeframe. 
• If the power outage or airflow system downtime is expected to continue for >2 hours, 
relocate compounding operations during the outage if possible (after consultation with the 
DP and/or Supervising Pharmacist) 
• Once the sterile room systems have been returned to normal function and pressure 
differentials at all entry/exits have been restored, document the time systems are restored 
and the pressure differentials, temperature, and humidity in all areas of the steri le suite. 
Continue to document pressure differentials, temperature, and humidity until they have 
returned to required ranges. 
• Before returning to normal compounding operations, perform remedial cleaning and 
microbial air & surface sampling as shown in the table below. Remedial cleaning is 
performed by trained and fully garbed personnel. 
OUTAGE 
TIMEFRAME 
CLEANING OF SECS (AND PECS) 
AFTER POWER & HVAC SYSTEMS ARE FULLY RESTORED 
MICROBIAL AIR &/OR 
SURFACE SAMPLING 
< 1 hour  • If sterile suite access was restricted (e.g., no or 
minimal entry/exit) – remedial cleaning not 
necessary  
• If sterile suite access was NOT restricted: conduct 
daily cleaning of sterile suite with an EPA-
registered disinfectant cleaner (i.e. clean & 
disinfect surfaces and floors in SECs) 
Per DP 
1 hour ->  
24 hours 
• Conduct monthly cleaning of sterile suite with a 
sporicidal disinfectant (i.e. clean & disinfect all 
surfaces, floors, walls, & ceilings in SECs and 
PECs)* 
Surface sampling – all 
PEC & SECs per 
sampling map  
Air sampling – per DP 
> 24 hours • Triple clean sterile suite & PECs* Surface  sampling – 
all PEC & SECs per 
sampling map  
Air sampling – per DP 
*Refer to Cleaning & Disinfecting Sterile Compounding Areas policy for cleaning procedures and 
cleaning agent selection. 
• When an outage extends beyond 24 hours, consider recertifying the suite. 
• DP determines if normal BUDs can be resumed pending microbial air and surface sampling 
results. 
• Investigate the OOS power outage event, implement corrective actions, and verify the 
corrective actions have been effective. Document all aspects of the investigation, corrective 
action plan, and data collected to verify effectiveness. Retain documentation in a readily 
retrievable format and location. 4.3. Entire Sterile Suite (PECs, SECs, & airflow systems) : When power is disrupted to both the SEC 
and all PECs (e.g., total facility power outage or shutdown): 
• Note the time of the power outage 
• Halt compounding operations temporarily while the severity and potential duration of the 
situation is assessed; notify the DP and/or Supervising Pharmacist immediately.  
• If urgent compounding must occur, use Immediate Use Compounding BUDs of < 4 hours 
until the compounding suite (including hoods) have been cleaned and restored to normal 
operations.  
OUTAGE 
DURATION 
PROCEDURE 
Time of Event ->  
5 min 
• Halt compounding operations and note the time of the power outage  
• Contact DP and/or Supervising Pharmacist 
• Contact Facilities Dept or external systems vendors for initial assessment 
• Restrict or halt movement into/out of sterile suite and minimize entry/exit 
between rooms in the sterile suite; post signage at sterile suite entry points (e.g., 
ante room and pass-through doors with access to non-classified areas) 
• Determine disposition of CSPs and accessed components inside of hoods  
o Completed CSPs: remove from hood and label; BUD unaffected 
o Partially compounded individual CSPs: discard or complete compounding as 
an Immediate Use CSP (< 4-hour BUD) 
o Uncompounded batched CSPs (components) : place components in a sanitized 
bin with the compounding paperwork;  sanitize and compound after power is 
restored and sterile suite has been restored and components cleaned or move 
to an alternative compounding room/site to complete 
o Accessed components: Discard (e.g., spiked bags or vials with attached tubing 
or transfer sets) 
• Start assessment and prioritization of pending compounds in anticipation of an 
extended outage 
5 min ->  
15 min  
• Nonessential compounding staff exit sterile suite without doffing garb (doffing 
occurs outside of sterile suite) and take completed CSPs and compounding 
paperwork out of the compounding room 
• Complete paperwork and note time compounding was halted and CSP disposition 
on Compounding Record (CR); used downtime procedures for compounding 
documentation entered into computer-based systems (if appropriate) 
• In coordination with the DP or Supervising Pharmacist, essential compounding 
personal (i.e., lead IV RPH and/or technician) continue to wind down operations 
inside sterile suite 
• Follow up on status of repairs and outage 
15 min ->  
30 min 
• If outage is expected to extend beyond a reasonable timeframe, consider 
relocating highly temperature sensitive medications to alternative storage 
devices (refer to section 4.4) 
•  Essential personnel exit sterile suite without stopping to doff garb; remove any 
other paperwork, labels, or medication necessary for relocated compounding 
operations and/or alternative storage 
Ongoing until 
resolution 
• Reentry to the sterile suite is restricted to necessary activities (e.g., such as 
relocating equipment, supplies, components, or stored medications) and 
personnel (e.g., supervised repair personnel, essential compounding personnel)  
 
• Continue to monitor the pressure differentials, temperature and humidity for each room if 
restoration is expected within 1-2 hours from the loss of power and/or airflow. • If the power outage or airflow system downtime is expected to continue for >30 minutes, 
relocate compounding operations during the outage if possible (after consultation with the 
DP and/or Supervising Pharmacist)  
• Continue to monitor drug storage location temperatures and relocate stored components 
and CSPs when storage locations no longer maintain the required temperature; refer to 
section 4.4. 
• Once the sterile room systems have been returned to normal function and pressure 
differentials at all entry/exits have been restored, document the time systems are restored 
and the pressure differentials, temperature, and humidity in all areas of the sterile suite. 
• Before returning to normal compounding operations, perform remedial cleaning and 
microbial air & surface sampling as shown in the table below. Remedial cleaning is 
performed by trained and fully garbed personnel. 
OUTAGE 
TIMEFRAME 
CLEANING OF SECS (AND PECS) 
AFTER POWER & HVAC SYSTEMS ARE FULLY RESTORED 
MICROBIAL AIR &/OR 
SURFACE SAMPLING 
< 1 hour  • If sterile suite access was restricted (e.g., no or 
minimal entry/exit) – remedial cleaning is 
determined by DP 
• If sterile suite access was NOT restricted: 
conduct daily cleaning of sterile suite (i.e. clean 
& disinfect surfaces and floors in SECs) 
Per DP 
1 hour ->  
24 hours 
• Conduct monthly cleaning of sterile suite (i.e. 
clean & disinfect all surfaces, floors, walls, & 
ceilings in SECs and PECs)* 
Surface sampling – all 
PEC & SECs per 
sampling map  
Air sampling – per DP 
> 24 hours • Triple clean sterile suite & PECs* Surface  sampling – all 
PEC & SECs per 
sampling map  
Air sampling – per DP 
*Refer to Cleaning & Disinfecting Sterile Compounding Areas policy for cleaning procedures 
and cleaning agent selection. 
• When an outage extends beyond 24 hours, consider recertifying the suite. 
• DP determines if normal BUDs can be resumed pending microbial air and surface sampling 
results. 
• Investigate the OOS power outage event, implement corrective actions, and verify the 
corrective actions have been effective. Document all aspects of the investigation, corrective 
action plan, and data collected to verify effectiveness. Retain documentation  in a readily 
retrievable format and location. 
4.4. Drug Storage Device Power Outages & Temperature Excursions 
• Record the time of power outage 
• Record the temperature of each affected device when the outage occurred 
• Restrict or halt device access and post signage on the device(s) 
• Contact Facilities Dep artment or external device technicians immediately if the source of 
the outage or temperature excursion is unknown or if outage extends beyond 30 minutes. 
If source of excursion is known (e.g., refrigerator door left open too long while stocking), 
monitor device temperature f or 15 minutes and contact Facilities Department or external 
vendor if needed. • Continue to monitor device temperature and if/when device exceeds or is soon expected to 
exceed acceptable temperature deviation, relocate products to alternative storage 
locations meeting the required storage conditions. 
TYPE/PURPOSE OF DEVICE EXPECTED TEMP 
RANGE 
DRUG RELOCATION 
TRIGGER(S) 
CSP Controlled Room Temperature Drug Storage 
Area 20°C - 25°C + 5°C for no more 
than 30 minutes 
Investigation Drug Service (IDS) Controlled Room 
Temperature Drug Storage Area 20°C - 25°C + 5°C; move if trigger 
is reached 
CSP Storage Refrigerator 2°C - 8°C + 5°C for no more 
than 30 minutes 
Investigation Drug Service (IDS) Refrigerator 2°C - 8°C  + 5°C; move if trigger 
is reached 
CSP Storage Freezer -25°C to -10°C + 5°C for no more 
than 30 minutes 
IDS Freezer -25°C to -10°C  + 5°C; move if trigger 
is reached 
 
• If drug storage device (or area) excursions exceed these general guidelines, quarantine 
affected CSPs and components until the Designated Person(s) or Supervising Pharmacist can 
determine if the temperature excursion (e.g., both the maximum temp excursion 
documented and the duration of the OOS conditions) has de graded the quality of the 
individual items. 
 
Troubleshooting Power Outages or System Disruptions 
OOS EVENT IMPACTING 
STERILE COMPOUNDING 
AREA OR SYSTEM 
TROUBLE SHOOTING 
PEC loss of power • Check power switch & power source to ensure device is on and 
receiving power 
• Check if PEC is plugged into an emergency backup power source 
• Check to see if power generator test is occurring or other facility 
test or emergency operation that would temporarily disrupt power 
to the emergency backup power supply 
SEC loss of power • Check fuse with Facilities Department or fuse box (if smaller 
facility) 
• Check to see if power generator test is occurring or other facility 
test or emergency operation or procedure that would temporarily 
disrupt the main facility power supply 
• Contact power company 
HD PEC alarm • Confirm sash is at the appropriate height to ensure ISO Class 5 
airflow and environment inside PEC and ensure proper PEC 
function 
• Check PEC power switch & power source to ensure device is on and 
receiving power OOS EVENT IMPACTING 
STERILE COMPOUNDING 
AREA OR SYSTEM 
TROUBLE SHOOTING 
• Confirm externally ventilated exhaust fan(s) have power and are 
working normally 
• Contact certification vendor 
HD exhaust system 
alarm 
• Confirm HD PEC is operating properly and is not in an alarmed 
state 
• Confirm alarm system wiring and back up power source (if 
applicable) have not been dislodged and are connected and 
functioning properly 
• Confirm externally ventilated exhaust fan(s) have power and are 
working normally 
• Contact certification vendor 
Pressure differential 
alarm 
• If alarm has just gone off, allow ~ 1 minute with the door closed to 
determine if the pressure stabilizes and returns to normal range 
(doors open for an extended period of time will sound alarm) 
• Determine if door is shutting tightly (if not, pressure differential 
may be impacted) 
• Check to see if pressure gauge is powered 
• Check if pressure gauge requires replacement of internal board, 
other IT component, or battery back up 
• Confirm HVAC system is working properly and pressure readings in 
the rest of the sterile suite are within range  
• Check to make sure return vents (low to ground) are not blocked 
• Check to make sure return vent cover is free of dirt and fibers; 
consider removing outer grate to check cleanliness of internal 
register) 
Temperature or 
humidity alarm – 
rooms or areas 
• If alarm has just gone off, allow ~ 2-3 minutes with adjacent doors 
closed to determine if the temperature and/or humidity stabilizes 
and returns to normal range 
• Confirm HVAC system is working properly and pressure 
differentials, temperature, and humidity in the rest of the sterile 
suite are within range 
Temperature gauge – 
refrigerators & 
freezers 
• Check power switch & power source to ensure device is on and 
receiving power 
• Confirm monitoring device is positioned correctly and is 
functioning properly (e.g., wires and power and/or batteries are 
operational 
• If a continuous monitoring device is also installed in the 
refrigerator and/or freezer, determine if it is also in alarm (if alarm 
is from an autonomous gauge) 
• Confirm monitoring device is glycol-based (more accurate reading) 
and has been maintained per manufacturer’s specifications  
• If alarm has just gone off, allow ~ 2-3 minutes with the door closed 
to determine if the temperature stabilizes and returns to normal 
range (doors open for an extended period of time will sound alarm) OOS EVENT IMPACTING 
STERILE COMPOUNDING 
AREA OR SYSTEM 
TROUBLE SHOOTING 
• Determine if door is shutting tightly (if not, pressure differential 
may be impacted) 
4.5. Refer to the Quality Assurance and Quality Control policy  for procedures related to 
investigations and corrective action plans. 
5. Definitions 
5.1. Classified area: An area that maintains an air quality classification based on the ISO standards 
required in this chapter (see also the definition for ISO class).   
5.2. Cleanroom suite (aka sterile suite or IV room): A classified area that consists of both an anteroom 
and buffer room.  
5.3. Component: Any ingredient used in the compounding of a preparation, including any active 
ingredient, added substance, or conventionally manufactured product. Compounded sterile 
preparation (CSP): A preparation intended to be sterile that is created by combining, ad mixing, 
diluting, pooling, reconstituting, repackaging, or otherwise altering a drug product or bulk drug 
substance Related Policies, Documents, References 
5.4. Designated person(s): One or more individuals assigned to be responsible and accountable for 
the performance and operation of the facility and personnel as related to the preparation of CSPs 
5.5. ISO class: An air-quality classification from the International Organization for Standardization 
5.6. Negative-pressure room: A room that is maintained at lower pressure than the adjacent spaces, 
and therefore the net airflow is into the room 
5.7. One-step disinfectant cleaner: A product with an EPA-registered (or equivalent) claim that it can 
clean and disinfect a nonporous surface in the presence of light to moderate organic soiling 
without a separate cleaning step 
5.8. Oversight: The review, monitoring, and supervision of actions taken by personnel, bearing 
responsibility for those actions, and being available for consultation if and when needed even if 
not physically present 
5.9. Primary engineering control (PEC) : A device or zone that provides an ISO Class 5 air quality 
environment for sterile compounding. 
5.10. Positive-pressure room: A room that is maintained at higher pressure than the adjacent spaces, 
and therefore the net airflow is out of the room 
5.11. Secondary engineering control (SEC): The area where the PEC is placed (e.g., a cleanroom suite 
or an SCA). It incorporates specific design and operational parameters required to minimize the 
risk of contamination within the compounding area.  
5.12. Segregated compounding area (SCA): A designated space, area, or room that is not required to 
be classified and is defined with a visible perimeter. The SCA must contain a PEC and is suitable 
for preparation of Category 1 CSPs only 5.13. Sporicidal disinfectant: A chemical or physical agent that destroys bacterial and fungal spores 
when used in sufficient concentration for a specified contact time. It is expected to kill all 
vegetative microorganisms 
5.14. Unclassified space: A space not required to meet any air cleanliness classification based on the 
ISO 
6. References 
6.1. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 5/2025 
7.1. Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2023. 
7.2. Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
7.3. Revised 5/2024 (formatting changes only). 
 
 
 