 
 
 Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Administration and 
Personnel 
Title: Policy Management and Revision Policy Reference #: PH0600 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 08/02/2024 Last Date Reviewed: 08/07/2024 
Last Date Revised: 08/07/2024 
 
A. SCOPE – Applies to Pharmacy Department Policies within Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
 
B. DEFINITIONS:  
 
1. Policy Owner:  Responsible for managing the revision process through the final upload of revised policy 
2. Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies Policy and Procedure Committee (PPP Committee): group of pharmacy 
personnel who meet monthly to establish new or review policies and procedures 
3. Subject Matter Expert (SME): Reviews policy for potential revisions based on area of expertise 
4. Work Group:  Internal group of SMEs and stakeholders tasked with massive revisions to a set of policies 
5. Lead:  Internal leader responsible for signing off on revised policies; may be specific to regulatory 
6. Administrative Role:  Completes admin tasks including following up with reminders and preparing 
approvals 
7. SharePoint Administrative Role: Responsible for reporting and governance duties, including access 
 
C. SOP/PRACTICE GUIDELINES/PROCEDURES   
 
1. Pharmacy policies and SOPs will be assigned to Policy Owners by the Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies 
Policy and Procedure Committee. 
2. Thirty days prior to the next meeting, the PPP Committee Lead will email all members the previous 
meeting minutes as well as the next meeting’s agenda. 
3. Policy Owners will review their corresponding policy assignments, as needed, based on the policy 
assignments in the agenda. 
a. The Policy Owner will review the policy and decide if SME input is needed. 
i. If SME input is needed, the Policy Owner will send the policy to the appropriate SME. 
1. The SME will make any revisions or edits and return to the Policy Owner. 
2. The Policy Owner will prepare any further revisions and edits to be presented at 
the next PPP Committee meeting. 
ii. If SME input is not needed, the Policy Owner will make any revisions or edits as needed 
and present the policy at the next PPP Committee meeting. 
4. Once approved by the PPP Committee, the Administrative Assistant or Committee Lead will upload the 
revised policy to TeamLink and update the expiration date. 
 