 PH-10-01 
Page 1 of 8 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Investigational 
Drugs 
Title: Clinical Research Participation: 
Managing Investigational Drugs 
Policy Reference #: PH-10-01 
Supersedes #: PH-28-01C 
Date of Origination: 07/01/2002 Last Date Reviewed: 2/3/2025 
Last Date Revised: 02/03/2025 
 
 PURPOSE: 
To ensure that investigational drugs are handled in accordance with regulatory requirements and to 
protect human subjects in research studies involving investigational drugs.  
  
DEFINITIONS: 
Investigational drug:  a chemical or biological drug that is used in a clinical investigation.  An 
investigational drug can be: 
• A new chemical compound that has not been approved by the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) for use in humans and undergoing planned clinical investigation. 
  
• An FDA-approved drug that is being studied for an FDA-approved or unapproved use, dose, 
dosage form, administration schedule, or under an Investigational New Drug (IND) application, 
in a controlled, randomized, or blinded clinical trial. 
  
POLICY: 
A. All investigational drug studies conducted at Our Lady of the Lake must be reviewed thru the Office 
of Research, using the current feasibility matrix structure, before the study is considered.  The Office 
of Research is responsible for ensuring IRB review and approval for all investigational drug studies 
conducted at OLOL is obtained.  Investigational drug studies, involving FDA-approved medications 
must also be approved by the Hospital’s Pharmacy & Therapeutics Committee. 
  
B. Prior to conducting a clinical trial involving an investigational drug at Our Lady of the Lake, the 
primary investigator or his designee must supply a copy of the research protocol for review by the 
investigational drug pharmacist. 
  
C. The investigational drug pharmacist must meet with necessary study personnel to assess the 
investigational drug study requirements. 
  
D. The investigational drug pharmacist will develop an investigational drug study budget for the 
investigator to adequately plan for all necessary pharmacy costs.  Typical costs include, but are not 
limited to: 
  
   PH-10-01 
Page 2 of 8 
1. Start- up costs:  a one-time charge at study initiation.  This includes the cost of reviewing the 
protocol, setting up drug preparation/dispensing procedures, planning or initiation of meetings, 
staff training and in-services for pharmacists, and setting up framework for documentation. 
  
2. Randomization:  per subject charge for online or telephone randomization 
  
3. Preparation and dispensing: varies depending on the type of medication, the number of doses 
and duration of treatment 
  
4. Drug cost:  the cost of any FDA-approved drugs or supplies purchased by the pharmacy 
department for the study. 
  
5. Inventory and recordkeeping:  this includes quality assurance, monitor visits, study drug 
inventory receipt and storage, restocking and reordering as needed, storage of used products and 
maintaining inventory and dispensing logs. 
  
6. Study closure:  includes return or destruction of all remaining study materials, copies of records 
as needed, return of any special equipment which was provided, and record archival. 
  
E. The investigational drug pharmacist at Our Lady of the Lake Pharmacy Department is responsible 
for the study drug shipment receipt, storage, dispensing, maintaining inventory accountability and 
dispensing logs, and disposal of all investigational drugs used in research studies conducted at 
OLOL.  This responsibility may be delegated to a specific staff pharmacist provided he or she has 
undergone study specific training. 
  
F. The investigational drug pharmacist will maintain archived records of pharmacy procedures, 
correspondence, original drug dispensing/accountability records, and temperature monitoring logs 
for all closed research studies for the time required by governing regulatory bodies. Other regulatory 
materials, including the protocol and the investigators brochure, will be maintained in the Clinical 
Research Department. 
G. Consistent with FDA requirements, original investigational study logs will not be removed from the 
Pharmacy unless specifically authorized by the sponsor in cooperation with the Directors of 
Pharmacy and Clinical Research.  
  
PROCEDURES: 
  
 
A. Study Initiation: 
1. Once all approvals have been received to proceed with the conduct of the study, the principal 
investigator (PI) or Study Coordinator will meet with the investigational drug pharmacist to 
discuss study specific issues. 
2. The investigational drug pharmacist or the Study Coordinator will notify the sponsor that all drug 
shipments should be directed to Our Lady of the Lake Pharmacy. 
3. The investigational drug pharmacist will be responsible for maintaining a study specific 
comprehensive pharmacy binder that contains all documents and records relevant to each study 
including the study protocol and accurate accountability logs related to the investigational 
product receipt, storage, preparation, dispensing and disposition.   PH-10-01 
Page 3 of 8 
  
B. Receipt of investigational study drugs: 
1. Upon receipt of the investigational drug, the investigational drug pharmacist will inventory the 
shipment, ensuring that the information on the packing slips exactly matches with what has been 
sent to the site.   
2. The investigational drug pharmacist will maintain an accountability log documenting the receipt 
of all investigational study drugs. Logs will be unique to each study.  However, all logs will 
include the following: 
a. Name of the study drug, Protocol number and Principal investigator 
b. Date of receipt 
c. Quantity received 
d. Lot numbers 
e. Expiration dates 
f. Total investigational drug inventory on hand 
g. Balance of investigational inventory on hand 
h. Condition of product at the time of receipt 
i. Recorder’s initials 
  
3. Evidence of breakage, compromised storage, or product tampering will be reported to the 
supplier immediately. 
4. If the sponsor includes a form in the shipment to acknowledge receipt, the investigational drug 
pharmacist will obtain the necessary signatures and forward the form to the sponsor. 
5. The investigational drug pharmacist will keep a copy of the acknowledgement form, as well as 
all shipping receipts, for the regulatory binder.  
6. The investigational drug pharmacist will ensure that any supplies required for the blinding of the 
investigational drug are available. 
7. The investigational drug pharmacist will ensure that there are adequate supplies of the 
investigational drug on hand, along with any supplies needed for compounding/dispensing.  The 
investigational drug pharmacist will also make sure none of the investigational drug is past the 
expiration date.  The investigational drug pharmacist will contact the study monitor to obtain 
additional drugs/supplies.  
8. Immediately upon the receipt of shipment, data from electronic temperature logger will be 
downloaded whenever applicable.  In case of temperature excursion occurring during shipment, 
the study sponsor will be notified, and the study drug will be quarantined until further 
notification from the sponsor about usability of the product. 
  
   
C. Storage of the investigational drugs: 
1. All investigational drugs will be stored in a secure/ locked environment and kept separate from 
non-investigational drugs and supplies. 
2. Investigational drug will be clearly identified as to which study they are assigned. 
3. Access to investigational drug will be limited to only those personnel who require access for the 
proper conduct of the study.    PH-10-01 
Page 4 of 8 
4. Environmental controls (e.g. temperature regulation, protection from light) will be implemented 
and documented when applicable.  When dictated by study protocol, storage temperature will be 
documented in a temperature log specific to the investigational study drug. 
5. The following definitions will be applied for specific storage temperature unless specified 
otherwise by the study sponsor: 
Room Temperature:  20o to 25o Celsius 
Refrigeration:   2o to 8o Celsius 
Freezer:   – 15o to – 25o Celsius 
6. The storage temperature will be continuously monitored and a temperature log will be 
maintained daily recording the am and pm temperature. 
7. All Pharmacy procedures for handling controlled substances will be followed if the 
investigational drug is subject to these requirements, as specified in the investigator brochure, 
package insert, or protocol. 
8. If storage conditions have been compromised (e.g. temperature excursions from the allowable 
range), or if there is any suspicion that the study product has not been stored properly: 
a. The occurrence will be documented on the investigational drug study log and the drug will be 
quarantined. 
b. The pharmacist discovering the incident will contact the investigational drug pharmacist 
immediately.  The investigational drug pharmacist will follow-up with sponsor and study 
coordinator. 
c. The investigational drug pharmacist will arrange for replacement drug if deemed necessary 
by the principal investigator and/or study monitor. 
9 At the conclusion of the study, all unused investigational drugs will be returned either to the 
sponsor or destroyed on site according to the specific instructions provided by the sponsor and in 
accordance with applicable regulations. 
10. Investigational drugs will be stored in the same physical building / location where the research 
subjects will receive treatment.  However, if an investigational drug needs to be transported to 
another physical location for dispensation to a subject for outpatient research studies, the storage 
temperature requirements set forth by the sponsor will be followed during such transport. 
 
  
D. Prescribing Investigational Drugs: 
  
1. Investigational drug will only be prescribed by an authorized physician designated in the IRB 
submission as a principal or co-investigator or his designee. 
2. The principal investigator or study coordinator will notify the Pharmacy of the admission of a 
research subject – inpatient or outpatient.  
3. All written orders for investigational drugs will include the following: 
Date/time of order 
Protocol name (short title) and number 
Patient identifying information – full name and one other identifier (account number, date of 
birth)  PH-10-01 
Page 5 of 8 
Study participant identification number 
Randomization number if available 
Participant height and weight  
Study product prescribed (if study is blinded, the study product will be labeled accordingly) 
Dose and route of administration 
Quantity to be dispensed 
Prescriber name and signature 
 
4. For investigational drugs to be taken by the participant at home, additional information must 
include directions for use, quantity to dispense, and refills authorized. 
  
E. Dispensing investigational drugs: 
1. Investigational drugs will be dispensed in a manner consistent with existing pharmacy 
procedures. 
  
2. All pharmacists who will be involved in the order entry, preparation, and dispensing of 
investigational drugs will receive adequate training on each applicable active investigational study 
protocol. Pharmacy technicians will NOT be involved in mixing, preparation and dispensing 
of investigational drugs. 
  
3. An investigational drug will only be dispensed upon a pharmacist’s receipt of an order for the 
investigational drug by an authorized physician. 
  
4. All investigational drugs that are dispensed are recorded in the appropriate drug accountability log 
which must contain the following information: 
Date and time of dispensing 
Study participant’s initials and study identification number 
Drug dose and amount dispensed 
Units removed from the stock and their lot number 
Unique kit identifier if any 
Amount wasted if applicable 
Amount of study drug returned if applicable 
Dispensing pharmacist’s initials 
  
5. The study drug will be prepared and dispensed in accordance with the drug-specific research 
protocol and established pharmacy guidelines. 
6. The study drug prepared and dispensed by the pharmacy for use in a study must be labeled with 
the following information: 
  
Patient name and room number 
Protocol name 
Drug name or placebo 
Quantity dispensed 
Dose, administration route and frequency of administration 
Storage instructions 
Date of dispensing   PH-10-01 
Page 6 of 8 
Expiration date and time 
The statement “Caution: Limited by federal law to investigational use only.” 
  
7. Investigational drugs for inpatient and outpatient use will be dispensed by the investigational drug 
pharmacist or his/her designee to either the research nurse coordinator or his/her designee. 
  
8. When patients participating in research study in an outpatient setting are admitted to the hospital, 
pharmacy will maintain the custody of their research medications.  Each dose will then be 
dispensed from pharmacy to the nurse taking care of the patient.  Study drug will be returned to 
the patient at the time of discharge.  Pharmacy will maintain study drug accountability record 
during the patient’s hospital stay.  
  
9. If an investigational drug is dispensed but not administered (or not given to the patient to take at 
home), it must be returned to the Pharmacy.   
  
10. If the investigational drug will be dispensed from a location other than Our Lady of the Lake main 
pharmacy, the investigational drug pharmacist will work with staff in the alternate location to 
ensure drug accountability.  
  
11. Any discrepancies in the investigational drug dispensing / accountability logs will be investigated 
and circumstances documented for review by the Director of Pharmacy 
  
12. When a study subject completes the study (or withdraws prior to completion), their status will be 
documented in the dispensing log.  
  
  
F. Investigational drug administration:   
  
Once an investigational drug has been properly dispensed by the Pharmacy, any person otherwise 
authorized to administer medications at Our Lady of the Lake may do so, except that an RN may not 
delegate this to an LPN.   
  
G. Investigational Drug transport: 
  
Refer to Pharmacy SOP on IP transport for the procedure for transporting investigational drugs. 
   
H. Emergency Un-blinding: 
  
1. If the principal investigator (PI) determines that emergency un-blinding is medically necessary, 
the protocol guidelines for unblinding will be strictly followed.   
2. Randomization codes will be kept in a sealed envelope in an appropriately labeled binder kept in 
the Pharmacy.  PH-10-01 
Page 7 of 8 
  
I. Study Closure: 
1. The PI or study coordinator shall notify the investigational drug pharmacist of planned study 
closure and scheduled closeout visits.  
2. Prior to the close-out visit, the investigational drug pharmacist will ensure that all documentation 
regarding receipt, storage, dispensing, and return of investigational drugs is complete, accurate, 
and ready for review.  
3. At the time of the close-out visit, the investigational drug pharmacist will make investigational 
drug inventory and accompanying documentation available to the study monitor.   
4. Unused study medication and subject returns will be shipped back to the sponsor at the 
conclusion of the study at the sponsor or researcher’s expense, unless arrangements have been 
made for local disposal. The sponsor should provide a courier account number for the shipment 
to be charged to them. 
5. If the sponsor allows on-site study drug disposal, normal Pharmacy routines must be followed, 
consistent with OSHA and biohazard materials requirements.  The investigational drug 
pharmacist will provide the sponsor with written documentation of study drug destruction.  
6. Copies of drug accountability documentation (master IP accountability and subject dispensing 
logs, shipment receipts etc.) will be made available for the sponsor and/or PI’s regulatory files at 
closeout upon request. 
  
EXCEPTIONS: 
None 
  
  
  
  
  
  
REFERENCE: 
FDA:  Guidance for Industry:  E6 Good Clinical Practice: Consolidated Guidance 
FDA Information Sheet:  Use of Investigational Products When Subjects Enter a Second Institution 
National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research (NIDCR) Tool Summary Sheet:  study product 
guidelines and considerations; www.nidcr.nih.gov/NR/rdonlyres/.../StudyProductGuidelines.doc.  May 
2011.  Accessed February 15, 2012. 
MM 04.01.01 EP1.  The hospital has a written policy that identifies the specific types of medication orders 
that it deems acceptable for use.  The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 06.01.05 EP1.  The hospital has a written process addressing the use of investigational medications 
that includes review, approval, supervision, and monitoring.  The Joint Commission  Medication 
Management Standards  PH-10-01 
Page 8 of 8 
MM 06.01.05 EP2.  The hospital’s written process for the use of investigational medications specifies 
that the pharmacy controls the storage, dispensing, labeling, and distribution of investigational 
medications.  The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 05.01.11 EP4.  The hospital implements its processes for the use of investigational medications.  
The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
 
 
 