 PH-11-08 
Page 1 of 6 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Formulary and 
Medication 
Procurement 
Title: Formulary Management Policy Reference #: PH-11-08 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 05/02/2012 Last Date Reviewed: 06/22/24 
Last Date Revised: 10/25/19 
 
PURPOSE:   
To define the process for managing the Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) and the Baton Rouge Market 
Pharmacy Formularies.  
DEFINITIONS:  
Pharmacy & Therapeutics (P&T) Committee :  a committee of physicians, pharmacists, and other 
healthcare professionals responsible for evaluating, appraising, and selecting from among the numerous 
available drug entities and products those that are considered clinically necessary for use. The committee 
is also responsible for ensuring the safe and effective use of medications. The Committee uses the best 
available information in making decisions and adopts best practice guidelines from evidence -based 
literature and research experience with new medications. 
 
Formulary:  a continually updated list of medications and related information representing the clinical 
judgment of physicians, pharmacists, and other experts in the diagnosis and treatment of disease and 
promotion of health available for use throughout the hospitals and clinics. 
 
Non-formulary medications: any medication, brand name, or dosage form that is not on the formulary.  Non -
formulary medications are not stocked in the pharmacy but will be obtained and dispensed with appropriate 
approval. 
 
Authorized prescribers: an attending physician, fellow, resident, or intern . Nurse practitioners and physician 
assistants may prescribe formulary medications based on their scope of practice in accordance with Louisiana 
law, Medical/Dental Staff Bylaws and Rules and Regulations, and based on their individual collaborative 
practice agreement that each clinician has with their supervising physician. 
 
Automatic therapeutic substitution : Authorized interchange of therapeutic alternates in accordance with 
previously established and approved written guidelines or protocols within the formulary system. 
 
Therapeutic equivalents:  two or more drugs which differ in composition or in their basic chemical entity 
but are considered by the P&T Committee to have the same safety and efficacy. 
 
Subcommittees of the P&T Committee: 
Children’s Hospital P&T Committee 
Formulary and Informatics Committee 
Antibiotic Stewardship Committee  PH-11-08 
Page 2 of 6 
Opioid Stewardship Committee 
System Oncology Committee  
Medication Use Committee 
Formulary Evaluation Teams 
• Cardiovascular Team 
• ICU/Anesthesiology Team 
• Neurosciences Team 
• Oncology Team 
• Rheumatology 
 
POLICY: 
I. Our Lady of the Lake and OLOL owned entities f ormularies are a list of accepted medications 
and dosage forms available for use throughout the hospital s and clinics.  The formulary system 
ensures that the most safe, efficacious, and cost-effective medications are readily available.   
 
II. Attending-level members of the medical staff, the P&T Committee Chair and the Director of 
Pharmacy, Pharmacist in Charge, or his/her designee may submit a request for a medication or 
dosage form to be added to or deleted from the formulary.   
 
III. Upon receipt of a request to change the formulary, a message will be sent from the Chair of the 
P&T Committee (or his/her designee) to the requestor acknowledging that the request has been 
received and will be discussed at an upcoming meeting.  A formulary monograph will be prepared 
within 60 days of receiving the request. 
 
IV. Medications are added to the Formulary if one of the following conditions applies: 
a. The new drug has greater safety and efficacy with equal cost, 
b. The new drug has equal safety and efficacy with lower cost, 
c. The new drug is believed to be safer or more effective at a higher cost and the incremental 
increase in safety and/or efficacy outweighs the increased cost 
d. The new drug is the only therapy currently available for management of a particular disease 
state or patient population and is safe and effective 
 
V. The requestor will be notified electronically regarding the decision of the Committee. 
 
VI. Pursuant to a Formulary decision, medications are categorized as one of the following: 
a. Formulary 
b. Formulary, not stocked: not stocked; but can be made available upon request 
c. Formulary, restricted : restrictions may be imposed on all uses, or selected indications, 
patient populations, patient status (e.g. outpatient), diagnoses or laboratory criteria, or 
ordering physician specialty 
i. Formulary, restricted to service - approval required : prescribing is restricted to 
approval by selected services 
ii. Formulary, restricted to service - formal consultation required : prescribing is 
restricted pursuant to a formal documented consultation  PH-11-08 
Page 3 of 6 
d. Non-formulary: not stocked, but can be made available on a case -by-case basis with 
appropriate approval. 
e. Non-formulary, not available: not stocked, not available 
 
VII. The primary means of disseminating information from the Committee is via the OLOL P&T 
Committee Newsletter.  This monthly Newsletter is sent electronically and posted on the Drug 
Information Resource Center website ( www.formweb.com/ololrmc) under P&T Committee 
Updates 
 
PROCEDURES: 
VIII. Accessing the OLOL and OLOL owned entities Formularies 
a. The Formulary is accessible through the OLOL Drug Information Resource Center at 
www.formweb.com/ololrmc.  The Formulary is updated at least monthly. 
 
IX. Handling requests to modify the Formulary  
a. Upon receipt of a completed Formulary addition/deletion request form, a formal drug 
monograph will be prepared by a clinical pharmacist within 60 days of receipt of the 
request.  Clinical pharmacists will conduct literature searches and review information 
provided by the manufacturer to prepare the drug monograph.  Formulary monographs will 
be prepared to address the following: 
i. FDA-approved indications 
ii. Unlabeled indications 
iii. Pharmacology 
iv. Pharmacokinetics 
v. Selected clinical trials 
vi. Adverse reactions 
vii. Drug-drug and drug-food interactions 
viii. Contraindications 
ix. Warnings and precautions 
x. Pregnancy and lactation 
xi. Abuse potential 
xii. Potential for medication errors 
xiii. Dosage and administration 
xiv. Nursing implications 
xv. Dosage forms available 
xvi. Cost comparison/reimbursement 
xvii. Guidelines for use 
xviii. Methods to monitor patient response (when applicable) 
xix. Safe medication practices 
xx. Formulary recommendations 
 
b. Monographs will be reviewed by at least one member of a Formulary Evaluation Team and 
the P&T Chair prior to formal presentation to the P&T Committee.  The physician 
formulary evaluation team member is responsible for obtaining the approval from his/her 
respective service line prior to formal presentation of the monograph to the P&T 
Committee.  PH-11-08 
Page 4 of 6 
   PH-11-08 
Page 5 of 6 
 
X. Handling requests for Non-Formulary medications 
a. Physicians must complete the Non -Formulary Request Form to obtain a non -formulary 
medication.  Clinical pharmacists will review requests upon receipt.  (Entities without a 
clinical pharmacist on staff – all non-formulary requests will be reviewed by the Pharmacist 
in Charge or his/her designee).  To facilitate the review process, physicians shall provide 
clinical justification for the use of the non -formulary medication.  Possible clinical 
justifications include: 
i. Newly marketed medication that has not been requested for formulary addition 
ii. Patient has documented adverse reaction to the formulary medication (prescriber to 
specify medications and reaction) 
iii. Documented therapeutic failure with formulary agents (prescriber to specify 
medications used) 
iv. Patient stabilized on a specific medication prior to admission and clinical 
consequences if not continued. 
b. Requests for non -formulary drugs will be handled per the Non -formulary Drug Request 
policy. (PH-11-09) 
 
XI. Handling requests for Formulary -Restricted medications being used outside of their P&T -
approved restrictions 
a. Physicians must complete the Non -Formulary Request Form. Requests will be handled 
following the process for request of Non-Formulary medications. 
 
XII. Handling requests for medications with a Non-formulary, Not available status 
a. Physicians must complete the Non -Formulary Request Form.  Requests will be handled 
following the process for request of Non -Formulary medications.  However, The P&T 
Committee Chair or a member of the Medical Staff Office must approve procurement and 
dispensation of the requested medication. 
 
XIII. Handling Automatic Therapeutic substitution 
a. The P&T Committee has authorized the Department of Pharmacy to automatically 
substitute certain prescribed non -formulary medications with therapeutically equivalent 
formulary medications.  If a prescriber specifically requires the non-formulary medication 
be dispensed, he/she must complete a Non-Formulary Request Form.  The aforementioned 
process for handling requests for Non-Formulary medications will be followed.  
 
XIV. Handling Drug Shortages 
a. Medication shortages are monitored by administrative and clinical staff of the Department 
of Pharmacy.  Contingency plans, product allocation steps and other procedures are 
coordinated with physicians, pharmacy, and nursing leadership including the P&T 
Committee and members. 
 
Resultant plans for formulary changes and substitutions occurring as a result of drug shortages will be 
found on the Drug Information Resource Center website ( www.formweb.com/ololrmc) and will be 
communicated via email. 
   PH-11-08 
Page 6 of 6 
 
REFERENCES 
MM 02.01.01 EP1. Members of the medical staff, licensed independent practitioners, pharmacists, and 
staff involved in ordering, dispensing, administering, and/or monitoring the effects of medications develop 
written criteria for determining which medications are available for dispensing or administering to 
patients. The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 02.01.01 EP2 . The hospital develops an approves criteria for selecting medications, which, at a 
minimum, include the following:  Indications for use, Effectiveness, Drug Interactions, Potential for errors 
and abuse, Adverse drug events, Sentinel event advisories, Other Risks, and Costs. The Joint Commission 
Medication Management Standards 
MM 02.01.01 EP3. Before using a medication new to the hospital, the hospital determines a method to 
monitor the response to the patient. The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 02.01.01 EP4. The hospital maintains a formulary, including medication strength and dosage . The 
Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 02.01.01 EP5. The hospital makes its formulary readily available to those involved in medication 
management. The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 02.01.01 EP12. The hospital develops and approves written medication substitution protocols to be 
used in the event of a medication shortage or outage.  The Joint Commission  Medication Management 
Standards 
 
 
 