   
 
 PH-11-09 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: 
Formulary & 
Medication 
Procurement 
Title: Non-Formulary Drug Requests Policy Reference #: PH-11-09 
Supersedes #: PH-08-16-O 
Date of Origination: 05/01/2011 Last Date Reviewed: 05/07/2024 
Last Date Revised: 01/10/2022 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define the process for reviewing non-formulary drug requests 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
• Non-formulary drug: a medication that has not been approved for use by the Pharmacy & 
Therapeutics (P&T) Committee.   
 
• Automatic Therapeutic Interchange: the process of converting one drug to another drug of 
equivalent safety and efficacy.  A clearly defined list of eligible drugs is maintained by the 
pharmacy and all interchanges are approved by the hospital’s P&T Committee. 
 
POLICY: 
A. The non-formulary order template (request forms may be used for non-acute areas) must be 
utilized when requesting a non-formulary medication. 
B. All fields in the non-formulary order template or order form must be completed prior to 
dispensing a non-formulary medication. 
C. Non-formulary requests are evaluated for the following: 
a. Clinical appropriateness 
b. Reasoning for inferiority of formulary agents (if formulary alternatives exist) 
c. Appropriate site of care 
i. Some non-formulary medications are more appropriate for administration in the 
outpatient setting based on: 
1. Slow onset of action (days to weeks) 
2. Evidence of safe administration in the outpatient setting 
3. Lower costs associated with outpatient vs. inpatient administration  
a. Reimbursement of third-party companies may be taken into 
consideration of approval for use.  
d. Allergies and potential for adverse effects 
e. Appropriate dose, route, and frequency of administration 
i. Patients must be reviewed for appropriate dosing based on renal/hepatic function 
f. Therapeutic duplication 
g. Potential drug-drug and drug-disease interactions 
h. Contraindications and potential for toxicity 
i. Cost effectiveness 
j. Ability to procure the drug 
Formatted: Line spacing:  Multiple 1.08 li   
 
 PH-11-09 
Page 2 of 3 
D. Non-formulary drugs are not standard inventory stock.  Therefore, drugs approved for use must 
be procured from an outside facility. 
a. If the expected delay in procurement is > 4 hours, the ordering provider must be 
contacted and made aware. 
 
PROCEDURE  
INPATIENT PHARMACY: 
 
A. When a pharmacist receives an order for a non-formulary medication or when a provider 
declines an Automatic Therapeutic Interchange: 
a. The pharmacist receiving the medication order will open a “Non-Formulary Review” 
type intervention and attach it to the order in question. In the documentation field of the 
intervention, the pharmacist shall complete the Non-Formulary Review Worksheet.  
b. Once the Non-Formulary Review Worksheet is completed in its entirety, the pharmacist 
receiving the order will contact the clinical pharmacist on-call to review the request. 
i. If there is clear reasoning for use of the non-formulary agent, the clinical 
pharmacist will contact the order-entry pharmacist to communicate approval.  The 
Buyer will ensure the non-formulary medication is procured. The PIC will choose 
the correct drug product and verify the non-formulary order.  The clinical 
pharmacist on-call will update the prescriber with the estimated date and time that 
the non-formulary medication will be available.  
ii. If there is no clear evidence that the drug requested is more appropriate than 
current formulary agents or the information provided is insufficient to evaluate 
the request, the clinical pharmacist will contact the physician for further 
discussion. 
c. If the physician declines a formulary alternative, the clinical pharmacist must contact the 
Clinical Pharmacy Manager for review and discussion with the physician.  The Clinical 
Pharmacy Manager will continue the discussion and involve appropriate personnel 
including the Director of Pharmacy and a physician representative of Medical Staff 
Office if necessary.  
 
NON-ACUTE AREAS 
Nonformulary order forms may be completed by the physician and sent to the pharmacy director or 
designee for further review.  All aforementioned criteria must be reviewed for therapy appropriateness 
to also include a financial analysis of the product requested.  This review may take up to 72 hours or 
more; the physician will be notified of approval.  Pending appointment for the patient to receive therapy 
may be scheduled based on procurement.   
 
REFERENCES: 
MM 02.01.01 EP7.  The hospital has a process to select, approve, and procure medications that are not on 
its formulary.  The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 02.01.01 EP8.  The hospital implements the process to select, approve, and procure medications 
that are not on its formulary.  The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
 
 
    
 
 PH-11-09 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 