 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Residency Manual Section: Pharmacy 
Residency 
Title: Resident Leave of Absence Policy Reference #: PH-22-10 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 05/02/2012 Last Date Reviewed: 01/06/2025 
Last Date Revised: 11/09/2021  
 
PURPOSE: 
This policy summarizes the process by which vacation, sick, maternity/paternity, and other leaves of 
absence that may be granted to residents in Our Lady of the Lake sponsored pharmacy residency program.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Paid Time Off (PTO):  a paid benefit that may be used for a variety of personal reasons, both scheduled 
and unscheduled (vacation, personal appointments, illness or other emergency time off.) 
 
Prolonged absence:  an absence lasting 3 or more consecutive days. 
 
Frequent absences:  2 or more unscheduled absences per quarter. 
 
Pharmacy Resident (“resident”):  a pharmacist in a post-graduate education training program. 
 
Preceptor: an expert pharmacist who gives practical experience and training to a pharmacy resident.  He or 
she is also responsible for directing, supervising, and evaluating the resident.  
 
Residency Program Director:  the pharmacist responsible for the direction, conduct, and oversight of the 
residency program. 
 
Residency Coordinator: the pharmacist responsible for aiding the residency program director throughout 
the residency year. 
 
POLICY: 
A. Professional Leave:  Attendance at required educational conferences are considered professional 
absences and do not affect PTO.  Residents who wish to spend additional time away after the 
conference has ended or prior to the conference beginning must follow procedures for vacation 
leave and utilize PTO. 
 
B. Vacation Leave:  pharmacy residents will accrue 5.077 hours of PTO per 2 week payroll period.  
Vacation requests must be made in advance in writing to the Residency Program Director and 
preceptor of the rotation in which the vacation leave will take place.  Request must then be 
approved by both the Residency Program Director and preceptor of record in advance with 
consideration of rotation obligations, pharmacy practice experience obligations and other resident 
responsibilities.  Vacation requests affecting pharmacy practice experience must be made in 
writing no later than 2 weeks before the start of the schedule.  Also see OLOL policy on Paid 
Time Off (HR-B-3-006). The resident must also notify the scheduler of the approved days off so 
that the schedule may reflect the true pharmacist attendance for the day.  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
 
C. Sick Leave:  The resident must notify the preceptor of record, Residency Program Director and/or 
supervisor in charge at least 2 hours before start of shift unless physically unable to provide 
notification.  It is the responsibility of the resident to coordinate and make up any missed work 
associated with the preceptor of record for that rotation.  Illnesses exceeding 24 consecutive work 
hours (e.g. 3 days) will follow OLOL’s Leave of Absence policy (HR-3-001).  Such absences will 
require a physician’s authorization to return to work, and clearance to return to work from 
Employee Health.  The resident is also responsible for meeting with the Residency Program 
Director to discuss the impact of the absence on the resident’s educational experience and 
residency requirements. 
 
D. Maternity/Paternity Leave:  Resident must use all available PTO.  The residency program may 
grant unpaid leave as appropriate and in accordance with applicable law.  
a. Should an existing resident (PGY-1) match for the PGY-2 program at OLOL, the program 
may grant up to twelve weeks of extended leave under the family medical leave act. In 
these cases, the program will put forth all efforts in the event where an extension of the 
residency year is necessary.  
 
E. Personal Leave of Absence:  Additional leave without pay may be granted, subject to Residency 
Program Director approval and any legal requirements, for illness extending beyond available 
PTO, or family/personal emergencies that exceed available PTO. Any additional required time off 
may result in extending the program or the removal of one elective learning experience.  The 
program may also be extended for performance-related issues, not to exceed 30 days beyond the 
intended completion date of the residency*.  Requests for program extensions are reviewed on a 
case-by-case basis.  The process for requesting an extension is as follows: 
 
a. The resident must meet with the Residency Program Director to develop a plan to assure 
that requirements for the residency program are successfully met.  This plan must be 
approved by the Residency Advisory Committee. 
b. Residents may be granted an extension for a time period not to exceed 30 days. 
c. If the program is extended, the resident will still participate in the Pharmacy Practice 
Experience and other assignments just as any other resident at the time. 
 
*It is important to note that while efforts will be made to work with the individual resident to 
resolve issues in completing the program in a timely manner, there is potential that the request will 
not be able to be granted dependent on the regulations of the organization.  The Family Medical 
Leave Act or Disability will be administered in accordance with organizational policy in cases 
where these acts would apply. 
 
F. Prolonged or Frequent Unexcused Absences:   If a resident accrues 2 or more unexcused absences 
per quarter, he or she must meet with the Residency Program Director to discuss potential impact 
on educational objectives.  The individual rotation preceptors will track attendance and notify both 
the Residency Program Director and the resident. The resident is then responsible for setting up 
the meeting with the Residency Program Director. 