 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Pharmacy Residency 
Title: Resident Due Process 
Policy 
Reference #: PH-22-09 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 05/02/2012 Review Date: 02/03/2025 
Revision Date: 1/27/2020 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to establish a systematic approach to deal with remediation or 
disciplinary action of a pharmacy practice resident. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Residents are expected to adhere to the clinical and professional standards set forth by Our Lady 
of the Lake Regional Medical Center, as well as the requirements of ASHP.  The following 
process shall occur regarding the possible remediation or disciplinary action of a resident: 
 
II. A resident may be dismissed or other adverse action may be taken for cause, including but not 
limited to: 
A. Unsatisfactory clinical performance (failure to promote patient safety, failure to abide by 
specific rotation expectations, etc.) 
B. Failure to comply with the policies, rules and regulations of OLOLRMC and other training 
facilities. 
C. Violation of federal and/or state laws, regulations, or ordinances 
D. Any unethical behavior 
E. Insubordination 
F. Conduct that is detrimental to patient care 
G. Unprofessional conduct 
H. Falsification of any information on the application 
 
III. The following are grounds for immediate dismissal: 
A. Failure to obtain pharmacy licensure in the predetermined time period 
B. Failure to achieve departmental competency in the predetermined time period 
C. Failure to submit proof of PGY-1 completion (for PGY-2 programs) or evidence of ASHP 
sanctioned PGY-1 exemption within 30 days of starting the program 
D. Any breach of the residency contract  
IV. Disciplinary action related to a resident’s ability to meet the goals and objectives of the residency  
program will be addressed in the following manner: 
 
A. Structured feedback: All residents will be provided routine feedback that is consistent with 
the educational program. Feedback techniques include verbal feedback and written 
evaluations (via PharmAcademic).  
a. There must be at least two instances of written feedback in Pharmacademic either 
via summative evaluations of a specific rotation or via a snapshot evaluation as 
determined by the preceptor 
b. After two documented instances of deficiency, a letter of deficiency (or formal 
action plan) will be developed.  
c. If the deficiency or offense is deemed severe, a letter of deficiency (or formal 
action plan) may begin before a second documentation of the offense occurs 
 
B. Letter of Deficiency: When the Residency Advisory Committee deems that routine structured 
feedback is not resulting in necessary improvement, the Committee may elect to issue a Letter 
of Deficiency and develop an action plan. This action is considered formal probation.  The 
Letter of Deficiency will clearly state the identified deficiency, a plan of correction that 
includes success criteria, and time period in which to do so. Letters of Deficiency must be co-
signed by the resident and the Residency Program Director.  This action step does not trigger 
a report to any outside agencies. If the resident satisfactorily resolves the deficiency(ies) noted 
in the Letter of Deficiency and continues to perform acceptably thereafter, the period of 
unacceptable academic performance does not affect the resident’s intended career 
development or jeopardize the resident’s ability to graduate from the program.  
 
C. Failure to alleviate the deficiency: If the Residency Advisory Committee determines that the 
resident has failed to satisfactorily alleviate the deficiency(ies) outlined in the letter, the 
Committee may elect to take further action, which may include one or more of the following 
steps: 
 
1. Require repeat of rotation which may require extension of agreement or removal of one 
elective experience. 
2. Dismissal 
 
D. Dismissal from the Program: Residents dismissed from the residency program due to 
unsatisfactory performance are ineligible for re-consideration for readmission to the residency 
program and are ineligible for rehire at Our Lady of the Lake and its affiliates. 
 
E. Request for review: At any point, a resident may request a review of the decision made by 
the Residency Advisory Committee by filing a grievance per the Pharmacy Resident 
Grievance policy (PH-22-01).  
 
V. In all cases of disciplinary action resulting in written counseling or greater, the department’s Human 
Resources Business Partner will be consulted for objective input and guidance on the most 
appropriate disciplinary action to take in accordance with the OLOL Policy on Team Member 
Counseling and Progressive Discipline (OrgOps/HR/P/002) 