OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Pharmacy Residency 
Title: Preceptor Development Policy 
Policy 
Reference #: PH-22-12 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/14/18 Review Date: 4/7/2025 
Revision Date: 5/7/2021 
 
PURPOSE: 
Resident preceptors must meet a set of requirements to be designated as such. This policy 
outlines the requirements. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Pharmacy Resident (“resident”):  a pharmacist in a post-graduate education training program. 
 
Preceptor: an expert pharmacist who gives practical experience and training to a pharmacy 
resident.  He or she is also responsible for directing, supervising, and evaluating the resident.  
 
Residency Program Director:  the pharmacist responsible for the direction, conduct, and 
oversight of the residency program. 
 
Residency Coordinator: the pharmacist responsible for aiding the residency program director 
throughout the residency year.  
 
POLICY: 
I. PGY-1 Preceptors: Preceptors must be licensed pharmacists who have completed an 
ASHP-accredited residency followed by a minimum of one year of pharmacy practice 
experience. Alternatively, licensed pharmacists who have not completed an ASHP-
accredited residency may be preceptors but must demonstrate mastery of the 
knowledge, skills, attitudes, and abilities expected of one who has completed a PGY1 
residency and have a minimum of three years of pharmacy practice experience. All 
preceptors must have at least 6-months of experience at Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center. 
II. PGY-2 Critical Care Preceptors: Preceptors must be licensed pharmacists who have 
completed an ASHP-accredited PGY-2 residency followed by a minimum of one year 
or pharmacy practice experience. Alternatively, licensed pharmacists who have not 
completed an ASHP-accredited PGY2 residency, must have three or more years of 
practice in the advanced area. 
III. Preceptors must have training and experience in the area of pharmacy practice for 
which they serve as preceptors, must maintain continuity-of-practice in that area, and 
must be practicing in that area at the time residents are being trained. 
IV. Preceptors must have recognition in the area of pharmacy practice for which they 
serve as preceptors including at least one of the following: A. BPS Certification 
B. Fellow at a state or national level organization 
C. Multidisciplinary certification 
i. Validated certification that results from an exam and requires 
reaccreditation on a defined basis by the organization providing 
certification (i.e. not a one time certificate) 
ii. Pharmacy related certification recognized by Council on Credentialing in 
Pharmacy 
1. Other examples include: Certified Professional in Patient Safety 
(CPPS), Certified Diabetes Educator (CDE) 
iii. Exceptions to the list that do not meet criteria are ACLS, BLS, and PALS 
D. Advanced degree beyond entry level pharmacy degree related to learning 
experience precepted (e.g. MBA, MHA) 
E. Formal recognition by peers as a model practitioner 
1. Pharmacist of the year-recognized at state, city or institutional 
level where only one individual is recognized 
2. Patient care, quality, or teaching excellence-recognition at 
organization level (not internal to pharmacy department only) for 
an initiative that resulted in positive outcomes for all patients that 
either was operational, clinical, or educational in nature. 
F. Credentialing and privileging granted by the organization/practice/health system 
with ongoing process of evaluation and/or peer review. 
G. Subject matter expertise as demonstrated by ten or more years of practice 
experience in the area of practice in which they precept 
V. Preceptors must have an established active practice in the area for which they serve as 
preceptor as demonstrated by one of the following: 
A. Contribution to the development of clinical or operational policies/guidelines or 
protocols in the practice site 
B. Contribution to the creation/implementation of a new clinical service or service 
improvement initiative at the practice site 
C. Active participation on a multi-disciplinary or pharmacy committee or task force 
responsible for patient care or practice improvement 
D. Demonstrate leadership within the practice area. 
VI. Preceptors must demonstrate ongoing professionalism, including a personal 
commitment to advancing the profession as demonstrated by completing at least 3 
activities in the last 5 years: 
A. Serving as a reviewer (e.g., contributed papers, grants, or manuscripts; 
reviewing/submitting comments on draft standards/guidelines for professional 
organizations)  
B. Presentation/poster/publication in professional forums  
C. Poster/presentation/project co-author for pharmacy students or residents at a 
professional meeting (local, state, or national) 
D. Active service, beyond membership, in professional organizations at the local, 
state, and/or national level (e.g., leadership role, committee membership, 
volunteer work) E. Active community service related to professional practice (e.g., Free Clinic, 
medical mission trips) 
F. Evaluator at regional residency conferences or other professional meetings 
G. Routine in-service presentations to pharmacy staff and other health care 
professionals 
H. Primary preceptor for pharmacy students 
I. Pharmacy technician educator 
J. Completion of a Teaching and Learning Program 
K. Providing preceptor development topics at the site 
L. Professional consultation to other health care facilities or professional 
organizations (e.g., invited thought leader for an outside organization, mock, or 
practitioner surveyor) 
M. Contributing to health and wellness in the community and/or organization through 
active participation in health fairs, public events, employee wellness 
promotion/disease prevention activities, consumer education classes, etc 
N. Publication of original research or review articles in peer-reviewed journals or 
chapters in textbooks 
O. Publication or presentation of case reports or clinical/scientific findings at local, 
regional, or national professional/scientific meetings or conferences 
P. Teaching of pharmacy students or other health care professionals (e.g., classroom, 
laboratory, in-service) 
Q. Active involvement on committees within enterprise (e.g, work impacts more than 
one site across a health system) 
VII. Preceptors must demonstrate a desire (e.g. express interest to the residency director) 
and an aptitude (as defined below) for teaching that includes mastery of the four 
preceptor roles fulfilled when teaching clinical problem solving (instructing, 
modeling, coaching, and facilitating). Further, preceptors must demonstrate abilities 
to provide criteria-based feedback and evaluation of resident performance. Preceptors 
must continue to pursue refinement of their teaching skills. 
VIII. Once an interest is expressed the new preceptor applicant must identify a formal 
mentor (or a mentor will be assigned by the Residency Program Director) and start 
the preceptor curriculum under the guidance of the mentor and members of the 
Preceptor Development Committee. Preceptors going through this process will be 
classified as Preceptors-in-Training. Preceptors that do not currently meet the 
requirements to be a preceptor must remain a Preceptor-in-Training until they are 
eligible. A New Preceptor Application Process Documentation and Checklist must be 
filled out. Below is an outline of the curriculum: 
A. Core readings (Bloom’s Taxonomy - knowledge). The references to the readings 
are found on the T:drive 
a. Curricular mapping 
b. Problem solving skills 
c. Providing effective feedback 
d. Managing difficulty learning situations 
B. Teaching philosophy (Bloom’s Taxonomy - synthesis) 
C. Scenario discussions (Bloom’s Taxonomy - evaluation) 
D. Observation with mentor feedback (Bloom’s Taxonomy - application) a. Rotation syllabus 
b. Resident evaluation 
 
The new preceptor applicant will meet with their mentor on a regular basis. The above 
curriculum and other relevant topics (see mentor resource guide/topics) may serve as the 
foundation of these regular meetings. In general, it will take the new preceptor applicant 
6 to 12 months to complete the program. The process can be shorter or longer depending 
on the candidate’s ability to complete the track. Upon completion of the curriculum the 
new preceptor applicant will submit an application portfolio and meet with their mentor 
and the Residency Program Director to discuss the transition to an official residency 
preceptor.  
 
To help preceptors continue their development as clinical educators they need to attend at 
least 75% of the sessions of Preceptor Development sessions each year. An annual report 
must be submitted to the Preceptor Development Subcommittee as documentation of the 
preceptor’s continued contribution to pharmacy practice and documentation of 
professional contributions (i.e. Preceptor academic and professional record). The 
Preceptor Subcommittee will review and assess the preceptor’s report; areas of strength 
and improvement will be identified; an improvement plan will accompany areas of 
improvement. 
 
Additionally, the RPD will review preceptor evaluations in PharmAcademic. Feedback 
will be provided to preceptors on an annual basis. Focus points will include, but not be 
limited to: preceptors’ ability to serve as a role model for the learning experiences and to 
incorporate clinical teaching roles at the level required by the resident as well as the 
preceptors contribution to the success of the residents and the program. 
 
Preceptors shall participate in continuous quality improvement of the residency program 
and be an active member of the residency advisory committee. 
 
IX. Mentor Requirements 
A. All new Mentors will be reviewed by the Preceptor Development Subcommittee and 
recommendations will be presented to the Residency Advisory Committee 
 
B. Eligibility Criteria 
i. Mentors must be a Clinical Pharmacist 
ii. Mentors must meet all criteria to be a residency preceptor (see Preceptor 
Development Policy PGY-1 vs PGY-2)  
iii. Mentors must actively participate in residency-related planning  
iv. Mentors must have at least 2 years of experience as a primary preceptor for 
pharmacy residents and students 
 
C. Responsibilities of a Mentor  
i. Facilitate development of rotation syllabus and related documents  
ii. Participate in resident evaluations during preceptor training  
iii. Provide regular feedback on how to be an effective preceptor  
iv. Ensure that the new preceptor completes the application and checklist.  v. Promote ongoing participation in Preceptor Development sessions  
vi. The mentor must meet with the new preceptor mentee on a regular basis to 
discuss Preceptor Development topics.  
 
D. General Rules  
i. Limit two new preceptor mentees per mentor  
ii. The mentorship will be a one year term at which point, the mentor, new 
preceptor mentee, and Residency Program Director will assess the 
competency of the new preceptor and develop a transition plan to become an 
official residency preceptor (see above).  
 
X. To develop a resident’s practice competency, it is critical that learning experiences be 
supervised by pharmacist preceptors who model pharmacy practice skills and provide 
regular criteria-based feedback. However, in selected learning experiences in later 
stages of the residency, when the primary role of the preceptor is to facilitate resident 
learning experiences, it is permissible to use practitioners who are not pharmacists 
(e.g. Physicians, physician assistants, and certified nurse practitioners) as preceptors. 
In these instances, a pharmacist must work closely with the non- pharmacist preceptor 
to select the educational goals and objectives as well as participate actively in the 
criteria-based evaluation of the resident’s performance. Moreover, these learning 
experiences must be conducted only at a point in the residency when the RPD and 
preceptors agree that the resident is ready for independent practice. Evaluations 
conducted at the end of previous learning experiences must reflect such readiness to 
practice independently. 