OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Pharmacy Residency 
Title: Resident Selection Policy 
Policy 
Reference #: PH-22-13 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 01/10/2020 Review Date: 01/06/2025 
Revision Date: 11/29/2022 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to outline the criteria to determine a residency applicants’ eligibility to 
interview for the Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center PGY1 Pharmacy Residency Program 
and PGY2 Critical Care Program. This policy also outlines criteria for ranking candidates for Phase I of 
the The Match as well as the process for Phase II of the match, should such an event arise. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Applicant: a pharmacy student or pharmacist applying to the PGY1 pharmacy residency program at Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center or a PGY2 resident applying to the PGY2 Critical Care 
program at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center. 
 
Preceptor: an expert pharmacist who gives practical experience and training to a pharmacy resident.  He 
or she is also responsible for directing, supervising, and evaluating the resident.  
 
Residency Program Director (RPD):  the pharmacist responsible for the direction, conduct, and 
oversight of the residency program. 
 
POLICY: 
I. Interview Selection Process 
a. Upon receipt of all applications submitted by the predetermined application deadline, the 
RPD will assign the applicants to the preceptors for review. 
i. Each applicant will be reviewed by two (2) preceptors and the RPD 
ii. The RPD will review the following assignments in Webadmit: 
1. Academic excellence 
2. Curriculum vitae 
3. Leadership and teamwork 
iii. The assigned preceptors will review the following assignments in Webadmit: 
1. Recommendations 
2. Written communication (letter of intent) 
 
b. Applicants will be ranked based upon the following scoring system utilizing all application 
documents submitted to Webadmit: 
i. Academic excellence  PGY1 and PGY2 Applicants (10) 
1. (10 points) GPA ≥ 3.91  
2. (8 points) GPA 3.61-3.90 
3. (6 points) GPA 3.31-3.60 
4. (4 points) GPA 3.01-3.30 
5. (0 points) GPA < 3.0 
6. (5 points) Transcript received from a pass/fail school 
 
  
ii. Curriculum vitae  
1. PGY1 Applicants (20 points) 
a. 4th Year Clinical Experiences: 2 pts per specialized acute care clinical 
rotation, no more than 2pts total for any ambulatory care experiences 
(Max 6 pts) 
b. Publications: Local and/or non-peer reviewed (1 pt), National and/or 
peer-reviewed (2 pts) (Max 4 pts) 
c. Presentations: >3 Pharmacy School-related or Journal clubs (1 pt), 
P&T Committee (1 pt), CE Presentation (1 pt), Local/State pharmacy 
organization (2 pts), National pharmacy organization (3 pts) poster 
presentation (2 pts) (Max 5 pts) 
d. Research/Projects (give points for each project): ≥2 years work on 
research project (1 pt), participant in group research project/secondary 
author (1 pt), primary author on research project (2 pts), MUE/quality 
improvement projects (2 pts) (Max 5 pts) 
2. PGY2 Applicants (25 points) 
a. PGY1 practice experiences: 2 pts per specialized critical care or 
emergency medicine clinical rotation (Max 6 pts) 
b. Publications: Local and/or non-peer reviewed (1 pt), National and/or 
peer-reviewed (4 pts) (Max 8pts) 
c. Presentations (PGY-1 only): >3 Case presentations or Journal clubs (1 
pt), P&T Committee (2 pt), local CE presentation (1 pt), State 
pharmacy organization (2 pts), National pharmacy organization (3 pts), 
poster presentation (1 pt),  >2 in-service presentations (2 pts) (Max 
6pts) 
d. Research (give points for each project): ≥2 years work on research 
project (1 pt), participant in group research project/secondary author (1 
pt), primary author on >1 research project (2 pts), MUE/quality 
improvement projects (1 pts) (Max 5 pts) 
 
iii. Leadership and teamwork  
1. PGY1 Applicants (20 points; +2 bonus) 
a. Organizational involvement: Committee Chair (1 pts), Officer/Vice 
President (2 pts), President (3 pts) (Max 5) 
b. Work Experience: <1 yr in Community/Retail (1 pt), <1 year in 
Hospital (2 pts), >1 yr in Community/Retail (3 pts), >1 year in 
Hospital (4 pts) (Max 5 pts) 
c. Honors/Awards/Scholarships: Local Scholarships/Awards (2 pts), 
National Scholarships/Awards (3 pts) (Max 5pts) 
d. Clinical Skills Competition: Local (2 pts), National (3 pts) (Max 5 pts) 
e. BONUS POINTS (max 2): active participation at 2 or more health 
events/homeless shelter 
 
2. PGY2 Applicants (20 points) 
a. Leadership positions: Committee Chair (1 pts), Officer/Vice President 
(2 pts), President (3 pts), Chief resident >1 month (2 pts) (Max 5 pts) 
b. Precepting/Teaching Experience: Co-precepted on 1 rotation (1 pt), 
Co-precepted on 2 rotations (3 pts), Co-precepted on >2 rotations (5 
pts), Taught lecture in pharmacy school (1 pt), Taught/facilitated 
pharmacy school lab course (1 pt) (Max 5 pts)  c. Honors/Awards/Scholarships (Pharmacy school only): Local 
Scholarships/Awards (2 pts), National Scholarships/Awards (3 pts) 
(Max 5pts) 
d. Community service (within past two years): Participated in 1 
community service event (1 pt), 2 community service events (2 pts), 3 
community service events (3pts), >3 community service events (5 pts) 
(Max 5 pts) 
 
iv. Recommendations  
1. PGY1 Applicants (30 points) 
a. Overall letters of recommendation (15 points) 
(+5) for each letter that highly recommends the candidate (max 15) 
(+3) for each letter that recommends the candidate 
(0) for each letter that recommends WITH reservations 
(0) for each letter that states DO NOT recommend 
 
b. Also, add points for the following (max 10): 
i. (+1) for each letter from a clinical pharmacist (max 3) 
ii. (+2) Mentions strong time management skills  
iii. (+1) Mentions asking for more project opportunities (initiative) 
iv. (+1) Mentions integration into the team (teamwork) 
v. (+2) Mentions emotional intelligence/maturity 
vi. (+2) Mentions candidate’s ability to self-assess, seek feedback, 
or accept/implement feedback 
vii. (-2) Mentions any concerns about professional conduct 
 
2. BONUS POINTS (Either +5 or +3, between all letters):  
a. (+5) for mention within top 10% or performing at the level of a 
resident OR (+3) for mention within top 25% or mentions above 
average 
b. Bonus points are not summative. Must choose 1 bonus criteria.  
i. Example: If 2 letter writers mention “above average”, 
candidate will receive +3 points ONLY.  
 
3. PGY2 Applicants (25) 
a. Start each candidate off with 25 points and subtract for the following: 
i. (-25) 3 letters of recommendation WITH reservations 
ii. (-20) 2 letters of recommendation WITH reservations 
iii. (-15) 1 letter of recommendation WITH reservations 
iv. (-10) 3 letters of recommendation (none highly recommend 
candidate) 
v. (-5) 3 letters of recommendation (only one highly recommend 
candidate) 
vi. (-5) No letters of recommendation from a critical care clinical 
pharmacist 
b. Also, subtract points for the following: 
i. (-2) Mentions concerns about professional conduct 
ii. (-2) Mentions tardiness 
iii. (-2) Mentions concerns about time management 
iv. (-3) Mentions concerns about intellect 
v. (-3) Mentions concerns about interacting with providers  OR (-5) Mentions inappropriate or confrontational behavior with 
providers 
vi. (-3) Does not mention improvement throughout experience  
 
v. Written communication  
1. PGY1 Applicants (25) (A score of ≤10 requires review by a second preceptor) 
a. (15 points) Applicant clearly and logically communicates his/her 
intentions for pursuing residency. Letter of intent is free from obvious 
grammatical and typographical errors. 
b. (10 points) Applicant clearly and logically communicates his/her 
intentions for pursuing residency. However, there are slight 
grammatical and typographical errors. 
c. (0 points) Applicant does not clearly and logically communicate 
his/her intentions for pursuing residency and/or the letter of intent 
contains numerous grammatical or typographical errors.  
 
d. Add extra points for the following: 
i. Mentions personal characteristics that benefit the program (2 
pt) 
ii. Mentions specific goals that align with the institution (2 pts) 
iii. Mentions opportunities that the institution provides (3 pts) 
iv. Adequately personalizes letter through personal 
story/experience (3 pts) 
 
2. PGY2 Applicants (20) (A score of ≤10 requires review by a second preceptor) 
a. (15 points) Applicant clearly and logically communicates his/her 
intentions for pursuing residency. Letter of intent is free from obvious 
grammatical and typographical errors. 
b. (10 points) Applicant clearly and logically communicates his/her 
intentions for pursuing residency. However, there are slight 
grammatical and typographical errors. 
c. (0 points) Applicant does not clearly and logically communicate 
his/her intentions for pursuing residency and/or the letter of intent 
contains numerous grammatical or typographical errors.  
 
d. Add extra points for the following: 
i. Mentions personal characteristics that benefit the program (1 
pt) 
ii. Mentions specific goals that align with the institution (1 pts) 
iii. Mentions opportunities that the institution provides (1 pts) 
iv. Adequately personalizes letter through personal 
story/experience (2 pts) 
vi. Each preceptor will rank each candidate reviewed based on the following ranking 
system (max 6 points, 3 per reviewer) 
1. Must interview (3 pts) 
2. Maybe interview (1 pts) 
3. Do not interview (0 pt) 
 
 
c. Applicants are ranked highest to lowest based on total score. The Residency Advisory 
Committee meets to discuss each applicant to determine interview eligibility based on scores, 
personal interactions with applicants at recruiting events, and overall fit of the applicant to the program. A final interview list of sixteen (16) to eighteen (18) applicants, four (4) 
applicants per available residency position for the PGY1 Residency and sixe (6) to eight (8) 
applicants for the PGY2 Critical Care Residency, is decided upon and offers for interviews 
are sent out to the applicants via Webadmit. The meeting is a closed, private event, and no 
information regarding interviewee selection will be discussed outside of the meeting. The 
department secretary will schedule the interviews and send out calendar invites to the 
preceptors based on scheduling. 
 
d. The RPD will send the following information out to each candidate once an interview date 
has been determined: 
i. Agenda for the day 
ii. The following policies 
1. Resident Due Process 
2. Professionalism 
3. Program Assessment Strategy 
4. Leave of Absence 
 
 
 
II. On-Site Interview Process  
Applicants offered an on-site interview will have three separate group interviews with members 
of the preceptor group that include both behavior-based questions and clinical scenarios. PGY2 
applicants will be required to present a 30 minute critical care presentation to members of the 
PGY2 Critical Care Preceptor group. Applicants will receive two scores, entered into Webadmit, 
based on the following criteria: 
 
i. Interview score- the average interview score from all interviewers.  
1. On a scale of one to four, one being the lowest and four being the highest, 
interviewers will score applicants on the following areas: 
a. Adaptability 
b. Collaboration 
c. Conflict resolution 
d. Initiative 
e. Professionalism 
f. Multi-tasking 
g. Ability to accept constructive criticism 
2. Scores from the above areas will be totaled and submitted on Webadmit. 
 
ii. Presentation skills (PGY2 Applicants ONLY)- the average presentation score from all 
reviewers 
1. Interviewers will score candidates on the following areas using a 5 point scale: 
a. Presentation of Background Information 
b. Discussion of Disease State and Drug Therapy 
c. Selection and Interpretation of Primary Literature 
d. Critical Thinking Skills 
e. Communication Skills  
f. Response to Questions 
g. Audiovisual 
 
2. Total scores from the 3 cases will be submitted in Webadmit  
 
 III. Rank Selection 
a. Applicants are ranked highest to lowest based on interview day score including the interview 
and case questions score. The preceptors meet to discuss each applicant to determine rank 
based on scores, personal interactions during the interview, and overall fit of the applicant to 
the program. The meeting is a closed, private event, and no information regarding 
interviewee selection will be discussed outside of the meeting. 
 
b. A final rank list is compiled and submitted to the National Matching Service by the RPD. 
 
IV. Phase II of the Match 
a. The process for phase II of the match will follow the previously outlined process in a more 
expedited fashion based on the dates set forth by the National Matching Service. A phone 
interview may suffice in place of an on-site interview depending upon location of the 
candidate and the time constraints of available interview dates. 