 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Pharmacy Residency 
Title: Program Assessment Strategy  
Policy 
Reference #: PH-22-05 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 05/02/2012 Review Date: 4/3/2024 
Revision Date: 11/03/2021 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
Define the program’s assessment strategy 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Summative evaluation:  evaluates resident goals and objectives for learning experiences.  Both the 
resident and the preceptor complete a summative evaluation for a given learning experience. 
 
Snapshot evaluation :  evaluates resident progress in meeting one  or more  objective(s).  Unlike 
summative evaluations, in a snapshot evaluation  only the preceptor complete s an evaluation for a 
specified objective of the  learning experience , which is then shared with the resident who must 
acknowledge and sign the snapshot. 
 
Learning experience evaluation:  resident evaluation of the learning experience. 
 
Preceptor evaluation:  resident evaluation of the preceptor.  
 
PharmAcademic®:  Electronic software used to document resident progress , complete and submit 
evaluations, and develop resident schedules. 
 
POLICY: 
A. A customized resident development plan will be developed for each resident no later than the last 
day of the Orientation  rotation.  The Residency Program Director ( RPD) and resident are 
responsible for updating the plan at least quarterly. 
B. All preceptors will provide to the resident a written description of their learning experience on or 
prior to the first day of the resident’s rotation.   
C. All preceptors will provide an appropriate orientation to the learning experience, which includes , 
but is not limited to , a review of educational goals and objectives chosen, learning activities, 
expectations, and evaluation methods and schedule. 
D. Preceptors will provide on -going, criteria-based feedback throughout each learning experience to 
assist the resident’s skill development processes. 
E. Written formative evaluations are encouraged and should be used as a means to provide criteria -
based feedback.  Appropriate formative evaluation instruments may include Snapshots via 
PharmAcademic®, patient monitoring forms, drafts of newsletters, monographs, manuscripts,  
Medication Use Evaluations (MUEs), in-services, drafts of seminar presentations and anything else 
deemed necessary by the residency preceptors.  
F. For each learning experience, the following evaluations must be completed via PharmAcademic®: 
a. Summative evaluation by the Preceptor ( due 7 days after the last day of rotation; last day 
of the quarter for longitudinal rotations) 
b. Summative evaluation by the Resident ( due on the last day of the rotation ; last day of the 
quarter for longitudinal rotations) 
c. Learning Experience Evaluation by the Resident (due on the last day of the rotation) 
d. Preceptor Evaluation by the Resident (due on the last day of the rotation) 
e. All residents must sign their summative evaluations submitted by the preceptor no later than 
7 days after the preceptor submits the evaluation 
G. Residents and preceptors must ensure summative evaluations are discussed face -to-face.  The 
evaluating preceptor should invite the oncoming preceptor to attend the resident evaluation session 
to provide continuity between learning experiences, if deemed necessary. 
H. The residency advisory committee (RAC) will meet at least quarterly to review residents’ progress 
toward achievement of program goals and objectives. 
I. Residency certificates are awarded upon successful completion of residency program requirements.  
This includes achievement of greater than or equal to 75% of objectives by the end of the residency. 
PGY2 Critical Care residents must achieve 100 % in Goal R1.1 as defined per the American Society 
of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) Competency Areas, Goals, and Objectives for Postgraduate 
Year Two Critical Care Pharmacy Residencies document. Residents also must not have a needs 
improvement score on or after June of the program year to be considered for a certificate of 
completion. 
 
PROCEDURE 
 
A. Summative evaluation process 
a. Residents and preceptors will use the following evaluation scale for summative evaluations: 
i. NI = needs improvement 
ii. SP = satisfactory progress 
iii. ACH = achieved 
iv. NA =  not applicable 
b. Goals marked as “NI” or “ACH” by the resident or preceptor must have an appropriate 
explanation in the comment section. 
B. Formative evaluation process 
a. Preceptors will use the “Provide Feedback to Resident” feature  to create snapshot 
evaluations in PharmAcademic®. 
C. Learning Experience evaluation process 
a. Residents will use the following evaluation scale for learning experience evaluations: 
i. Consistently true 
ii. Partially true 
iii. False 
D. Preceptor evaluation process 
a. Residents will use the following evaluation scale for preceptor evaluations: 
i. Always 
ii. Frequently  
iii. Sometimes 
iv. Never 
E. Preceptor Evaluation of Resident’s Attainment of Goals and Objectives 
i. Preceptors will provide on-going, criteria-based feedback throughout each learning 
experience to assist the resident 
ii. Only those goals listed in the program design and those that might be added for an 
individual resident will be evaluated. 
F. Achievement of goals & objectives for the Program 
a. The RPD will designate a goal as “Achieved for the Residency” if: 
i. A goal and objective that is evaluated only once during the residency where the 
resident has been marked as satisfactory progress or achieved. 
ii. A goal and objective that is evaluated twice throughout the residency where the 
resident has been marked as satisfactory progress on both occasions or achieved on 
at least one occasion. 
iii. A goal and objective that is evaluated more than twice throughout the residency 
where the resident has shown improvement as indicated by being marked as 
satisfactory progress or achieved with no decrease in level of progress. 
iv. A goal and objective that is marked as achieved at least twice throughout the 
residency. 
v. The Residency Advisory Committee has reviewed resident progress and agrees there 
is sufficient documentation to mark the goal as “Achieved for the Residency” 
 
Program Completion Requirements 
PGY1 Residency certificates are awarded upon the successful completion of all residency 
requirements.  These include: 
 
G. Achievement for residency of ≥75% of objectives by the end of the residency.  Residents also 
must not have a “needs improvement” score by or after June of the residency year to be 
considered for a certificate of completion.  
H. Two seminar presentations (60 minutes each) 
I. Case/disease state presentations (Fall semester: 3, Spring semester: 2) 
a. Complete at least 3 of the following: 
b. Drug monograph x 2 
c. MUE 
d. Drug Class Review 
e. Must have at least 3 presentations at a formal meeting (at least 1 will be P&T) 
J. Completion of research project including written manuscript 
K. Quarterly contribution to pharmacy newsletter 
L. ASHP Midyear Clinical Meeting research-in-progress Poster Presentation & Residency Showcase 
participation 
M. Alcalde Residency Leadership Conference platform presentation  
N. Community service activities (Fall semester: 1, Spring Semester: 1) 
O. Poster presentation at Our Lady of the Lake Quality and Research Day 
 
PGY2 Residency certificates are awarded upon successful completion of all residency requirements. 
These include:  
A. Achievement for residency of ≥75% of overall objectives and 100 % in Goal R1.1 per ASHP 
Competency Areas, Goals, and Objectives for Postgraduate Year Two Critical Care Pharmacy 
Residencies document by the end of the residency.  Residents also must not have a “needs 
improvement” score by or after June of the residency year to be considered for a certificate of 
completion.  
B. Two seminar presentations (60 minutes each) 
C. Four case presentations (30 minutes each) 
D. Six journal club presentations (20 minutes each) 
E. Six in-service presentations  
F. At least one of the following presented at a formal meeting: 
a. Medication use evaluation (MUE) 
b. Drug monograph 
c. Drug class review 
G. Completion of research project including written manuscript 
H. ASHP Midyear Clinical Meeting research-in-progress Poster Presentation & Residency Showcase 
participation 
I. Alcalde Residency Leadership Conference platform presentation  
J. Community service activities (Fall semester: 1, Spring Semester: 1) 
K. Poster presentation at Our Lady of the Lake Quality and Research Day 
 
 
 
 