   
 
 
PH2304 
Page 1 of 6 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Medication Use, 
Storage and 
Handling 
Title: Orders: Medication Orders Policy Reference #: PH-23-04 
Supersedes #: PH-10-10-O 
Date of Origination: 05/19/2005 Last Date Reviewed: 02/03/2025 
Last Date Revised: 02/03/2025 
  
POLICY: All medication orders shall be clear and accurate and meet all requirements of a medication 
order as defined in this policy.    
1.     Definitions 
• Range Order: A medication order in which the dose interval varies over a prescribed range, 
depending on the situation or the patient's status.  
• Titration Order: A medication order in which the dose is either progressively increased or 
decreased in response to a patient’s status. 
• Taper Order: An order in which the dose or frequency of a medication is progressively reduced 
to achieve a desired clinical outcome.   
• Therapeutic Duplication:  The concurrent prescribing of more than one medication for the 
same indication without a clear distinction of when one agent should be administered over 
another 
• Resume Order: An instruction to restart a previously held medication. 
• Automatic Stop Order:  A policy -imposed discontinuation of certain medications after a 
predefined period unless renewed by the prescriber. 
• Verbal Order: A spoken directive for medication administration. 
• Legend Drug: Any drug defined by the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, as amended, 
and under which definition its label is required to bear the statement "Caution: Federal law 
prohibits dispensing without prescription." 
• Non-legend drug: A medication that does not require a prescription and can be purchased 
over the counter. 
• On-call Order: A medication order that is issued in anticipation of a specific need, but it is not 
meant to be administered immediately. 
• Unapproved abbreviation: A shortened form of a word or phrase that is not officially 
recognized or recommended by medical authorities, regulatory bodies, or established 
guidelines. Using unapproved abbreviations in medical practice can lead to confusion, 
misinterpretation, and potentially dangerous errors in patient care. 
• Order clarification:  The process of seeking further explanation or clarification regarding a 
medication or treatment order that is unclear, ambiguous, or incomplete. This is done to 
ensure that the correct treatment or medication is administered to the patient according to 
the physician's intent.    
 
 
PH2304 
Page 2 of 6 
• Generic orders: Instructions from a prescriber to continue or resume a patient's usual 
medication or treatment.  
2.     Contents of Medication Orders 
2.1 All medication orders must include the patient’s full name, medical record number, date and 
time of the order, medication name, dosage, route, frequency, and prescriber’s signature. 
2.2 Orders must be written using clear, legible, and unambiguous language. 
2.3 Medication names may not be abbreviated. Abbreviations listed on The Joint Commission’s 
Official “Do Not Use” List must not be used. (See Table 1.)  
Table 1 Official “Do Not Use” List published by The Joint Commission 
 
2.4 Additional Considerations 
• Orders that do not comply with items 2.1 -2.3 will be clarified with the prescriber by a nurse 
or pharmacist prior to the medication being prepared, dispensed, and/or administered.  
• There should be a notation in the chart (e.g. on the medication order, in the progress notes, 
etc.) of the diagnosis or indication for each medication ordered. 
• Generic orders such as “resume previous medications” and “continue home medications” 
are not legitimate medical orders. If a generic order is received, a nurse or pharmacist will 
consult with the prescriber to obtain specific orders for each medication.  
   
 
 
PH2304 
Page 3 of 6 
3.     Special Order Types   
Certain types of orders require additional information. These types of orders are listed below. Orders 
that do not meet the criteria indicated are invalid and will be clarified before administration.  
3.1 On-call Orders 
On Call orders must be clearly qualified to indicate the prescriber’s intended dosing location and 
time, as shown in the examples below. 
• On call to OR 
• On call one hour before procedure 
• On call prior to dialysis  
3.2 Hold Orders 
Prescribers should use the order hold function in the electronic medical record to indicate that a 
medication should be held. A written or free -text hold order will be treated as discontinued order 
unless the prescriber indicates a specific time or clinical parameter to restart the medication or the 
number of doses to hold.  
3.3 Verbal and Telephone Orders 
• Verbal orders shall be transmitted only by authorized prescribers designated in medical staff 
rules and regulations.  
• Verbal orders may be given by a physician extension in emergency situations. (Example: 
Operating room nurses, nurses during a code situation, or nurses during a natural or other form 
of disaster) 
• Verbal orders shall be subsequently authenticated (verified) and countersigned by the 
prescribing practitioner or other responsible practitioner within the time specified by medical 
staff rules and regulations. 
• Verbal orders for medications and verbal clarification of medication orders shall be accepted 
and written in the patient's record only by personnel so designated in the medical staff rules and 
regulations and are qualified to receive them.  Medical staff r ules and regulations limit the 
acceptance of verbal orders to: 
 Registered nurses 
 Licensed practical/vocational nurses 
 Registered pharmacists 
• Verbal orders will be received by authorized professionals within their scope of practice, 
immediately transcribed or entered into the electronic medical record, and read back to the 
prescriber for confirmation.  In addition to the information required for  a written order, 
documentation of verbal orders shall include: 
o The date and time of entry 
o The prescribing practitioner's first and last name 
o The written or electronic signature and title of the person who accepted the order. 
 For transcribed paper orders, “RB” should be affixed to the order to show documentation 
in writing that the order has been verified by reading back the order to the prescriber.      
 
 
PH2304 
Page 4 of 6 
 For orders entered directly into the electronic medical record, the professional entering 
the order should indicate that the order is a transcribed verbal order with readback at the 
time of signing.  
3.4 PRN Orders 
Orders for PRN (as needed) medications shall be written or electronically sent via Computerized 
Physician Order Entry (CPOE). Use of PRN (as needed) medication orders must be qualified to 
include the symptoms or indications for use, so there is no question  as to the prescriber’s intent.   
Without the qualifier, the order is not complete and will be clarified. 
Examples include (qualifiers underlined): 
• PRN at bedtime if needed for sleep 
• PRN for pain of (per pain scale) but not more than 4 doses in 24 hours 
• PRN for temperature over 100 degrees F 
PRN orders must include a specific frequency or time interval (e.g. Q6H, PRN).  To only include “PRN” 
in an order as the frequency of the order, is unacceptable.  
3.5 Range Orders 
Range orders must be written clearly, specifying the minimum and maximum dose, frequency, and 
interval as in the example below. Range orders are not allowed for chemotherapy and 
anticoagulants. Range orders that are not compliant with this policy will be c larified. The examples 
below demonstrate acceptable vs. unacceptable range orders.  
• Example of an unacceptable range order: Percocet 5/325mg 1-2 tablets by mouth every 4-6 
hours as needed for mild to moderate pain. 
• Acceptable correction of the above order:  
 Percocet 5/325mg 1 tablet by mouth every 4 hours as needed for mild pain. 
 Percocet 5/325mg 2 tablets by mouth every 4 hours as needed for moderate pain. 
3.6 Taper Orders 
Orders for tapering medications must include dosage limits and time factors to achieve the desired 
clinical outcome. Orders that lack specific guidelines for dose and frequency reduction are not valid 
and require clarification.   
3.7 Titration Orders 
Medication titration orders are those in which the dose is either progressively increased or 
decreased in response to the patient’s status. Required elements include: 
• Medication name 
• Medication route 
• Initial rate of infusion (dose/unit of time) 
• Incremental units to which the rate or dose can be increased or decreased 
• How often the rate or dose can be changed 
• Maximum rate or dose of infusion 
• Objective clinical measure to be used to guide changes 
An example of an acceptable order for titration would be:     
 
 
PH2304 
Page 5 of 6 
• Start Dopamine drip at 10 mcg/kg/min.  Increase by 5 mcg/kg/min every 5 minutes until SBP is 
>90, but less than 120.  Max rate of 20 mcg/kg/min. 
The initial dose of a titrated medication needing to be restarted will be driven by the protocol or by a 
specific order from the prescriber. 
4.     Therapeutic Duplication 
Instances of therapeutic duplication will be clarified with the prescriber. When more than one 
medication is prescribed for the same indication, clarification will occur to determine whether the 
ordering of multiple agents for the same indications is eithe r an accidental prescribing error or 
intentional multi-modal therapy. All instances of therapeutic duplication must be clarified by the 
pharmacist so that each medication has a unique indication and/or sequence of administration.  
When a patient is prescribed multiple antiemetic agents, there must be a clear understanding of the 
following concerns: 
• Was the intent of the prescriber to have all ordered medications given known by the 
prescriber, pharmacist, and the administering provider? 
• When does the administering provider give each agent based upon the intent of the 
prescriber? 
For example, if a patient is prescribed both acetaminophen and ibuprofen for mild pain, the 
pharmacist must clarify whether the prescriber intends for both medications to be given at the same 
time or in sequence. The order must be subsequently updated to p rovide all those on the patient’s 
care team with clear instructions according to the prescriber’s intent.  
5.     Order Transmission  
Orders and order clarifications may be transmitted by the following methods:  
• CPOE (preferred) 
• Paper submitted via fax or direct scan into the electronic medical record  
• Telephone 
• Text message, if accomplished through a HIPAA-compliant STP (secure texting platform) and 
if in compliance with the CoPs at 42 CFR Part 482.24 and 41 CFR Part 485.638. 
• Direct verbal communication (emergent situations only, see 3.1 Telephone and Verbal 
Orders)  
References 
MM.01.01.01 The hospital plans its medication management processes. The Joint Commission. 
MM.04.01.01 Medication orders are clear and accurate. The Joint Commission.  
MM.05.01.01 A pharmacist reviews the appropriateness of all medication orders for medications to 
be dispensed in the hospital. 
  
The Joint Commission. (2018, September 14). Do not use list . https://www.jointcommission.org/-
/media/tjc/documents/resources/patient-safety-topics/patient-
safety/do_not_use_list_9_14_18.pdf. Accessed 1.14.2025.    
 
 
PH2304 
Page 6 of 6 
The Joint Commission. (2024, June 5). Use of secure text messaging for patient information and 
orders. Joint Commission Online. https://www.jointcommission.org/resources/news-and-
multimedia/newsletters/newsletters/joint-commission-online/june-5-2024/use-of-secure-text-
messaging-for-patient-information-and-
orders/#:~:text=Joint%20Commission%2Daccredited%20healthcare%20organizations,members%
20of%20the%20care%20team Accessed 1.14.2025. 
The Joint Commission. (n.d.). Medication Management (MM): Medication orders . Retrieved January 
14, 2025, from https://www.jointcommission.org/standards/standard-faqs/hospital-and-hospital-
clinics/medication-management-mm/000002339. Accessed 1.14.2025. 
The Joint Commission. (n.d.). Medication Administration – Therapeutic Duplication versus 
Multimodal Therapy . Retrieved January 14, 2025, from 
https://www.jointcommission.org/standards/standard-faqs/hospital-and-hospital-
clinics/medication-management-mm/000002339. Accessed 1.14.2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 