 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Medication Use, 
Storage and 
Handling 
Title: Orders: Non- standard or Commercially 
Unavailable Compounded Drugs 
Policy Reference #: PH-23-13 
Supersedes #: PH-10-08 
Date of Origination: 05/19/2005 Last Date Reviewed:    02/03/2025 
Last Date Revised:   02/07/2020 
 
POLICY: 
 
The pharmacy shall dispense commercially available forms of sterile and non -sterile medications when 
possible.  If the needed formulation is not commercially available,  the p harmacy shall prepare the 
medication according to established standard concentrations, if a standard concentration has been 
established.    
 
When appropriate, the pharmacy may contract the services of a secondary compounding pharmacy for the 
preparation of  non-standard or commercially unavailable formulations of sterile , and non -sterile 
medications. The compounding pharmacy shall be appropriately licensed by the State Board of Pharmacy, 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and any other appropriate regulatory agency.  The contracted 
compounding pharmacy shall be in good standing with the State Board of Pharmacy, Food and Drug 
Administration, and any other appropriate regulatory agency, and shall operate according to USP 797, 
USP 795, or any other relevant regulatory guidelines. 
 
1. Where there are established standard concentrations, orders for non-standard compounds may be 
accepted if the prescriber provides an appropriate clinical reason for the non-standard formulation.  
2. Orders for non-standard sterile compounds: 
a.  Orders for non-standard sterile compounds shall include all components of a complete order, 
with clear details about the requested formulation, including but not limited to, ingredients, 
directions for use, and literature references.   
b. A pharmacist shall ensure there is literature to support the chemical compatibility and 
stability of the non-standard compound prior to preparing and dispensing a dose.     
3. Orders for non-standard non-sterile compounds: 
a. Orders for non-standard non-sterile compounds shall include all components of a complete 
order, with clear details about the requested formulation, including but not limited to, 
ingredients, directions for, and literature references.   
 
A pharmacist shall ensure there is literature to support the chemical compatibility and stability of the 
non-standard sterile or  non-sterile compound, and shall follow the appropriate approval and 
documentation processes as outlined in the Policy PH0302 – Medications: Formulas and Recipes,  prior 
to preparing and dispensing a dose.     
 
REFERENCES  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
MM 04.01.01 EP1. The hospital has a written policy that identifies the specific types of medication 
orders that it deems acceptable for use. The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
 
Policy PH0302 Medications: Formulas and Recipes  
 
 