 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 5 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Medication Use, 
Storage and 
Handling 
Title: Orders:  Sound alike look alike Drugs  
(SALADs) 
Policy Reference #: PH-23-08 
Supersedes #: PH-10-17-O 
Date of Origination: 05/23/2006 Last Date Reviewed: 05/20/24 
Last Date Revised: 05/06/2024 
 
PURPOSE 
To improve patient safety by using safeguards to reduce the potential for sound alike look alike 
medication errors 
POLICY 
Patient safety procedures will be in place to reduce the potential for a medication error related to 
prescribing, dispensing and administering medications with sound alike look alike names and/or 
packaging.   
• For Lake Physician Group (LPG) Clinics, please refer to policy NM021 Sound Alike 
Medications.  LPG areas are governed by a separate council and therefore may have a separate 
sound alike look alike approved drug list for LPG areas.  
• LSU Health Baton Rouge Clinics may also use a more appropriate, clinic administered 
medication list of sound alike look alike medications similar to, if not the same as, the list used 
by LPG clinics.  This list of medications is attached at the end of this policy.   
•  
 
PROCEDURE 
One or more of the following strategies will be utilized for sound alike look alike medications: 
• Tall-Man Lettering: Tall-man lettering will be utilized to differentiate products that have sound 
alike look alike names in the computer, automated dispensing devices, and in storage areas.   
• Storage: Similar sound-like look-like products will be separated within the pharmacy, patient 
care areas, automated dispensing machines and other settings when possible. 
• Order Entry Enhancements: Pop-up windows may be used during order entry to alert 
pharmacists and nurses of a potential sound alike look alike medication. 
• Maintain awareness of sound alike look alike drug names by providing information to all 
department staff. 
• Auxiliary labeling may be used as an alternate means of awareness and notification.   
• The potential for Sound alike Look alike Drugs, as a cause of medication errors, will be reviewed 
by the Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee at the time a medication is considered for 
formulary status.  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 5 
 
• The list of Sound alike Look alike Drugs will be reviewed annually by the Pharmacy and 
Therapeutics Committee.  
 
REFERENCES 
MM 01.02.01 EP1.  The Hospital develops a list of look-alike/sound-alike medications it stores, dispenses 
or administers. 
MM 01.02.01 EP2.  The Hospital takes action to prevent errors involving the interchange of the meds on 
its list of look-alike/sound-alike medications. 
MM 01.02.01 EP3.  The Hospital annually reviews and, as necessary, revises its list of look-alike/sound-
alike medications. 
MM 04.01.01 EP4.  The hospital has a written policy that defines the precautions for ordering medications 
with look-alike or sound-alike names.  The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 5 
  
 Policy Reference Number 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The list below is the sound alike look alike list approved for use in the Lake Physician Group Clinics as well as the 
LSU Health Baton Rouge Clinics.   
 
HumULIN and HumALOG insulin 
NovolIN and NovolOG insulin 
NovolIN 70/30 and NovolOG mix 
AMARyl and REMINyl 
Avandia and Coumadin 
CeLEBREX, CeLEXA and CeREBYX 
clonazePAM (KlonoPIN) and CloNIDine (Catapres)  
LAntUS and LEntE Insulin 
LamiSIL and LamiCTAL 
ZyPREXA and ZyRTEC 
AdvICOR and AdvAIR 
DIAbeta and ZEbeta 
DiFLUCAN and DiPRIVAN 
PrILOSEC, PrOZAC and PrEVACID 
Wellbutrin SR and Wellbutrin XL 
Zantac, Zyrtec and Xyzal 
NEURONTIN and ZEURONTIN 
AvaLIDE and AvaPRO 
RemERON and RemINYL 
 Policy Reference Number 
Page 5 of 5 
 
FLOmax and FOSAmax 
SIMcor and SYMBIcor 
Heparin 10 units /ml and Heparin 100 units /ml 
MMR and MMRV (Proquad) 
Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine (Prevnar 13) and 
Pneumococcal Polysaccharide Vaccine (Pneumovax 23) 
Tdap and DTap or Td, Tb, DT 
PEDIArix and KINrix 
IPV and HPV 
Hib and Hep B 
 