OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 3 
PHLC028 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLC028 
RECOLLECTION OF BLOOD SPECIMEN (RESTICKS) 
       Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 9/3/2019 9/22/2019 9/22/2019 
Reviewed By LC 9/17/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 MAY 8, 2013 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide a guideline for the recollection of laboratory specimens in an attempt to provide optimal blood 
specimen quality for laboratory testing. 
 
Addresses: 
Medical Laboratory Technicians 
Medical Technologist 
Supervisors 
Venipuncture Phlebotomist 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
 
POLICY: 
The laboratory accepts and tests specimens that are of sufficient quality for testing.  Listed are examples for 
potential reasons why a blood specimen may be rejected, and recollection requested by the Laboratory technical 
staff: (this list is not inclusive, and a phlebotomist may be asked to recollected blood specimens for other reasons 
not listed –  refer to the Phlebotomy Laboratory Standards for Blood Specimen Quality Procedure for more 
information on the below) 
• Blood Bank Collections missing required documentation 
• Clotted Specimens 
• Contamination 
• Hemolysis 
• Lab Accidents 
• Lost or Missing Specimens 
• Mislabeled/Unlabeled Specimens 
• Quantity Not Sufficient (QNS) 
• Verification of Lab Results 
• Wrong Specimen Collected 
 
Recollection for reasons listed above should be requested by MT/MLT, with the exception of mislabeled or 
unlabeled specimens. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
• The technical department (MT/MLT) is to analyze specimen collections and specimen collection 
situations for blood specimen quality for laboratory testing.  
• If a recollection is decided, the technical section should notify other departments that received specimen 
from the same collection time and inquire if a recollection of their specimen will be needed as well OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 3 
PHLC028 
 
 
• Recollections are to be collected within ONE HOUR of notification from technical section. 
• Requesting department is to verify that restick has been completed within 1 hour of request. If the restick 
is not received the requesting department is to contact the person, the restick was submitted to. 
 
RECOLLECTION REQUEST: 
A. Technical Department Contacts Patient’s Nurse: 
1. MT/MLT notifies nurse of need and reason for recollection (contact Charge Nurse if patient’s nurse is 
unavailable) 
2. The nurse will provide consent for restick or will provide additional information regarding the 
collection (including possible need to contact physician for advisement) 
3. Document the nurse’s name for acknowledgment and as a point of contact regarding the recollection 
4. If recollection is authorized, ask nurse if the recollection will be collected by the nursing staff (Nurse 
collect) or will phlebotomy support (Lab collect) be needed. 
5. If  Lab collect is selected proceed to the next step B.  If Nurse collect is selected document on 
technical department restick log the following:  
i. Patient’s Name 
ii. Reason for restick 
iii. Nurse notified of restick 
iv. Time restick was called to nurse 
6. Ensure nurse is aware of specimen requirements needed for testing 
7. Document the patient’s name on the Central Processing Department Restick Board 
8. If recollection is not received within one hour contact the documented nurse 
B. Notify Venipuncture Department of Recollection Request: 
1. Call Venipuncture Charge Tech at extension x5-8166 
2. Notify the Venipuncture Charge Tech of the need for a recollection. Communicate the following: 
i. Patient’s Full Name 
ii. Tests requiring recollection 
iii. Reason for recollection 
iv. Name of nurse notified 
v. Requester (MT/MLT) Name and Technical Section 
3. Document on technical department restick log the following:  
i. Patient’s Name 
ii. Reason for restick 
iii. Nurse notified of restick 
iv. Venipuncture Charge Tech restick was submitted to 
C. Venipuncture to Collect – STAT Priority: 
1. Venipuncture Charge Tech is to document on the Charge Tech Document the following  information 
provided by the technical section: 
i.  Patient’s Full Name 
ii. Tests requiring recollection 
iii. Reason for recollection 
iv. Name of nurse notified 
v. Requester (MT/MLT) Name and Technical Section OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 3 of 3 
PHLC028 
 
 
2. Ensure that the patient’s restick orders have been entered in the patient’s Electronic Medical Record 
(EMR).  
3. Dispatch a phlebotomist to recollect immediately making sure to communicate to the phlebotomist 
the collection is a restick and reason for the restick.  The charge will also add a comment in the 
Patient Draw list to identify the collection as a restick. 
4. Phlebotomist is to recollect the specimen STAT and document restick on specimen label 
5. Place specimen in a specimen biohazard bag, write “RESTICK” on front of biohazard bad, and send 
to lab immediately after draw. 
D. Recollection received by Laboratory Central Processing Department: 
1. Retrieve specimen biohazard bag (with RESTICK written on Biohazard Bag)  
2. Immediately accession specimen tubes into the laboratory and process as STAT priority 
3. Take the restick specimen to the prospective department and notify the MT/MLT of the restick 
specimen’s collection time. 
4. Remove the patient’s name off the Central Processing Restick Board 
E. Testing of Recollected Specimen 
1. Document the specimen’s collection time if not captured by the Rover device 
2. Ensure specimen has been placed on instrument/analyzer for testing 
3. Result based off  OLOL Laboratory practices 
4. If another recollection is required, proceed to step A again addressing collection will be a restick x2 
 
Limitations of Procedure: 
A. Procedure applies to patients admitted to Our Lady of the Lake RMC including the Emergency Room 
B. Recollections are to be collected as a STAT collection to avoid delays in patient treatment. 
C. If request for recollection of a patient becomes numerous consult Supervisor or Manager for advisement 
on how to proceed with patient laboratory testing or collection 
D. Lost or missing specimens should be recollected within 30 minutes of acknowledging specimen has been 
lost or is missing to avoid delays in patient treatment. 
REVISIONS 
5/8/2013 (created); 9/3/2019 
 
 