OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 5 
PHLC003 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLC003 
PHLEBOTOMY TECHNIQUE – VENIPUNCTURE COLLECTION 
       Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 8/19/2019 9/22/2019 9/22/2019 
Reviewed By LC 9/16/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 NOV 6, 1986 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define the performance of actions taken to perform a venipuncture 
 
Addresses: 
Supervisors  
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists 
 
PROCEDURE: 
The following steps are to be taken when performing phlebotomy 
A. Performance of Venipuncture 
1. Wash your hands before coming into contact with the patient 
2. Check the door to the patient’s room, the wall directly above the head of the patient, or the white 
board in the patient’s room for signage, or special armbands such as “limb alert bands” that define or 
limit phlebotomy 
3. Check the door to the patient’s room, the wall directly above the head of the patient, or the white 
board in the patient’s room for signage that defines or limits phlebotomy 
4. Greet the patient and identify yourself 
5. Identify the patient (refer to the Patient Identification Procedure) 
6. Position the patient 
7. Choose an arm 
8. Apply the tourniquet  
• Do not leave the tourniquet tied on the patient for more than 60 seconds prior to performing 
the phlebotomy 
9. Select venipuncture site and locate a suitable vein 
• Antecubital veins are preferred for ease of drawing and less patient pain 
Common venous sites include: 
o Median basilica vein 
o Median cephalic vein 
o Cephalic vein 
o Basilic vein 
o Radial vein 
• Venipuncture sites are located in the antecubital fossa 
• Refers to the area of the arm that is anterior to and below the bend of the elbow OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 5 
PHLC003 
 
• Several major arm veins lie close to the surface in this area and are easy to locate and penetrate 
with a needle 
• These veins are referred to as antecubital veins 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. Antecubital Veins Subject to Venipuncture 
• Median Cubital vein 
o First choice vein for venipuncture 
o Usually large and well anchored 
o Bruises less easily 
• Cephalic vein 
o Second choice for venipuncture 
o Often harder to palpate than the median cubital vein 
• Basilic vein 
o Third choice vein for venipuncture 
o Generally easy to palpate 
o Not as well anchored 
o Rolls and bruised more easily 
o Venipuncture of this vein tends to be more painful to the patient 
o Possibility of accidental puncture of the brachial artery which lies close to the skin 
surface in this area 
• When antecubital veins are unsuitable or unavailable, other veins subject to venipuncture 
include veins of the back of the hand, forearm, and the wrists.  
• Leg, ankle, and foot veins should only be used for venipuncture when no other sites are 
available and only with authorization from the patient’s physician 
• Puncture of the femoral vein is performed only by a physician 
11. Put on gloves 
12. Clean the draw site with 70% isopropyl alcohol swab and allow to dry 
• For Blood Alcohol testing, collect blood specimen using sterile technique, preparing collection 
site with a BETADINE Prep prior to venipuncture.  
13. Support the patient’s arm with the hand lower than the antecubital area 
14. Select appropriate collection device and specimen containers 
15. Remove protective cap from needle and position bevel up 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 3 of 5 
PHLC003 
 
16. Hold the skin slightly taut, pierce the skin along or on top of the target vein and enter the vein at an 
approximate 15-degree angle 
17. Advance the needle into the vein slightly 
18. Collect the specimen, releasing the tourniquet within one minute of blood flow 
19. Withdraw the needle and place gauze sponge of the puncture site 
20. Hold pressure for at least 30 seconds and then tape gauze sponge to site 
21. Dispose of needle in sharps biohazard box—NEVER RECAP NEEDLES 
22. Label the specimen containers at the patient’s bedside using the Epic specimen label, patient chart 
label or a handwritten label   
• Or in emergent situations, labeling needs to take place in the presence of the patient (i.e. 
Trauma, Code) 
23. Make sure the patient is not bleeding before leaving the room 
24. Notify nursing personnel of any problems encountered while drawing the patient 
 
B. Collection Devices: 
1. Syringe and needle 
• Choose 21- or 23-gauge needles 
• Open needle and syringe container and assemble in the presence of the patient 
• Remove protective needle cover 
• Break the seal of the plunger and advance it fully forward, expelling all air from the barrel of the 
syringe before use 
• Enter vein 
• Pull back on syringe plunger with gentle pressure 
• Release tourniquet within a minute of starting venipuncture 
• Remove needle from vein and activate safety device immediately 
• Fill required collection tubes using one handed technique and the tube racks found on the 
phlebotomy tray or cart 
• Dispose of the syringe and needle into a sharp’s disposal box 
 
2. Vacutainer  
• Choose 21- or 23-gauge needle 
• Open and assemble equipment in the presence of the patient 
• Remove protective needle cover 
• Hold flange of the needle holder and push sample tube inward to engage stopper needle (but do 
not puncture tube completely, being careful to not release vacuum) 
• Enter vein 
• Push specimen tube forward to allow the stopper needle to puncture the stopper 
• Blood flows into the sample tube by tube vacuum 
• Release the tourniquet when blood flows 
• Remove filled tube from holder; change to next tube following order of draw 
• Remove needle from vein and activate safety device immediately 
• Do not remove the vacutainer needle from the holder.  Discard both as intact assembly into a 
sharp’s disposal box. 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 4 of 5 
PHLC003 
 
3. Butterfly needles (winged collection set) 
• Choose 21- or 23-gauge set 
• Open and assemble equipment in the presence of the patient 
• Remove protective needle cover 
• Enter vein 
• Pull back on syringe plunger with gentle pressure 
• Release the tourniquet when blood flows 
• Collect the appropriate blood volume in syringe 
• Activate safety device while removing needle from vein 
• Hold the needle with one hand and the syringe in the other 
• Hold the needle over the sharps box opening and allow to fall into the box 
• Release the luger lock from the syringe and allow the butterfly device to fall into the sharps 
disposal box 
• Place a safety transfer device onto the syringe 
• Fill required collection tubes using one handed technique and the tube racks found on the 
phlebotomy tray or cart 
 
C. Order of Draw: 
Vacutainer/specimen tubes are filled in the following order when using syringes or vacutainer draws: 
1. Blood culture bottles 
2. Light blue tops (sodium citrate)—coagulation 
3. Plain red tops (No additive)—chemistry, serology, etc. 
4. Royal Blue (Plain Red – No additive) – heavy metal 
5. Red and yellow SST tops (clot activator)—chemistry 
6. Green tops (lithium heparin tube, sodium heparin tube)—chemistry 
7. Lavender tops (EDTA)—hematology 
8. Royal blue (EDTA) – Lead levels 
9. Grey tops (potassium oxalate/sodium fluoride)—chemistry 
10. Yellow ACD – special hematology 
Note: When using a winged blood collection set (butterfly needle) for venipuncture and a coagulation tube is 
the first tube needed, first draw a discard tube. The discard tube must be used to prime the tubing of the 
collection set, which will assure maintenance of the proper anticoagulant/blood ratio in the first tube filled. 
The discard tube should be a non-additive tube (plain red) or coagulation tube (light blue) and need not be 
completely filled. 
 
D. Transport of Specimens to the Laboratory 
1. Group all patient specimen tubes 
2. Rubber band sample tubes together 
3. Place labeled, grouped container tubes in biohazard plastic bag 
4. Send samples to Central Processing 
• Pneumatic tube system 
• Call 5-8166 for pickup at defined location 
• Bring the samples to Central Processing 
 
Limitations of Procedure 
1. Another person may collect a sample via an indwelling access line or other method, but the attending 
Phlebotomist is to: 
• Be present during the collection of the specimen 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 5 of 5 
PHLC003 
 
• Perform patient identification 
• Label and sign the specimen container 
• Is responsible for the accuracy of the patient collection 
2. A Phlebotomist may not accept responsibility for unlabeled specimens, incompletely processed nurse 
collections, or specimen draws that were not witnessed by the phlebotomist 
• Recollect the patient’s specimen if identification is uncertain 
3. Tourniquets are not to be left on patients’ arms, check each patient before leaving the room 
4. Prevent back flow of specimen during the use of the vacutainer draw method by 
• Placing the patient’s arm in a downward position during the procedure 
• Release the tourniquet after the blood starts to flow into the first tube 
5. Hold pressure on the venipuncture site for a longer time period when drawing light blue tubes used in 
coagulation testing as these patients are generally receiving therapy that causes extended bleeding 
6. Hands are to be washed between each patient contact 
7. Gloves are to be worn for each patient phlebotomy and then discarded 
8. Specimen collection supplies and equipment are only to be utilized within their expiration date and stored 
per manufacturer’s instructions 
9. If multiple collection attempts are made, the phlebotomist must use a new needle for each venipuncture. 
 
References: 
Clinical Laboratory and Standards Institute (CLSI). Procedures for the Collection of Diagnostic Blood Specimens by 
Venipuncture; Approved Standard-Sixth Edition, CLSI document H3-A6 
 
REVISIONS 
11/6/1986 (created); 9/7/2011; 8/9/2017; 8/9/2019 