OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
 
Page 1 of 3 
PHLIS008 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLIS008 
COMPUTER DOWNTIME PROCEDURE 
       Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 10/3/2017 10/3/2017 10/3/2017 
Reviewed By LC 9/17/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 JAN 2000 
 
PURPOSE: 
Provide for the continuation of phlebotomy service to the institution in the event of a computer failure or planed 
downtime 
 
Addresses: 
Venipuncture Supervisors 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists 
 
POLICY: 
Venipuncture staff will continue to provide phlebotomy service to the institution during a computer downtime or 
failure.  Requests for laboratory testing are made by submitting a “Down Time Order Form” listing the patient’s 
name (last, first), patient’s date of birth, patient’s location, required testing, and test priority to Venipuncture.  
Collection and testing are performed as indicated on the manual order request. 
 
A. Initiation of EPIC Downtime Procedures 
1. Are announced by the hospital operator 
2. Maybe announced by the laboratory computer support staff 
 
B. Location management 
1. Inpatients 
• Unit requesting laboratory testing are to fax patient orders on the “Downtime Order Form” to ext. 
5-3019 (765-3019) 
• Units not having fax capability are to call order requests to ext 8166 
• Units calling orders are to provide the patient’s name (last, first), patient’s date of  birth, patient’s 
location, and required testing, and test priority 
• For units calling orders, a “Downtime Order Form” is to be left on the counter for the nursing 
station for pickup by the responding phlebotomist 
2. Outpatients 
• Obtain a completely filled out “Outpatient Registration Form” 
• Obtain a legible physician order for the required testing 
3. Plaza Outpatient 
• Obtain a completely filled out “Outpatient Registration Form” OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
 
Page 2 of 3 
PHLIS008 
 
 
• Obtain a legible physician order for the required testing 
• Draw the patient 
• Make the copy of the patient order for each department involved in providing testing for the order 
• Send the order and patient sample to Processing 
4. Outreach Patients 
• Obtain a completely filled out  “Outreach Registration Form” 
• Verify that specimen collection supports test order 
• Perform 2-ID/3-ID of patient 
• Draw the patient 
• Label tubes with the patient’s name (last, first, mi), patient’s date of birth, collector’s Network 
ID, and time of collection 
• Send the order and patient specimens to Central Processing 
C. Using the Manual Inpatient Draw Order Sheet 
1. Phlebotomist are dispatched to draw patient using either the “Patient Draw List” from the BCA 
Downtime computer,  “Downtime Order Form” or copy of the physician order 
2. For phoned in orders, pick up “Downtime Order Forms” at the nursing station before drawing the patient 
3. Carefully determine specimen volume and container type required for order 
4. Identify the patient using the “Downtime Order Form” as the laboratory label 
5. Draw the patient only after matching named and medical record number on the “Downtime Order Form” 
and the name and medical record number on the patient armband 
6. Legibly label specimen containers with patient’s name (last, first, mi), patient’s date of  birth, and medical 
record number, include date,  time of draw, and tech Network ID  
7. Send specimen s to Central Processing 
 
D. Using the Manual Outpatient / Plaza Draw order sheet 
1. Phlebotomist is dispatched to draw patient using a copy of the physician order 
2. Carefully determine specimen volume and container type required for order 
3. Identify the patient using the copy of the physician order and asking the patient to state their name 
4. Draw the patient 
5. Legibly label specimen containers with patient’s name (last, first, mi), patient’s date of  birth, and  include 
date,  time of draw, and tech Network ID  
6. Send specimens to Central Processing 
Limitations of Procedure 
1. Required patient information is to include full name, medical record number, requesting physician, patient 
room number, and required tests 
2. Downtime order forms are to be legible 
3. Specimen labeling is to be legible 
4. Orders received on manual slips during non-downtime time periods are taken to Central Processing for 
distributions to laboratory test sections 
5. Call the unit sending specimens without downtime orders and request that a manual order be delivered to 
Processing OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
 
Page 3 of 3 
PHLIS008 
 
 
6. Copies of orders must be legible. 
REVISIONS 
01/2001 (created); 10/3/2017 
 
 