OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 2 
PHLP005 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLP005 
DISPOSAL OF CONTAMINATED MATERIALS 
       Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 10/5/2011 10/5/2011 10/5/2011 
Reviewed By LC 9/7/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 FEB 1988 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide for the disposal of spilled materials that may be contaminated 
 
Addresses: 
Supervisors 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists 
 
POLICY: 
Clean up of minor spills of contaminated materials are to be anticipated. Accidents occur that involve breakage 
and leakage of biological materials passing through the Laboratory.  Care is to be exercised when handling 
potentially infectious materials.  Most of the specimen containers used in venipuncture have been converted to 
plastic reducing the chances of accidental breakage.  Spills can be classified as minor and easily cleaned or large 
requiring the assistance of others.  Do not attempt to clean a large spill by yourself. Notify a supervisor.  The 
supervisor will call in necessary assistance. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Small Spills – Example: Broken blue top coagulation tube 
1. All broken glass is to be treated as contaminated 
2. Put on gloves and protective apron if necessary 
3. Put on Safety Glasses if necessary 
4. Flood the spill site with disinfectant 
5. Allow the disinfectant to remain in contact with the spilled material for a few minutes 
6. Pick up the broken container and spilled material in a sharps biohazard box 
B. Large Spills – Example: Large Glass container of  body fluid  
1. Open up the Emergency Spill Kit 
2. Put on gloves and, if applicable, Safety Glasses and apron 
3. Completely cover the spill with the Spill Kit powder from the enclosed pouch 
4. Wait until the spill solidifies 
5. Use the shovel to pick up the solidified waste and place in supplied bag or sharps biohazard box 
6. Close and dispose of the waste bag in a sharps biohazard box 
7. Wipe the pre-cleaned area with the germicidal or bleach towelette and then dry using the absorbent 
towel 
8. Dispose of all material in a sharps biohazard box 
9. Remove gloves and wash hands thoroughly OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 2 
PHLP005 
 
 
 
Limitations of Procedure: 
• Get help if unable to make the necessary clean up 
• Get help if unsure of your ability to clean the spill 
• Safety Glasses are to  be worn when handling biohazardous substances in which mucus 
membrane contact could occur 
• All materials used to clean a spill should be placed in a biohazard waste container 
• If sharps are present in the spill, all materials used to clean the spill are to be placed in a sharps 
biohazard waste box 
• Wear gloves when cleaning any spill 
• If injured during the accident or during clean up: 
1. Wash injured area immediately with soap and water 
2. Report to either the Employee Health or ECU for treatment 
3. Complete an employee safety report online (Lakelink) via Quantros Safety Event 
Reporting system. 
REVISIONS 
2/1988 (created); 10/5/2011 
 
 