OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 2 
PHLP003 
 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLP003 
ISOLATION PATIENTS: TRANSMISSION-BASED PRECAUTIONS 
       Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 4/22/2013 4/22/2013 4/22/2013 
Reviewed By LC 9/17/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019   SEP 1986 
 
PURPOSE: 
Transmission-Based Precautions are designed for patients documented or suspected to  
be infected or colonized with highly transmissible or epidemiologically important pathogens for which additional 
precautions beyond Standard Precautions are needed to interrupt transmission in hospitals. There are three types 
of Transmission-Based Precautions: 
 
Airborne Precautions, Droplet Precautions, and Contact Precautions  
They may be combined for diseases that have multiple routes of transmission. When used either singularly or in 
combination, they are to be used in addition to Standard Precautions. 
 
Addresses: 
Supervisors 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomist 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Before entering the patient’s room: 
1. Verify that the room number displayed in the Rover device matches the room number being entered 
2. Verify that you have the necessary supplies to collect the tests ordered 
3. Leave your phlebotomy cart outside the room 
4. Patients placed in isolation will require appropriate personal protective equipment to be put on before 
contacting the patient 
• In the appropriate clean area and before contacting the patient, wash your hands 
• Put on the personal protective equipment required by the isolation type  
• Contact the patient following the procedure as noted isolation card posted on the outside 
of the patient’s door 
B. Personal Protective Equipment Required for the following Transmission-Based Precautions: 
1. Airborne Precautions: designed to reduce the risk of airborne transmission of infectious agents. 
• Gloves 
• N95 Respirator 
o Carefully fit the N95 respiratory mask 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 2 
PHLP003 
 
 
 
2. Droplet Precautions: designed to reduce the risk of direct or indirect droplet transmission of infectious 
agents. 
• Gloves 
• Surgical Mask 
o Carefully fit the N95 respiratory mask 
3. Contact Precautions: designed to reduce the risk of transmission of epidemiologically important 
microorganisms by direct or indirect contact. 
• Gloves 
• Gown 
o Put on the isolation gown 
o Put on gloves assuring that the glove cuff overrides and seals the gap between the 
glove and the isolation gown 
 
C. Performing Phlebotomy 
1. Perform proper Patient Identification (refer to the Patient Identification Procedure) 
2. Draw the patient’s blood trying to contact only the arm.  Avoid contact with the patient’s clothing, 
environmental surfaces, or items in the patient's room as much as possible. 
3. Supplies are to be discarded into the sharps container located in the patient’s room. 
4. Any equipment taken into the patient care area is to be disposed of in the room. 
5. Removing the collected specimen from the patient’s room: 
• Position an open biohazard bag in the clean area of the patient’s room in a manner that 
would allow the collected vacutainer tube to be dropped into the open bag without touching 
the outside of the biohazard bag 
• Hold the collected vacutainer tube over the opening of the biohazard bag 
• Drop the tube into the bag opening without touching the outside of the biohazard bag 
• Use non-contaminated gloves to seal the biohazard bag 
• Transport the sample in the biohazard bag to the laboratory for processing 
6.  Remove gloves and gowns before leaving the patient's environment and wash hands.  
7. After hand washing, ensure that hands do not touch potentially contaminated environmental surfaces or 
items in the patient's room as leaving. 
 
References: 
Organizational Isolation Precautions - Infection Control 
 
REVISIONS 
9/1986 (created); 4/22/2013 
 
 
 
 