OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 2 
PHLP002 
 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLP002 
HAND WASHING AND GLOVE USAGE 
       Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 11/5/2007 11/5/2007 11/5/2007 
Reviewed By LC 9/7/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 APR 1993 
 
PURPOSE: 
Describe appropriate methods of hand washing and the wearing of gloves 
 
Addresses: 
Supervisors 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists 
 
POLICY: 
A. All patients  and patient samples are to be treated as though infectious 
B. Venipuncture personnel are to wear gloves while: 
• Performing venipuncture or capillary blood collections 
o Fresh gloves are put on before each collection 
o Gloves are removed following each collection 
• Entering patient rooms designated as isolation area 
o Fresh gloves are put on before entering an isolation area 
o Gloves are removed on leaving the isolation area 
• Assisting in the collection of outpatient urine or other outpatient samples 
o Fresh gloves are put on before assisting in collection 
o Gloves are removed on completing the collection 
• While processing and logging of samples 
C. Venipuncture personnel are to wash their hands 
•  With soap and water or hospital approved alcohol-based hand cleaner 
o Hands should be washed with soap and water: 
❖ Before beginning the use of alcohol-based cleaners to remove dirt and grime 
❖ After performing 6 to 12 alcohol-based cleanings 
• Before each patient contact 
o Wash hands on coming into contact with or entering the patient room 
o If possible, use the foam dispenser located in the patient’s room so that the patient may 
observe the cleaning process 
o Hands may be washed using cart-based hospital approved alcohol hand cleaner 
• Following the removal of gloves OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 2 
PHLP002 
 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
Soap and water washing 
1. Turn on water and adjust temperature to warm 
2. Wet hands under warm, running water 
3. Apply soap located at the sink and rub hands together working up a lather 
4. Rub hands together creating friction for at least 15 seconds 
5. Rinse hands in a downward motion from wrist to fingertips using running water 
6. Dry hands using paper towels supplied at the sink being careful to touch only the new, clean paper towel 
while removing the towel from the dispenser 
7. After drying your hands, use the paper towel as a protective barrier to turn water supply handles to the off 
position 
Alcohol based hospital approved hand cleaners 
1. Wet hands with alcohol based cleaner 
2. Rub hands together creating friction 
3. Continue to rub hands together until alcohol-based cleaner evaporates 
4. Hands are clean when they become dry 
Limitations to the procedure: 
Alcohol based cleaners are intended for use on hands that are already cleaned and free of dirt, oil and other heavy 
material.  
 
REVISIONS 
4/1993 (created); 11/5/2007 
 
 
 
 