OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 3 
PHLR012 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLR012 
SPECIMEN QUALITY FEEDBACK AND PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT  
       Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 9/7/2019 9/22/2019 9/22/2019 
Reviewed By LC 9/7/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 AUG 17, 2015 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide phlebotomist with feedback on issues relating to specimen quality and labeling.  Specimen quality 
issues are also utilized as opportunities for performance improvement. For standards of specimen quality, please 
also refer to policy PHLC027 – Laboratory Standards for Blood Specimen Quality. 
 
Addresses: 
Supervisors 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomist 
 
POLICY: 
The Venipuncture department monitors preanalytic variables that are key indicators of specimen quality. Errors 
and issues relating to specimen quality discovered are investigated, evaluated, and communicated to the specimen 
collector, and are utilized as retraining or education tools for the department. Depending on the investigation and 
severity of the error, an accountability matrix involving discussion, education, and retraining including possible 
formal counseling is in place to develop expectations for collectors.  Errors and issues are also utilized in the 
continuous process of seeking opportunities for department improvement.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Blood Culture Contamination: 
1.  Collecting acceptable specimens for blood culture is dependent upon the quality of the preparation of the 
  phlebotomy site.  Improper preparation of the phlebotomy site may result in specimen contamination and  
  the resultant recovery of bacteria contaminates that are normally found on skin.   
2.  Blood culture contaminations are monitored by the Microbiology department and emailed monthly to the  
  Venipuncture Supervisor and Manager to provide feedback and education to the phlebotomy team. 
 
B. Blood Culture Volume: 
1.  Recommended blood collection volumes for culture (refer to policy PHLC013 – Collection of Blood  
  Cultures) 
• For patients weighing 37 Kg (81.5 pounds) or more, the recommended blood volume collection for 
each blood culture set is 20 ml (10 ml placed in the aerobic and 10 ml placed in the anaerobic bottle). 
• For pediatric patients weighing less than 37 Kg (81.5 pounds), a weight based blood volume is 
collected.   
2.  Suboptimum specimen volumes OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 3 
PHLR012 
 
 
• Suboptimum volumes (when collected blood volumes are less than the noted required sample volume) 
are discouraged as inadequate volumes of blood may compromise the recovery of potentially life-
threatening organisms from the patient's blood 
• Suboptimum volumes may occur due to the patient’s condition and difficulty encountered in 
performing the venipuncture. Larger volumes of blood increase the yield of true positive cultures and 
attempts to collect the recommended volumes should be taken.  
3.  Blood volumes are monitored by Microbiology on a monthly basis and results are forwarded to  
  Venipuncture Supervisor and Manager to provide feedback and education to the phlebotomy team. 
 
C. Patient Identification: 
1.  Patients are always to be identified by verifying patient information from an OLOL issued 
armband physically attached to the patient before beginning phlebotomy.  Outpatients in areas  
without armbands, are identified by verification of full name and birth date. (Refer to the Patient  
 Identification Procedure) 
2.  Patient identification errors are monitored per the Laboratory’s unlabeled/mislabeled specimen  
  process.  
  Errors are reported to the Venipuncture Supervisor and/or Manager by phlebotomist, laboratory  
  personnel, hospital safety reporting system, and/or laboratory compliance officer to investigate, 
  provide feedback, and counsel collector. 
D. Barcode Scanner Utilization: 
1.  By utilizing Rover devices at the bedside it reduces patient identification and specimen labeling  
  errors, while providing phlebotomist with a real-time list of specimens awaiting collection.  
2.  Lab orders are updated in the HIM system based on the attempt for specimen collection. 
3.  Rover device usage is monitored for the Venipuncture department on a monthly basis and results  
  are utilized to provide feedback and education to the phlebotomist. As well as review of the  
  equipment and processes.  
 
E. Specimen Recollections: 
1.  The laboratory accepts and tests specimens that are of optimal blood specimen quality for patient testing.   
  Insufficient specimen quality will require recollection. Please refer to policy PHLC028 - Recollection of  
  Blood Specimen Policy, for listed examples of potential reasons why a blood specimen may be rejected   
  and recollection requested by the Laboratory technical staff. 
2.  Recollections are to be collected as a STAT collection (regardless of original order collection priority) to  
  avoid delays in patient treatment. Recollections are to be collected, sent to laboratory, and accessioned  
  within ONE HOUR of notification from technical section. 
INTERPRETATION/RESULTS: 
As a part of performance improvement, Venipuncture monitors the following performance improvement 
indicators monthly. 
A. Blood Culture Contamination Rate:  Acceptable: < 2.5%  ( >97% compliant) 
B. Blood Culture Volume: Acceptable: > 95% 
C. Patient Identification: Acceptable: > 100% 
D. Barcode Scanner Utilization: Acceptable: > 95% 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 3 of 3 
PHLR012 
 
 
REPORTING: 
A. Documentation utilized in the discussion, education, and retraining of phlebotomist including possible 
counseling is kept in the employee’s file. 
B. As a part of the laboratory’s QA/QM program, reports are compiled for the performance improvement 
indicators, and the information is provided to the laboratory’s compliance officer monthly. 
 
REVISIONS 
8/17/2015 (created); 8/17/2015; 9/7/2019 
 