OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 3 
PHLR007 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLR007 
PATIENT ROOM ETIQUETTE 
       Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 10/5/2011 10/5/2011 10/5/2011 
Reviewed By LC 9/7/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 MAR 1, 2001 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define acceptable Phlebotomist behaviors while in the presence of the patient and to standardize Phlebotomist 
interaction with patients while performing venipuncture 
 
Addresses: 
Supervisors 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Before entering the patient’s room: 
1. Verify the room number in the Rover under “View my Assigned Draws” matches the room number being 
entered 
2. Verify that you have the necessary supplies to collect the tests ordered 
3. Patients placed in isolation will require appropriate personal protective equipment to be put on before 
contacting the patient 
• In the appropriate clean area and before contacting the patient, wash your hands 
• Put on the personal protective equipment required by the isolation type  
• Contact the patient following the procedure as noted isolation card posted on the outside 
of the patient’s door 
 
B. Entering the patient’s room:  
1. Always knock on the door and pause outside the room for 5-10 seconds before entering the room 
• Open the door slowly while listening for comments coming from the room that may 
condition your entry 
• Follow the instructions, document any delay in specimen collection, report the delay to 
the patient’s nurse 
• Enter the patient’s room if no conditional comment is forthcoming    
• While entering check for the presence of signage that would indicate any conditions that 
may affect phlebotomy collection 
o Posted on the outside of the door to the patient’s room 
o Posted on the wall directly above the head of the patient’s head OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 3 
PHLR007 
 
 
 
2. As you are entering the room, always introduce yourself to the patient by using the following greeting 
(SCRIPTING): 
• “Good (morning / afternoon /evening) Mr./Ms. patient’s last name, may I come in?  My 
name is _____ , I am from the laboratory and I have come to draw a blood sample for a 
test that your doctor has ordered” 
• For early morning draws, always apologize and explain why you are there so early. “I’m sorry 
to wake you, but our physicians will begin rounds soon and need to have updated results 
for their patients. “  
• If the patient’s room is dark, always say “I’m sorry, but I need to turn on a light” warning the 
patient and any guests present that you are about to turn on the room lights 
• Turn on the lowest intensity (least bright) light source in the room 
• If the low intensity lighting is insufficient for the task, tell the patient that you are 
about to turn on a higher intensity (brighter) light  
• Wash your hands using the soap dispenser located in the patient’s room. Always tell the patient 
what you are doing, “I’m going to wash my hands and then we’ll get started.” 
• Always put on gloves in the presence of the patient  
3. Approach the patient to begin the procedure always saying: 
• “May I see your hospital armband to verify your identity?” 
o Perform proper Patient Identification (refer to the Patient Identification Procedure) 
• While confirming the patient’s identity, always ask the patient, if capable, to tell you their name 
“Could you please tell me your name”.  Always be prepared to answer patient questions like 
“which doctor has ordered this test or what test has been ordered” 
• Always remember to refer the patient’s “why” questions to the patient’s nurse  
4. Proceed with preparations for the draw 
• Many patients appreciate appropriate conversation that serves to distract them from the 
upcoming needle stick – individual phlebotomist judgment is always required      
5. Always warn the patient that you are about to perform the phlebotomy by saying “I am ready to begin, 
you may feel a little pain, but I will try to finish quickly”  
6. Complete the phlebotomy, retrieve equipment brought into the room, and return any items moved during 
the procedure back to their original positions 
7. Remember that for the adult patients 2 draw attempts are made; for the pediatric patient, 15 years of age 
or less, 1 draw attempt is made.   If you fail to collect the blood sample – always apologize to the patient 
by saying “I am sorry, I don’t want to cause you any more discomfort.  I’m going to ask one of my 
co-workers to try to complete this collection.”  
8. Before leaving the patient always ask, “Is there anything else I can do for you while I am here” – 
always carefully follow through with any requests – and then always finish your contact by saying 
“Thank you for choosing the Lake” 
9. Just before leaving the patient, always say “I am closing the door for your privacy”.    
 
C. Precautions: OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 3 of 3 
PHLR007 
 
 
• Patient Identification 
o Perform proper Patient identification (refer to the Patient Identification Procedure) 
• Specimen Labeling 
o Ensure the specimen does not leave the presence of the patient before being labeled with the 
proper documentation  
• Bed rails 
o Most patient’s bed rails may be lowered to permit access to the patient 
o Never leave the patient’s bedside while the rail is in the down position 
o Return the bed rail to the raised position observed when entering the room 
• Bedside trays 
o Trays may be repositioned to allow access to patient 
o Return the bedside tray to the position occupied when entering the room 
• Mattresses 
o Do not leave phlebotomy materials or sample collection materials in the patient bed covers 
o Do not stick needles into the mattress of any bed 
• Call Box 
o Return to position comfortable to patient 
• Patient’s Door 
o Leave open while in room with the patient 
o Ask on leaving if the patient would like the door left open or closed 
o Leave the door as requested 
• Phlebotomy carts and trays 
o Taking and working off the tray/cart in the patient’s room is mandatory 
o Exceptions include: 
▪ Patients in isolation 
▪ AM rounds when disturbing the patient is a consideration 
 
Limitations of Procedure: 
1.   Wake the patient before touching so as not to surprise 
2.   Be prepared for an unconscious or semiconscious patient to react to the pain of having a needle stick 
3.   Assess the patient’s condition and ask for holding help if thought necessary 
4.   Holding help can be provided by nursing or Venipuncture personnel 
5.   Do not ask visitors or parents of children to help hold while drawing 
6.   Ask unit personnel for the meaning of posted signs if unfamiliar to you 
 
 
REVISIONS 
03/01/2001 (created); 10/5/2011 
 
 
 
  
 
 