OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 3 
PHLR002 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLR002 
PERSONAL APPEARANCE AND BEHAVIOR 
       Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 9/7/2019 9/21/2019 9/21/2019 
Reviewed By LC 9/13/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/21/2019 NOV 10, 1983 
 
PURPOSE:  
To provide personal appearance guidelines for Venipuncture staff members 
 
POLICY:  
It is the policy of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center to define personal appearance guidelines that 
represent our image of professionalism to our patients, their families , and our community without unduly 
restricting individual employee tastes.  Dress and grooming of employees must be consistent with the safety 
and hygiene standards necessary for a health care organization. 
 
PERSONAL APPEARANCE 
A. Appearance: 
The appearance of all employees is important since it affects those with whom they come in contact.  
Your attitude and appearance not only inspire the patient’s confidence in you, but also his/her 
confidence in the laboratory and the medical center. 
 
Employees are expected to maintain good personal hygiene and to dress in a neat, clean, and 
appropriately fitted clothing while on the job.  Clothing must be in good repair. Phlebotomists are the 
“Public Relations” section of the laboratory.  It is imperative that we impress our patients by our 
attitude, dress, and manners. 
 
B. Dress Code: 
1. Standard Uniform: *Uniform should fit appropriately * 
• Employee Badges at all times 
• Lake pager (if issued) 
• Caribbean Blue scrubs with optional same color jacket.  
o Caribbean Blue Scrub top  
o Caribbean Blue pants 
o Caribbean Blue scrub jacket 
• Only white shirts may be worn under primary scrub top (includes long sleeve, turtle necks) 
o No visible print should be seen 
• Scrub suits will not be “accessorized” with other items (such as: belts, ribbons, scarf’s, etc.) 
• Civilian jackets should not be worn “on stage” 
 
2. Footwear: 
• Shoes  
o No open toed shoes are acceptable OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 3 
PHLR002 
 
 
o Clogs are acceptable (if they do not interfere safe job performance) 
o Tennis shoes/Athletic shoes are acceptable (solid color and contain only 
brand/model name) 
o High tops are not acceptable 
• Socks 
o Should be conservative and coincide with the overall appearance of the uniform 
3. Hair Standards: 
• Hair must be neat, clean, well-kept with no extreme hairstyles 
• Long hair must be worn to not cause a safety or sanitary hazard 
• Only hair colors natural to humans may be worn (i.e. blue, pink, magenta, burgundy, etc. is 
not acceptable 
• Facial hair must be neatly trimmed 
• Hats or other coverings are not allowed 
 
4. Jewelry: 
• Excessive jewelry is not permitted  
o Dangling jewelry, long earrings, noisy bracelets should not be worn due to the 
potential risk of the patient and employee 
• Tattoos and piercings (other than ear piercings) should always be covered. 
 
5. Exceptions: 
• Casual days/periods indicated by the institution 
• The following maybe worn with Caribbean Blue Scrub pants: 
o White Polo Shirts with OLOL Insignia 
o Any other Lake approved shirt  
(i.e. Hospital of the year, Donor Shirts are not permitted) 
• These garments must only be worn on the designated days 
 
C. Behavior: 
Order and noise control are important in the care of the sick.  Each employee is responsible for maintaining 
a quiet atmosphere in the medical center. 
 
Team Member behavior is defined as behavior that is in alignment with OLOL’s Mission, Core Values, 
Service Standards and Principles of Organizational Ethics that promotes mutual respect, quality, and 
safety.  Dishonesty, insubordination, misconduct, and any other behavior that distracts and negatively 
impacts the quality and safety of all individuals in the healthcare environment are considered sufficient 
grounds for dismissal. 
 
Employees are to stay in their prospective departments except on business.  They are not to accept tips 
or other gratuities from patients or visitors. 
 
D. Telephone Etiquette 
Proper telephone manners can do much to build a reputation of excellent service in any organization.  
Each person contributes to the image of OLOL by answering phones promptly, identifying themselves 
and their department, and by being courteous and respectful in telephone conversations. 
 
Additional references:    OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 3 of 3 
PHLR002 
 
 
Laboratory Dress Code Policy – Laboratory Administration  
Organizational Employee Dress and Appearance –Human Resources 
Organizational Principles and Standards for Team Member Behavior –Human Resources 
 
REVISIONS 
11/10/1983 (created); 9/7/2011 
 
 