OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 2 
PHLR005 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLR005 
PHLEBOTOMIST CERTIFICATION AND LICENSING REQUIREMENTS  
       Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 9/7/2019 9/21/2019 9/21/2019 
Reviewed By LC 9/13/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/21/2019 JAN 2001 
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish the institutional guidelines for certification and licensing requirements for Our Lady of the Lake 
Phlebotomists.   And to establish the necessity of the Louisiana Laboratory Assistant state license for the 
performance of Moderate Complexity Testing. 
 
Addresses: 
Supervisors 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists  
 
POLICY: 
• Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center’s job description for Phlebotomist, Phlebotomist Senior, 
and Phlebotomy Operations Coordinator requires that the person employed be licensed in good standing 
to perform the work requirements of the position. 
• It is mandatory at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center that all Phlebotomist positions must 
have at least one of the three certifications listed below in order to continue employment at this 
institution: 
o Phlebotomy Certification from an accredited Phlebotomy Training Program or State Licensure 
o Medical Assistant Certification from an accredited Medical Assistant Training Program 
o Laboratory Assistant State Licensure for the state of Louisiana 
 
• Louisiana state law requires that persons performing Moderate Complexity testing in Louisiana must be 
licensed as a Laboratory Assistant and be in good standing with the Louisiana State Board of Medical 
Examiners. 
• The Venipuncture Department performs the Activated Clotting Time testing, which is Moderate 
Complexity Testing. 
 
A. Phlebotomist Requirement - Full time, Part time, and PRN employees are required to: 
o Present a valid Phlebotomy Certification/License, Medical Assistant Certification, and/or a Louisiana 
Laboratory Assistant state licensure when beginning employment 
o Have a 90 to 120 - day time period from beginning employment to acquire training necessary to apply 
for a Laboratory Assistant License if Phlebotomy or Medical Assistant Certification is not available. 
o Have a 90 to 120 - day time period from beginning employment to complete an application to the 
Louisiana State Board of Medical Examiners for the Laboratory Assistant License if Phlebotomy or 
Medical Assistant Certification is not available. 
o Have, at the end of 6 months of employment, a valid Laboratory Assistant License if Phlebotomy or 
Medical Assistant Certification is not available. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 2 
PHLR005 
 
 
B. Phlebotomist Senior and Phlebotomy Operations Coordinator Requirement - Full time, Part time, and 
PRN employees are required to: 
o Present a valid Phlebotomy Certification/License, Medical Assistant Certification, and/or a Louisiana 
Laboratory Assistant state licensure when beginning employment or being promoted to position 
o MANDATORY Laboratory Assistant License for the state of Louisiana 
▪ Must have completed training and received Laboratory Assistant License prior to beginning 
employment or being promoted  
C. Personnel failing to obtain or maintain a valid Laboratory Assistant License will be referred to Human 
Resources for individual review of the employee’s ability to meet the job requirements of the position. 
 
REVISIONS 
01/2001 (created); 10/11/2011; 9/7/2019 
 
 