 
Plant Services 
   
 PS046 
Page 1 of 4 
 
Title: Lockout Tagout  
Revision Date:  
Review Date: 09/30/2021 
Reference # PS046 Origin Date: March 2018 
 
PURPOSE: 
This procedure establishes the minimum requirements for the lockout / tag out of energy sources. These 
procedures shall be used to ensure that before staff performs any servicing or maintenance activities 
where the unexpected energizing, start up or release of stored energy could occur and cause injury, all 
potential hazardous energy shall be isolated and locked / tagged out. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Affected/Other Staff –Staff whose job requires him/her to operate or use a machine or equipment on 
which servicing or maintenance is being performed under lockout or tagout, or whose job requires 
him/her to work in an area in which such servicing or maintenance is being performed.  
 
Authorized Staff –Staff who locks out or tags out a machine or piece of equipment in order to perform 
servicing or maintenance on that machine or piece of equipment.  
 
Energized – Connected to an energy source or containing residual or stored energy.  
 
Energy-Isolating Device – A mechanical device that physically prevents the transmission or release of 
energy, including but not limited to the following: a manually operated electrical circuit breaker; a 
disconnect switch; a manually-operated switch by which the conductors of a circuit can be disconnected 
from all ungrounded supply conductors and, additionally, no pole can be operated independently; a line 
valve; a block; and any similar device used to block or isolate energy. Push buttons, selector switches 
and other control circuit-type devices are not energy-isolating devices.  
 
Staff Supervisor – An individual administratively in charge of authorized staff assigned to perform 
maintenance or service requiring the use of locks or tags.  
 
Hazardous Energy – Electrical, mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic, chemical, nuclear, thermal, 
gravitational or any other form of energy that could cause injury due to the unintended motion of 
energizing, start‐up, or release of such stored or residual energy in machinery, equipment, piping, 
pipelines or process systems. 
 
Lockout – The placement of a lockout device and tag on an energy-isolating device, in accordance with 
an established procedure, that ensures the energy-isolating device and the equipment being controlled 
cannot be operated until the lockout device is removed.  
Lockout Device – A device that utilizes a positive means, such as a key-operated padlock, to hold an 
energy-isolating device in the safe position and prevent the energizing of a machine or equipment.  
  
Plant Services 
   
 PS046 
Page 2 of 4 
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) – Safety equipment used by authorized staff during the 
lockout/tagout procedures.  
 
Point of Operation – The area where the work actually takes place. It is the place where tools and 
material meet. 
 
Program Administrator – Person responsible for researching, developing, administering and evaluating 
programs in response to the identified needs of the organization. Note: A Program Administrator may 
also be a supervisor and/or authorized staff. 
 
Qualified staff – Persons capable, as determined by their knowledge and skills, of working safely on 
energized system. This capability includes familiarity with the proper use of special precautionary 
techniques, personal protective equipment, insulating and shielding materials and insulated tools. This 
capability also includes familiarity with the construction and operation of the equipment and the hazards 
involved. 
 
Tagout – The placement of a tagout device on an energy-isolating device, in accordance with an 
established procedure, to indicate that the energy-isolating device and the equipment being controlled 
may not be operated until the tagout device is removed. 
 
Tagout device – A prominent warning device with a means of attachment, which can be securely-
fastened to an energy-isolating device in accordance with an established procedure to indicate that the 
energy-isolating device and the equipment being controlled may not be operated until the tagout device 
is removed.  
 
POLICY: 
The objective of this program is to protect personnel from injury when lockout of energy is required to 
ensure the safety of those working in or near danger zones. Work will not begin until all forms of 
hazardous energy are identified and controlled to a zero hazardous energy level. 
• Lockout is required if the work being done requires a person to place any part of their body into an 
area where a danger zone exists. Locks and/or lockout devices must be attached to the energy control 
point to keep the hazardous energy from being reintroduced to the equipment while work is being 
conducted.  
• There may be multiple energy control points that affect work in a danger zone; each point must be 
identified and controlled. 
• The lockout must provide complete energy isolation, without possible override. Note: push-buttons, 
selector switches, interlocks, emergency shutoffs, software controls and other control circuit type 
devices are not energy control points and cannot be used to fulfill this program. 
• Work will not begin until all forms of hazardous energy are identified and controlled. 
• All staff and contractors must have individual locks and keys such that the individual is the only 
person who possesses the key.  
Plant Services 
   
 PS046 
Page 3 of 4 
• If multiple technicians are working on the same task, the lead technician will be the one to lockout or 
tag out the system.  Primary responsibility is vested in authorized staff for a set number of those 
working under the protection of a group lockout or tag out device (such as an operations lock). 
• When more than one crew, craft, department, etc. is involved, assignment of overall job-associated 
lockout or tag out control responsibility will be assigned to authorized staff designated to coordinate 
the affected work forces and ensure continuity of protection and each authorized staff member shall 
affix a personal lockout or tag out device to the group lockout device, group lockbox, or comparable 
mechanism when he or she begins work, and shall remove those devices when he or she stops 
working on the machine or equipment being serviced or maintained. 
• In situations where it is impossible to install a lock or apply a locking device, contact Control Room 
for consultation and direction. 
• This program does not apply to electric equipment for which electrical energy is the only energy 
source and it can be isolated and controlled by unplugging the equipment from the outlet and 
keeping the plug under the exclusive control of the staff performing the servicing or maintenance. 
Also, the program does not apply to installations under the exclusive control of electric utilities for 
the purpose of power generation, transmission and distribution. 
• When the Authorized Staff member who applied the lockout device is not available to remove it, 
they shall be contacted and instructed to return to remove it if possible. If this is not possible the 
Control Room shall be contacted for further instruction. The removal of a lockout device has serious 
consequences and must not be taken lightly.   
• Inspect/audit lockout tag out procedures annually. 
• Provide effective training as mandated for all Staffs covered by this procedure. 
• Only qualified staff may work on energized system parts or equipment that have not been de-
energized under the lockout/tagout procedures of this document for testing and troubleshooting 
purposes.  
PROCEDURES: 
The following steps are required each time lockout/tagout is performed.  
 
Preparing equipment for lockout/tagout.  
Basic procedure to de-energize equipment 
1. The Authorized Staff should review the equipment to be de-energized, to identify all forms of 
hazardous energy. 
2. Identify the area of work and the lockout/tagout restriction zone.  
3. Identify the proper control point of each source of hazardous energy. 
4. The Authorized Staff shall obtain lock(s), tag(s), and locking and/or blocking devices. Outside 
contractors shall provide their own lock(s), tag(s), and locking and/or blocking devices. 
5. Notify workers of intent to de-energize—affected staff and the Control Room must be notified by 
the Authorized Staff prior to the application of any lockout or tagout device. 
6. Begin shutdown, de-energize and dissipate any residual energy (springs, hydraulic pressure, water 
pressure, steam, flywheels, gravity, etc.) by blocking, bleeding down or other appropriate means.   
Plant Services 
   
 PS046 
Page 4 of 4 
7. Apply lockout devices to each energy source. Once the lockout device has been applied, the key 
shall be removed and remains exclusively in the Authorized Staff’s possession. 
8. Where more than one Authorized Staff member will be working on a machine or piece of 
equipment, each Authorized Staff member must apply their own lock or tag to the energy -isolation 
device. The key for each lock must be in the possession of the staff who applied the lock. 
9. Confirm the equipment has been de-energized by initiating a normal startup procedure. Ensure that 
no Authorized or Affected Staff are in the restricted area prior to attempting the restart of the 
equipment. Do not enter the machine until it is confirmed that all energy sources have been locked 
out. When verification is complete, return the machine to the neutral or OFF position. 
10. Wear the appropriate PPE. 
11. Begin work. 
 
Restoring the equipment to normal operation when service is complete.  
Basic procedure to remove lockout/tagout devices and reenergize the equipment 
1. Inspect the work area to ensure that all nonessential items, tools, etc., have been removed from 
the danger zone. 
2. Check that all the guarding and safety controls have been properly replaced. 
3. Notify Affected Staffs and ensure that all personnel are in a safe location prior to reenergizing 
the equipment. 
4. Remove locks, tags and blocking devices. 
5. Reenergize the equipment/system according to the start-up procedures specific to each piece of 
equipment. 
6. Confirm the system is operating properly and safely before returning control of the equipment 
back to any Affected Staffs. 
7. Remove and clean or dispose of PPE.  
8. Check locks, tags and lockout devices for damage or cleaning needs. Replace as needed. 
 
OUTSIDE CONTRACTORS 
Outside contractors hired by OLOL, that may be required to work on equipment containing Hazardous 
Energy, shall be required to have a documented Lockout/Tagout procedure. The outside contractor shall 
provide OLOL with a digital and hard copy of this Lockout/Tagout procedure to keep on file. The 
contractor’s Lockout/Tagout procedure shall equal or exceed the OLOL Lockout/Tagout policy and 
follow its procedures.  Outside contractors shall be required to provide their own Energy-Isolating 
Devices and PPE. 
 
REFERENCES: 
NFPA 70E – Standard for Electrical Safety in the Workplace: 2018 Edition 
OSHA Control of Hazardous Energy 29 CFR 1910.47 
 
 
. 
 
 