 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject: Missed Treatments Section: Organization 
Date of Origination: May 2004 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: November 28, 2023 Serial Code:  RC2-07 
Date of Last Review:  November 28, 2023 
 
          
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to provide a means of communication between Respiratory 
Care staff and pharmacy, nursing services and risk management, in regard to patients 
who do not receive ordered respiratory therapy procedures.  Additionally, this policy will 
establish guidelines for obtaining statistical information regarding “Missed Treatments”. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
1. Respiratory Therapy missed medication/medication errors- Any physician order 
for a nebulized respiratory medication that is not given will be entered into Safety Event Manager, 
and documented for one of the following reasons: 
  
a. Therapist Not Available (TNA) 
b. Therapist not notified 
c. Medication not available 
d. Triage Level 3 or 4 respiratory staffing 
e. other (not refused) 
 
2. Refused Respiratory Therapy Treatment- Any treatment that has been ordered   
by a physician with privileges at Our Lady of the Lake RMC to be delivered by 
Respiratory Therapy that the patient or patient family member refuses. 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
Respiratory Therapy missed medication/medication error will be charted in patient 
EMR and reported to Pharmacy and Nursing.  The therapist responsible for the affected 
patient will notify the nurse caring for that patient and the respiratory supervisor/charge 
RT  
 
Refused Respiratory Therapy Treatment- Patients have the right to refuse therapy.  
This must be documented in patient’s EMR.   Any time a patient refuses a treatment, the 
patient will be educated on the benefits of the treatment and the possible consequences of 
missing the treatment. The nurse caring for the patient will be notified that the patient has 
refused their treatment and that the therapist has educated the patient.   The physician 
caring for the patient will be contacted for any patient refusing 3 treatments in a 24-hour 
period so the physician can reevaluate the need for therapy.   
 
 
 
Respiratory Therapy treatment schedule: Respiratory therapy will perform all procedures and administer all medications on the 
ordered frequency per workflow according to medical records and task list: 
 
Q2-  
Q3-  
Q4-  
Q6-  
Q8-  
Q12-  
BID  
QID  
TID  
While Awake:   
PRN as needed  
Stat within one hour 
 
 
 
 