 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject: Patient Documentation  
Date of Origination: October 1980 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: August 24, 2022  Serial Code:  RC2-04 
Reviewed: August 24, 2022  
         
Purpose  
The purpose of this policy is to outline the therapist’s responsibilities regarding patient 
documentation. 
 
Respiratory Care Patient Record    
A. All respiratory documentation will occur in the Electronic Medical Record 
(EMR). 
B. After service is rendered, the therapist will chart the following. 
1. Record the necessary information relating to gas therapy. 
2. Record the necessary information relating to the treatment modalities 
provided for the patient and tolerance of therapy. 
3. Record and patient assessment information. This may include but is not 
limited to the following: 
• Respiratory rate 
• Heart rate 
• Breathing pattern 
• Breath sounds 
C. All documentation should be performed in a timely manner. It is unacceptable 
for an employee to leave the hospital without completing all patient 
documentation.  An employee not completing all patient documentation will be 
subject to counseling. 
 
Ventilatory Charting 
A. Documentation of mechanical ventilator should occur at least once every two 
(2) to four (4) hours based on patient acuity and RT workload.  
1. Record the time when ventilator was initiated. 
2. Record the necessary assessment information for the each ventilator   
            checks. 
3. Record arterial blood gases under the current time period. 
  4. Bipap/airway clearance/intubation/treatment, etc. 
 
Downtime Documentation 
In the event the EMR goes down, the therapists will document on department-approved 
downtime forms for all patient documentation. The Respiratory Care Notes, blood gas form, 
and ventilator flowsheets will be available for charting. The supervisor will be responsible to 
notify all therapists and have the downtime forms available.  All paper documentation must be 
completed, and the information must be legible including signature and credentials. The therapists must also place a patient sticker in the upper right-hand corner of the page and 
place the documentation in the patient’s paper chart. 