 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Department Organization 
Subject:  Time and Attendance  
Date of Origination: August 1981 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: October 3, 2023 Serial Code: RC2-26 
Date of Last Review:  October 3, 2023 
         
PURPOSE: 
To stipulate the shifts, call-in responsibilities, and means of recording worked and benefit 
time. 
 
POLICIES: 
The starting times for the shifts in Respiratory Care are as follows: 
Day Shift –7:00 am (all except ASC) 
• Lake Ascension – Start 5:45 am 
Night 12 hour shift –  7:00 pm  (all except ASC) 
• Lake Ascension – 5:45 pm 
Evening shift –3:00 pm (all except ASC) 
• Lake Ascension – no defined evening shift 
Night shift –11:00 pm (all except ASC) 
 
1. Supervisor’s-Must be in the department 30 min prior to the above times. The 
ending times for the shifts in Respiratory Care are as follows:  
Day 12 – shift ends at 7:30 pm. 
Night 12 – shift ends at 7:30 am. 
Evening shift – shift ends at 11:30 pm. 
Night shift – shift ends at 7:30 am. 
Day shift – shift ends at 3:30 pm. 
2. Manager of each department may offer special shifts not within the above 
guidelines to cover time frames of higher workload or other reasons.  
3. Report between shifts will commence as soon as each shift supervisor of the off-
going and on-coming shifts concur that everything is in order. Report for ICU 
patients will be given in designated area near the patient’s room or bedside. . 
4. STAT or ASAP treatments will be given by the off going shift until 7am for Night 
shift and 7 pm for Day shift (for 12 hour shifts), also 3pm for Day shift, 11pm for 
Evening shift, and 7am for night shift (for 8 hour shifts).  
5. Employees who know they will be late should call the shift supervisor and inform 
him/her of their approximate arrival time.  Upon arriving in the department, the 
late employee should notify the shift supervisor that he/she has arrived. An 
employee that is habitually tardy may result in disciplinary action as stated in the 
policy HR.06.002. For the respiratory department, an employee may be 
considered tardy if more than one minute late for the scheduled shift start time. 
This is need necessary for operational efficiency in reducing disruptions during 
huddle and efficiency at the start of each shift.  6. Employees who will be unable to report as scheduled due to illness or accident 
must call the shift supervisor as soon as they are aware of the need for their 
absence, but not less than 2 hours prior to their schedule reporting time. After the 
first “call in” on a weekend shift (Friday, Saturday, and Sunday) any subsequent 
“call in” on a weekend shift may require the employee to make up the weekend 
shift on another weekend shift. This will be determined by the supervisor 
according to staffing needs.  In effort to minimize overtime, this may require 
manipulating the scheduled weekday shifts. Any “call in” occurring on a hospital 
recognized holiday, including Christmas Eve and New Year’s Eve may require 
the employee to work an additional holiday over the next calendar year.  
7. The shift supervisor will record on the supervisor's checklist those individual(s) 
who are late, sick or absent. 
8. Employees are responsible for using the Automated Time Management (ATM) 
system to record hours worked, holidays, PTO, EIT, and days off. Kronos should 
be used frequently, to check the accuracy and completeness of clocked time. The 
employee is responsible for errors in their clocked time if they have reasonable 
opportunity to check and correct it. Errors caused by the employee or his/her 
failure to check for and correct errors will not prompt the issuance of a special 
check. The time will be included on the next regular payroll. Details on the 
operation of the ATM and TCIS systems are in the Human Resources Policy and 
Procedure manual on TeamLink. In accordance with the hospital policy, 
disciplinary action may result in habitual errors or missed clocks in the ATM 
within a rolling calendar year time frame.   
9. Only the shift supervisor, Director or Manager have the authority to change the 
schedule. Changes made without the involvement and agreement of one of the 
above named individuals will not be honored. Swaps between individuals should 
be appropriately documented on the schedule and initialed by the approving 
supervisor. If an employee calls in on 2 shifts that were a swap shift, this 
employee will not be allowed to swap scheduled shifts for six months.  
10. Excused absent days can only be made up when there is a need for  coverage 
where otherwise overtime would have to be paid within the department, 
regardless of shift. 
11. Employees may need to call in due to illness, child’s illness or family emergency.  
These are the only excused call in reasons.  All unexcused call ins/absences may 
result in disciplinary action. Team members with a call in pattern or excessive call 
ins will require disciplinary action.  The disciplinary action taken will be 
recommended as defined in the policy HR. 06.002.  The first offense of a “no call, 
no show’ will result in the first level of disciplinary action and the 2nd offense will 
move to the final written notice level. A “no call, no show” will be defined as a 
shift that is scheduled, and the employee does not report to work and does not call 
the supervisor within the first 4 hours of the shift.   This will be monitored with a 
rolling calendar, which will be audited biweekly by a supervisor. Annual 
evaluations will reflect excessive call-ins and further administrative action may be 
taken.   
12. For any instance in which seniority is utilized for determining eligibility, 
excessive call-ins in the preceding 12 months will reduce the seniority factor to 1 year.  In the event that competing members both had their seniority factor 
decreased to one year it will revert to the actual date for seniority.  FMLA may 
not be counted towards excessive call-ins. 
13. Employees must use PTO for all excused absences.  In the event an employee 
does not have PTO available this will be handled at the discretion of the director.  
Leave of absence time and pay will be utilized in accordance with hospital policy.  
All unexcused absences will be clocked in as ABN (Absent not excused).   
14. Vacation may be denied if there is not enough accrued PTO to cover the dates 
requested.  For employees with a counselling for attendance within the last 12 
months, requests for scheduled PTO will be denied if there is not enough PTO to 
cover the requested time off. For all full time and part time employees with 
benefits, PTO must be utilized for all unscheduled time off.  This is in accordance 
with hospital policy. 
15. When a team member is “on call”, the team member is expected to report to the 
hospital when called. If the team member fails to answer the phone, after three 
times called, the event will be considered a “no call no show”. Disciplinary action 
will be applied and consistent with this type of event. 
 
 
 
 