 
 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Blood Gas Lab 
Subject:  CLIA Compliance of Blood Gas Labs  
Date of Origination: October 1993  
Date of Last Revision: March 2,2023 Serial Code: RC2-05 
Date of Last Review:  March 2, 2023 Signature:  
          
POLICY: 
The Blood Gas Laboratories operated by Respiratory Services at Our Lady of the Lake 
   Regional Medical Center will remain in compliance with a ll requirements of the Clinical 
Laboratory Improvement Act of 1988 (CLIA ’88), and to stipulate which individuals fill the 
CLIA-required roles. The lab also complies with all governmental regulations. 
 
PROCEDURE 
A. Blood Gas Lab at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
1. In accordance with CLIA '88, this lab is and shall remain registered with the 
Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) as a covered laboratory 
providing regulated tests as Moderate Complexity Laboratories. 
2. The CLIA number for the Blood Gas Lab at Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center is 19D0878491. The CLIA number for Our Lady of the Lake 
Ascension Campus is 19D0711456.  The CLIA number for Our Lady of the 
Lake Children’s Hospital campus is 19D2170428. The CLIA certificate 
received from CMS will be displayed in the main lab at each site and will 
correspond with the complexity of testing performed in the lab.  
3. The College of American Pathologists (CAP) accredit s the Blood Gas 
Laboratory at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center.  Its CAP 
accreditation number is 2007005. The CAP accreditation number for OLOL-
Ascension Campus is 3044402. The CAP accreditation number for OLOL 
Children’s Hospital campus is 8617099.  The lab will ensure compliance with 
all conditions of CAP approval .  The lab will be in compliance with the 
following terms of accreditation: (CAP will be notified when) 
a. An investigation of the lab by government entity or oversight agency 
or adverse media attention related to laboratory performance; 
notification no later than two working days. 
b. It finds itself subject of a validation inspection. 
c. Discovery of actions by lab personnel that violate national, state or 
local regulations.  
d. Change in laboratory test menu. 
e. Change in location, ownership or directorship of the lab (no later than 
30 days or 2 days if unexpected). 
f. Provision of a trained inspection team comparable in size and scope if 
requested by CAP at least once every two-year accreditation period.  
4. Dr. Anthony Harton is the Laboratory Director of the blood gas lab at OLOL 
North Baton Rouge, OLOL Livingston and OLOL Main Campus. Dr. Tracy 
Rauch is the Laboratory Director of the blood gas lab at OLOL Children’s  
 
Hospital. Dr. Jennifer Jastram-Belcher is the Laboratory Director of the blood 
gas lab at OLOL Ascension.  
5. All instruments used in the Blood Gas Lab are categorized by HCFA as 
moderate-complexity devices, and are operated in accordance with 
manufacturers' instructions. 
6. The laboratory is enrolled and participating in an approved Proficiency 
Testing (PT) program operated by the College of American Pathologists 
(CAP).  All necessary releases to allow CAP to report PT results to HCFA 
have been executed. 
7. The laboratory operates under the guidelines of the above regulatory bodies, 
the policy and procedure manual and manufactures recommendations.  All 
guidelines are detailed in the policy and procedure manual.    
8. The policy and procedure manual will be available electronically or physically 
in each area where blood gas instruments are housed and reviewed biennially 
by the Laboratory Director of the Blood Gas Lab.  Electronic version of the 
policy and procedure manual can be accessed through TeamLink home page.  
If in the event of an information system or network downtime, physical copies 
of the policy and procedure manual will be made available to all team 
members. 
9. All analyzers are used in accordance with FDA recommendations. 