 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  Uniform Dress Code Section: Organization 
Date of Origination: October 1980 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: August 24, 2022  Serial Code: RC2-10 
Date of Last Review:  August 24, 2022   
 
DRESS POLICY: 
The overall hospital dress & appearance policy is covered in Policy HR.06.004 and 
IC2005a.   
 
A. The hospital nametag should always be worn in a manner that is legible by 
patients and visitors.  This should be on a collar, lapel, lanyard, pocket, etc. that is 
clearly visible and above the waist of the team member. 
 
B. The uniform for staff therapists, Supervisors, and the Pulmonary Function/Blood 
Gas Therapist consists of black scrubs, either plain or with white or pink trim.  A 
matching Black or white Lab jacket, white lab coat, or hospital logo fleece 
sweater as approved by the director is optional.  Any variation of this must be 
approved by the director prior to being worn. T-Shirts/Sweatshirts may be worn 
under the scrub top. They must be white, pink, grey or black. At the Children’s 
Hospital, the uniform scrub top may include pediatric design and be of different 
colors.  
The black scrub uniform does not apply to the Director.  This individual is to wear 
appropriate business attire.  If the Director enters a clinical area to provide patient 
care, he/she should wear clean scrubs or a clean lab coat over his/her street 
clothes. 
 
C. As stipulated in the hospital policy, jeans are not permitted. 
 
D.  All aspects of the hospital policy including Tattoos, Jewelry and other items must 
be adhered to.  
 
E. Comfortable closed toe walking shoes that are consistent with the hospital policy 
and do not detract from the uniform are acceptable. 
 
F.  This policy is designed to specify specific guidelines for the respiratory 
department’s uniform attire.  It is in no way intended to supersede hospital policy 
and all aspects of the hospital policy must always be adhered to. 
 