 
Respiratory Therapy: Oxygen Therapy Protocol 
 
Approved by Respiratory Informatics and PAC  
August 2016 
 
1 Formatted: Left
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  Oxygen Therapy Protocol Section: Patient Care Therapy 
Date of Origination: January 1996 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision:  May 17, 2017September 1, 2015 Serial Code: RC7-18 
Date of Last Review:  May 28, 2018 May 17, 2017September 1, 2015  
 
I. Purpose: To implement a physician-approved plan for the management of the patient’s 
supplemental oxygen in order to provide oxygen therapy to patients. 
 
II. Protocol:  Specific guidelines for the Respiratory Care Practitioner to utilize the 
following protocol to evaluate, treat, and monitor appropriate oxygen administration for 
all non-mechanically ventilated patients.   
A. Patient Type - all patients currently receiving oxygen will be evaluated 
B. Clinical Area- All patient care areas. 
C. Oxygen therapy devices - Oxygen therapy should be started at the lowest possible 
levels to maintain SpO2 92% or SpO2 >89% for chronic pulmonary disease, unless 
otherwise ordered and specified by the physician. The respiratory therapist will 
choose the appropriate oxygen delivery device for the patient according to FiO2 
need and inspiratory flow. Devices include the following: 
a. Low flow nasal cannula 
b. High flow nasal cannula 
c. Venturi mask 
d. Non-rebreathing mask 
e. Trach collar 
f. Face tent  
g. Aerosol mask 
  
III. Indications for Oxygen Therapy  
A. Indications for Oxygen Therapy include: 
a. Documented hypoxemia (PaO2 <60mmHg or SpO2 as defined below) 
b. An acute care situation usually associated with hypoxia (e.g. pulmonary 
edema, drug overdose, or carbon monoxide poisoning). 
c. Clinical signs or symptoms of hypoxia (e.g. tachycardia, tachypnea, dyspnea, 
cyanosis, diaphoresis, confusion, anemia, or chest pain). 
d. Acute myocardial infraction with continuing pain, arrhythmias, or congestive 
heart failure. 
e. Immediate post-operative period (Post Anesthesia Room) until the patient is 
awake and vital signs are stable. 
f. Adult respiratory distress syndrome 
g. Acute pulmonary embolism 
h. Acute asthma 
Formatted: Font: Not Bold
Formatted: Indent: Before:  -0.3", Numbered + Level: 1 +
Numbering Style: I, II, III, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment: Right
+ Aligned at:  0.05" + Indent at:  0.3"
Formatted: Indent: Before:  -0.05"
Formatted: Indent: Before:  -0.3", Tab stops:  -1", Left
Formatted: Snap to grid
Formatted: Automatically adjust right indent when grid is
defined, Numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, …
+ Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:  0.19" + Indent
at:  0.44", No widow/orphan control, Adjust space between
Latin and Asian text, Adjust space between Asian text and
numbers
Formatted: Complex Script Font: 10 pt, Don't snap to grid
Formatted: Indent: Before:  0.56",  No bullets or numbering 
Respiratory Therapy: Oxygen Therapy Protocol 
 
Approved by Respiratory Informatics and PAC  
August 2016 
 
2 Formatted: Left
i. Acute exacerbations of COPD 
j. Acute pneumonia 
k. Newborn respiratory distress syndrome 
l. Other medical/surgical emergencies including: 
1. Head and blunt chest trauma 
2. Hepatic failure 
3. Acute pancreatitis 
4. Shock - septic, hemorrhagic, cardiogenic, etc. 
5. Post-seizure 
6. Aspiration pneumonitis 
  
IV.  Clinical Responsibilities: 
A. Adult patients  
a. Initiation of Protocol:  All patients admitted to the hospital with oxygen 
orders will be placed on the protocol unless the physician states otherwise. 
Once the initial order received, the respiratory therapist will assess the 
patient, and the therapist will decide which oxygen delivery device (if any) 
will be used, based on the protocol.  Any patient with SpO2 < 92% may be 
placed on O2 starting with nasal cannula @ 2 lpm or as needed            to 
maintain SpO2 > or = 92%. 
b. Titration - The respiratory therapist will titrate the flow rate and FiO2 to 
maintain SpO2 >92% or for patients with a diagnosis of COPD, the 
acceptable SpO2 will be >89% or as specified by the physician. During the 
titration period, if the patient exhibits persistent difficulty maintaining 
acceptable SpO2 > or = 92%, (or as per specific SpO2 physician order) the 
respiratory care practitioner will immediately place the patient back on their 
last FiO2 setting, which met criteria. The result will be documented in the 
patients’ EMR. 
c. Weaning: Whenever weaning a patient on supplemental oxygen, always wait 
a minimum of 15 minutes after any FIO2 changes before performing a 
follow-up pulse oximeter reading. Once SpO2 is > or = to 92% or to SpO2 
as specified by physician on room air for 24 hours, the order oxygen may be 
discontinued. The patients may have their oxygen therapy discontinued if 
the following criteria are met: 
1. Able to maintain SpO2 > 92% on room air for 24 hours (or specific 
SpO2 per physician orders) 
2. Vital signs have remained stable.  
3. While a patient is receiving oxygen therapy, a SpO2 will be 
performed at least once per day, and more often as a patient’s 
condition warrants it. These will be documented in the patient’s 
EMR. 
d. Patients with home oxygen. The oxygen protocol will apply until the oxygen 
is weaned to the prescribed home setting. 
Formatted: Font: Bold, Complex Script Font: 12 pt, Snap to
grid
Formatted: Indent: Before:  1.44",  No bullets or numbering 
Respiratory Therapy: Oxygen Therapy Protocol 
 
Approved by Respiratory Informatics and PAC  
August 2016 
 
3 Formatted: Left
  
B. Pediatric patients 
a. Initiation of protocol -All pediatric patients on respiratory therapy will be 
monitored to maintain SpO2 greater than 94% or as specified by physician 
orders.  
b. Titration- Adjustments in FiO2 will be made by the Respiratory Therapist, 
while maintaining SpO2 at or above.  The lowest possible flow will be used 
for the above criteria.  Optimally, a SpO2 will be obtained prior to initiation 
of O2 therapy.  If during titration the patient is unable to maintain an 
acceptable SpO2 of 95%, return to previous liter flow that met criteria 
c. Weaning – Oxygen therapy will be weaned as tolerated for SpO2 > 94%.  
The patient may have his/her O2 discontinued if patient able to maintain 
SpO2 and status remains stable.   
  
V. Guidelines/Warnings: 
A. If O2 requirements reach > 50% physician/nurse will be notified of SpO2 and O2   
setting.  If patient has history of COPD, SpO2 should be maintained > or = 89% or 
as specified by physician 
 
B. Do not continue weaning process if patient develops: 
a. A pulse greater than 120 bpm, or if adjustment of FI02 results in a pulse 
increase of 20 bpm 
b. Significant EKG change, e.g. onset of arrhythmias or ischemic morphology 
c. A change in sensorium occurs, e.g. confusion, lethargy, etc. Notify physician 
of change in patient’s condition 
d. If patient demonstrates an increase in work of breathing 
e. Clinical signs and symptoms of low oxygenation as listed above. 
 
 NOTE:  If patient is not tolerating FIO2 titration, procedure, return patient to previous 
FiO2, as clinically indicated, reassess patient, and continue the titration procedure if 
possible. If FiO2> 50%, it is required to contact physician for further instructions.  
 
          
 
 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to implement a physician -approved plan for the 
management of the patient on supplemental oxygen. However, it must be noted that this 
protocol should not take precedence over good clinical judgement. 
 
POLICY: 
Formatted: Indent: Before:  0.86",  No bullets or
numbering, Tab stops: Not at  0.86"
Formatted: Indent: Before:  0.86",  No bullets or
numbering, Tab stops: Not at  0.86"
Formatted: Indent: Before:  0.31", Tab stops: Not at  -1" 
Respiratory Therapy: Oxygen Therapy Protocol 
 
Approved by Respiratory Informatics and PAC  
August 2016 
 
4 Formatted: Left
A. Initiation of Protocol 
All patients admitted to the hospital with oxygen orders will be placed on the 
oxygen protocol unless the physician states otherwise. The protocol will be in 
place upon the input of oxygen orders. Once the initial order is received, the 
respiratory therapist will assess the patient, and the therapist will decide which 
oxygen delivery device (if any) will be used  to maintain an SpO2 >92% . Pulse 
Oximetry will be used to determine the SpO2 measurement. W hen oxygen 
devices are changed or flow settings and FiO2 settings change per protocol, the 
respiratory therapist may modify the original oxygen order per protocol.  If the 
FiO2 requirements consistently increase and/or exceeds 50%, the physician will 
be notified of the patient’s oxygen requirements.   
 
B. Discontinued Oxygen Therapy 
Once the patient has been weaned to room  air per protocol, and remains on room 
air for 24 hours and maintains an SpO2 >92%, then the oxygen protocol will be 
discontinued.  
 
C. Oxygen Protocol and COPD Patients 
Once the order for oxygen has been placed in Cerner by the physician, the patient 
will be placed on oxygen at the prescribed rate, and the respiratory therapist will 
titrate the flow rate and FiO2 to maintain SpO2 >92%.  For patients with a 
diagnosis of COPD, the acceptable SpO2 will be >89%.  
 
D. Oxygen Protocol and Patients on Home Oxygen 
All patients who are currently using home oxygen will have a single room air 
pulse oximeter reading performed. In the event that the room air saturation is 
greater than 92%, the physician will be notified. The oxygen protocol will apply 
until the oxygen is weaned to the prescribed home setting.  
 
Whenever weaning a patient on supplemental oxygen, always wait a minimum of 15 
minutes after any FIO2 changes before performing a follow -up pulse oximeter 
reading.          