 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  Sputum Collection  Section: Therapy 
Date of Origination: September 1991 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: May 29, 201October 21, 20218 Serial Code: RC7-23 
Date of Last Review:  Mar 1, 2019  October 21, 2021 
          
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to provide guidelines on the collection and handling of 
sputum specimens for Laboratory analysis. 
 
IMPLEMENTATION: 
Fundamental points 
1. The appropriate container depends upon the type of test ordered, and should be 
provided by nursing: 
A. AFB uses a double chamber container; 
B. Pneumocystis carinii uses a double chamber container; 
BC. C&S, Fungus or Gram Stain uses a simple sterile container; 
 
D. Cytology requires a container with a fixative solution. 
2. The container must not be contaminated. The patient's face, hands, lips, or hair 
must not touch the inside of the container or the top. 
3. An early morning specimen is preferred, especially for AFB. If initiation of 
antibiotic or other therapy will delay awaiting the collection, however, it may not 
be appropriate or possible to wait until the next morning. 
34. The importance of obtaining a true, deep good-quality sample cannot be 
overstated. Submission of a poor qualitypoor-quality sample made up of saliva, or 
contaminated through mishandling can result in delayed treatment, misdiagnosis, 
or useless results from an expensive procedure. 
45. Delay in submitting the sample to the lab after collected can result in failure to 
detect a pathogen. Delays following collection MUST BE AVOIDED. 
 
Process 
 
1. Simple sputum collection is generally the responsibility of the nursing staff caring 
for the patient. Occasionally, however, respiratory may become involved in the 
collection process. This occurs primarily as a result of either: 
A. specific physician order for respiratory to collect 
B. inability of the patient to spontaneously produce a sample 
2. If nursing is unable to obtain the sample, a physician order for sputum induction 
must be placed for respiratory to collect along with an order for hypertonic saline. 
This is understood to include authorization to induce the sample using protocols 
described in the separate Sputum Induction procedure. 
3. Once a sputum induction order for respiratory to collect the sample has been 
received, the order is entered into the EMR. 
4. When the order is received and confirmed, the therapist should acquire the 
necessary respiratory equipment and proceed to the patient's room. The patient 
Formatted: Heading 2, Indent: First line:  0"
Formatted: Normal, Indent: First line:  0.5"
Formatted: Body Textshould be told what is to be done and the reason for this sample collection. The 
patient should be asked to rinse their mouth with plain water prior to sample 
collection. 
5. The therapist should explain the procedure to the patient prior to the sample 
collection.  The first effort should be to ask the patient to spontaneously produce 
the sputum sample. If the patient is successful, the sample should be collected in 
an appropriate container, labeled, and immediately taken to the nurses’ station 
where sample is sent/transported transport to the lab to complete the order. The 
therapist's obligation is then complete. 
6. If the patient is unable to spontaneously produce the sample, the therapist should 
proceed to induce the sample using the separately described Sputum Induction 
protocol. OAgain, once this is successful, the sample should be expectorated into 
an appropriate container, labeled, and taken to the nurses’ station where sample is 
sent/transported transport to the lab to complete the order. 
7. If Sputum Induction is not successful, physician should be notified for further 
instruction. 
suctioning for the sample is an option, but the nursing unit must obtain a 
specific physician order authorizing suctioning. Once an order has been 
obtained, the nursing unit should obtain the necessary suction equipment and 
supplies including a suction machine and Lukens suction traps. 
8. Once the order is obtained, the therapist will suction the patient according 
to the Suctioning policy. Once the sample has been successfully collected by 
suctioning, the Lukens trap should be labeled with the patient's identification 
information and taken to the nursing desk for transport to the lab. 
9. If the sample cannot be obtained spontaneously, and suctioning is not an 
option, and the patient feels they can obtain the sample later, the container 
may be left at the bedside (Cytology container should not be left at bedside). 
The patient must be instructed in the following points: 
A. Rinse their mouth prior to producing the sample 
B. The inside surfaces of the container MUST NOT BE TOUCHED or 
contaminated 
C. Once successful in collecting the sample, the nurse must be called 
IMMEDIATELY. Delay can result in the sample becoming unviable before 
reaching the lab, resulting in missed diagnosis and possibly repeated 
sampling. 
Formatted: Indent: Before:  0.75", First line:  0"
Formatted: Indent: Before:  0.75",  No bullets or
numbering