 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject: Airway Clearance Section:  Therapy 
Date of Origination: October 1980 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: February 19, 2019 Serial Code: RC7-27 
Date of Last Review:  Mar 1, 2019June 29, 2021  
 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to outline the process for performing chest physical therapy 
(CPT). 
POLICY 
A. Airway clearance includes orders for the following: Chest PT, Vest,   flutter or IPV.  
The ordering of multiple modalities will not result in an increased frequency.  
Example: IPV and Vest are ordered QID. The therapies will be alternated.  The 
patient would receive two IPV and two Vest therapies in a 24- hour period.  In no 
case will we double up on the therapy (perform two modalities at the same time).  
Airway clearance therapy can be ordered no more frequent than q4 in ICU and QID 
on the floors. Airway clearance therapy will not be performed during sleeping 
hours, except in the critical care areas and areas where ventilator patients are 
maintained. 
B. Airway clearance therapy is only performed by physician order. 
C. In non-ICU adult patients, airway clearance therapy will only be performed on 
patients who meet the following criteria. 
1. Confirmed diagnoses of bronchiectasis, cystic fibrosis, or lobar atelectasis 
diagnosed via CXR within 72 hours. 
2. Indicated by a medically approved pathway. 
Note: In the event that the patient does not meet these criteria, the airway clearance 
therapy order will be discontinued by the therapist in the EMR “per policy”.   
D. In regard to non-ICU pediatric patients, the following guidelines will be followed. 
1. Aairway clearance therapy may be ordered no more frequently than QID, this 
will only be performed on the respiratory QID schedule. Airway clearance 
therapy will not be performed during sleeping hours, except in the critical care 
areas and areas where ventilator patients are maintained. 
2. Airway clearance therapy will be performed only on patients with the following 
diagnoses. 
a. atelectasis 
b. cystic fibrosis 
c. bronchiectasis 
d. chronic aspiration syndromes 
e. confirmed mucus plugging 
f. ineffective cough due to neuromuscular disease 
 