Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Volume 4 
Subject:  Team member education and competency Section: Blood Gas Lab 
evaluation Signature: 
Date of Origination: 25 October 2010  
Date of Last Revision: June 30, 2021 Serial Code: RC9-32 
Date of Last Review:  March 25, 2024  
          
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
 The purpose of this policy is to outline the ongoing education and requirements for competency 
assessment of all team members on drawing and sampling blood in addition to the process for 
reporting blood gas results.  Documentation of competency assessment will be completed for all team 
member prior to performing tests. 
 
POLICY: 
1. There will be ongoing education surrounding the blood gas lab and its operations for all team 
members.  
2. All staff will satisfactorily demonstrate competency in all aspects of testing and knowledge 
of the following, this listing is not all inclusive and items may be added at any time by the 
respiratory care director or lab director:  
a. Direct observations of routine patient test performance, including patient identification 
and preparation; and specimen collection, handling, processing and testing 
b. Monitoring, recording, interpretation, and reporting of results including, as applicable, 
critical results, and identifying results outside of analytical measurement range with 
proper documentation  
c. Review of test results, quality control records, proficiency testing results and 
preventive maintenance records 
d. Direct observation of performance of instrument maintenance and function checks 
e. Assessment of test performance through testing previously analyzed specimens, 
internal blind samples or external proficiency testing samples 
f. Evaluation of problem-solving skills  
3. Competency assessment will include written test, testing previously analyzed specimens, 
internal blind testing samples or external proficiency testing samples. The samples will 
include but not limited to, calibration verification material, external quality  controls, and 
proficiency samples.               
4. Competencies must be assessed by a Technical Consultant.  
a. Technical Consultants must have a bachelor’s degree in  respiratory therapy, 
cardiopulmonary, chemical, physical, biological, clinical laboratory science, or medical technology from an accredited institution, with at least two years of training 
and/or experience in nonwaived testing.  
b. Technical Consultants will complete a competency training (Doc 53 -63) prior to 
assessing team members; this would be a one-time training.  
5. For new team members, competency will be assessed during orientation, semiannually after 
the initial training, then annually every year thereafter at each laboratory location where 
testing is performed. Upon completion of this initial competency, the team member will have 
demonstrated competence in the procedure, analysis of sample, and in the review of results. 
Once the initial competency has been completed and competence is demonstrated, supervision 
for testing will no longer be required. Staff will continue to be assessed as part of their annual 
competency for the length of their employment. 
6. Staff that fail to demonstrate adequate competency must undergo individual training and must 
satisfy this competency prior to being allowed to perform unsupervised testing.  In the event 
that a staff member cannot satisfy this competency the department will reevaluate their job 
description as to if the team member should be reassigned or terminated.  
7. It is a requirement of licensure that all therapists acquire a minimum of 10 continuing 
education units annually.  This is in addition to our annual training that is lab specific as well 
as annual competencies. 
8. Department Director, Department Manager, and the Blood Gas Lab Supervisor will be 
required to complete the Respiratory Care Technical Consultant – Compliance & CLIA Roles 
Training Competency; this will be a one-time training.  
   
  
 