 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   
Subject:  Installation and validation of New               Section: Blood Gas Lab  
Instruments or New Analytes  
Date of Origination: July 10, 2013 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision: July 11, 2023 Serial Code: RC9-35 
       Reviewed: July 11, 2023 
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY:    
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to define the process for initiating and validating a new 
instrument or new analytes in the blood gas lab prior to implementation. 
 
POLICY: 
A. For each analyte tested, the lab must have data on accuracy, precision, and 
reportable range for the initiation of a new instrument. This testing will be 
conducted by multiple team members of the laboratory personnel. A method 
performance validation protocol will be written for the validation of each 
instrument.  This protocol will outline the details of the validation and will 
define the responsible parties for the validation process.  The laboratory 
director will review and approve the protocol prior to the implementation of 
the instrument prior to patient testing.  This protocol will be within the 
guidelines of this policy and is attached as an addendum (RC9-35-VP) 
B. For the initiation of a new analyzer or analyte the following methods will be 
utilized by laboratory personnel:  
1. Quality Control: QC ranges are established by the manufacturer. Precision 
of the instrument will be demonstrated by analyzing 20 QC data points for 
3 levels for a simple study. A complex study will demonstrate precision by 
variability of the user analyzing 3 levels of QC over a time frame of 20 
consecutive days. For the EPOC analyzer, 3 levels of QC will be ran for 
31 consecutive days. QC will be reviewed and analyzed to determine 
precision of the instrument. 
2. The Analytical Measurement Range will be determined by the following 
method: The initial determination of the Analytical Measurement Range 
will be determined by analyzing calibration verification materials of all 
levels.  The Low AMR value will be calculated by taking the highest of 
the lowest range values for each analyte, then subtract 15% of each 
analyte. Record each analyte value as the low Analytical Measurement 
range. For the High AMR, take the lowest of the high range of each 
analyte and add 15% to each value. Record this as the high Analytical Measurement Range. If the calculated ranges exceed the manufacturer’s 
reportable range, then the manufacturer’s reportable range will be utilized. 
The Analytical Measurement Range will be posted in the Blood Gas Lab 
at each analyzer. The process for analyzing calibration verification 
materials is defined in policy RC9-10.   
3. Correlation Studies: 20 patient samples will be analyzed on the new 
instrument and compared to an instrument already in use of the same 
manufacturer when applicable. If manufacturer changes, one machine will 
be correlated with the old manufacturer. This “master machine” will be 
compared to any other machines of the same manufacturer. Each analyte 
will be documented, compared and validated. Each analyte will be within 
ten percent of the analyte it is compared to for verification of accuracy. 
The COHb and MetHb will be within two points of each other for 
verification of accuracy. Lactate will be within one point of each other for 
verification of accuracy. A Representative from the manufacturer will 
compile a report which analyzes results to validate instrument.  The 
validation report will be reviewed by the laboratory director.  Patient 
correlation studies will be used to determine accuracy of the instrument. 
4. Validation of normal range for the initiation of a new instrument will be 
verified by conducting a study or utilizing a referenced study, or citing a 
published text book reference. For a normal range study, a sample size of 
20 patients will be obtained, analyzed, and documented for review.  The 
results will be compiled to verify that the performance of the new 
instrument is within 10% of the normal range.  Patient condition will be 
considered with review of each blood gas result. 
C. Data from the above components will be reviewed by the Respiratory Director or lab 
designee and the Laboratory Director as documented on the Instrument 
Implementation Checklist prior to implementing the new analyzer.   
D. Validation studies will be kept on file for the life of the instrument/method plus two 
years.   
 
Validation of Back-up Blood Gas Analyzers 
If all blood gas analyzers a t Lake Livingston, Lake North Baton Rouge , Lake Ascension 
and Children’s Hospital campuses are not operational, an analyzer from main campus will 
be utilized until service can be restored. Once an analyzer arrives at its location , 
revalidation will occur which will include calibration, running all three levels of internal 
quality control, and running three levels of external quality control three times. Upon return 
to main campus, the analyzer will be revalidated by means of calibration, running all three 
levels of internal quality control, and running three levels of external quality control three 
times. Calibration and three levels of internal quality control material will ensure accuracy. 
Precision will be determined by running all three levels of external quality controls three 
times. 
 
 
 