 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Volume 4 
Subject:  Calibration Verification Material Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Origination: March 1995 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision: December 6, 2023 Serial Code: RC9-10A 
         Reviewed: January 31, 2024 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to verify the calibration of blood gas, electrolyte and glucose 
systems throughout the patient reportable range.  
 
EQUIPMENT: 
A. Blood gas/electrolyte analyzer  
B. Calibration Verification Material (3 ampules of each level) 
C. 18 gauge needle with 3 cc syringe 
D. CVM data collection and recording form  
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Preparation of equipment 
1. Equilibrate CVM ampules to room temperature for at least 4 hours prior to 
use, and follow manufacturer’s instructions. 
2. Insert test card in the Epoc Reader and allow calibration to complete. 
3. Aqueous control fluids must be ran as a QA test. 
4. Verify that quality control results do not indicate a problem with the 
analyzer.   
B. Instructions for analyzing CVM 
1. Obtain one ampule of CVM level 1 and a syringe.  
2. Hold the ampule by its tip, shake the ampule vigorously for 5 to 10 seconds 
to equilibrate the liquid and gas phases, and avoid prolonged contact. 
3. Tap the liquid back into the base of the ampule. 
4. Carefully snap open the ampule. 
5. Immediately transfer the fluid from the ampoule into a plain syringe, 
avoiding fast suction and thin needles in order to preserve the gases in the 
solution. 
6. Transfer the fluid immediately into an Epoc Test Card in the Epoc Reader.     
7. Verify the results and record the results for level 1 analyte.  
8. Repeat steps 1 -7 for levels 2, 3, 4 , and 5 .  To minimize the effect of 
calibration drift, it is recommended that you sample in a specific order.  
Begin sampling with level 1 and continuing with levels 2, 3,  4, and 5  
respectively.  If all levels for each analyte are within the performance variability, continue to repeat this sampling sequence for each EPOC blood 
gas analyzer until you have a minimum of three results for each analyte.    
C. Verifying calibration of CVM 
1. Record the results for each analyte per level. 
2. Verify that your result is within the performance variability range listed for 
the epoc System provided at www.siemens-healthineers.com. 
3. If your result is not within the performance variability range, contact Epocal 
Technical Support.   
4.  The Analytical Measurement Range will be determined by the  following 
method:  
 Take the highest of the low range values for each analyte. Subtract 15% of 
each analyte; pO2 subtract 50%. Low Analytical Measurement Range will 
be set at or above the recorded values from previous statement . Take the 
lowest of the high range of each analyte and add 15% to each value. High 
Analytical Measurement Range will be set at or below the recorded values 
from the previous statement . If the calculated ranges exceed the 
manufacturer’s reportable range, then the manufacturer’s reportable range 
will be utilized.  
The Analytical Measurement Range will be posted near each analyzer. 
5. Results falling outside of the Analytical Measurement Range will be 
reported as greater than or less than the value of the analytical measurement 
range in the EDM. For results that are outside of  the machines reportable 
range, the physician will be notified that the result  falls outside of our 
reportable measurement range. 
 
D. Continuing the Analytical Measurement Ranges  
1.   The initial Analytical Measurement Range (AMR) will be established using 
the above method and recorded in the CAP binder (CVM tab). 
2.  After the initial AMR is set, each time Calibration Verification Material is 
ran, the values will be recorded in the CAP binder.   These highest of the 
high values and the lowest of the low values will then be compared to the 
current high and low AMR values.  AMR values will not be changed unless 
the highest of the high CVM results is lower than the AMR for two 
consecutive times, or the lowest of the low CVM results is higher than the 
AMR for two consecutive times. If the AMR is changed, the new AMR will 
be set by calculating the mean value from all samples measured that is 
lowest or highest from the Calibration Verification Material. This new 
AMR value will be set on all like instruments within the same CAP number. 
 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS: 
A. Calibration Verification Material must be performed every six months.  This 
material has been approved as matrix appro priate and is from an approved 
manufacturer.  
B. Storage of CVM will be in accordance to the manufacturer recommendations.  C. CVM will be sampled within 30 seconds of opening the ampule.  Prolonged contact 
with the atmosphere affects the pH, PCO2, and PO2 result.  
D. Excessive handling of the ampule can affect the temperature of CVM and cause 
erroneous results. 
 
 
 