 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Blood Gas Lab 
Subject:  Operation of the ABL90 Flex Blood Gas 
Analyzer Section: Volume 4 
Date of Origination: October 1995 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision: August 5, 2019 Serial Code: RC9-20 
         Reviewed: October 1, 2024 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to ascertain the following actual values from blood-pH, pCO2, 
pO2, Na, K, Cl, Ca, Glucose,  tHb, O2Hb, COHb, and METHb  and in addition these 
calculated values-base excess, bicarbonate, and carbon dioxide content.  It will also define 
how to save the result in the EMR(electronic medical records). 
 
EQUIPMENT: 
A. ABL90 Flex Blood Gas Analyzer 
B. Heparinized blood sample 
C. Unsterile gloves 
 
SAMPLING PROCEDURES: (All sampling procedures will be in accordance with 
the manufacturer’s recommendation, located in the operator’s manual).  
Syringe Sample 
A. Preparation of the EMR System to receive blood gas result 
1. Verify the physician order for a Blood Gas in the patient’s EMR. Print the 
accession bar code label and the complete the collection process. 
2. Obtain the specimen from the patient. Receive the specimen in the EMR. 
B. Verify the machine is ready to analyze a sample. 
1.  The system is ready to analyze samples when the following conditions 
exist. 
a. The analytes to be measured are in calibration. 
b. Select the appropriate sample type arterial  or capillary on the 
ABL90 Flex interface. 
3. Select analytes to be tested. Mix the blood well. Lift the inlet handle to the 
syringe position. Place and hold the tip of the syringe in the center of the 
inlet gasket. Push the syringe into the analyzer and hold it there until the 
analyzer indicates to remove the syringe. Close the inlet. The system will 
automatically aspirate the sample.  
4. Scan the accession label with the barcode gun or key in the accession 
identification number. Double check input to ensure the number is correct.  5. Once the analysis is complete, the results will be sent to the patient’s EMR. In 
the EMR, complete device information that is applicable.   
6. All blood gas results must be reviewed and verified prior to saving in the 
patient’s EMR. 
C. For blood gases sampled and analyzed in the OR, by the perfusionist during a 
surgical procedure, the following process will apply: 
1. These blood gases will be POC ordered. The user will scan wrist band of 
patient, order will be placed,  specimen will be “collected” and “received” 
in the EMR.  The specimen will be analyzed with values resulting to Aqure 
and the patient’s EMR. 
2. The date and time that the specimen is analyzed in the blood gas instrument 
will be the valid receive time of record.  This time will be reported in Aqure. 
3. Verification of results must be completed in the EMR to finalize the process. 
Critical values will follow policy RC9-4. 
D. Vacuum tube sampling 
Testing of vacuum tube samples must be aspirated into a syringe. Proceed with 
syringe sampling procedure as stated above. 
E. All laboratory results may be retrieved and printed in a report that has been 
approved by the Respiratory Laboratory Director. 