 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Blood Gas Lab 
Subject: Delegation and Medical Directors Responsibilities  
Date of Origination: October 18, 2017  
Date of Last Revision: February 24, 2022 Serial Code: RC9-37 
Date of Last Review: March 24, 2024  
 
PURPOSE 
This policy defines delegation of responsibility by the Laboratory Medical Directors to 
appropriate personnel and the responsibilities of the Laboratory Medical Director. 
 
POLICY 
The Laboratory Medical Director is ultimately responsible for the overall oversight and 
operation of the Laboratory. To satisfy requirements of the accrediting agency, periodic-
on-site visits by the Laboratory Medical Director will occur to discuss new 
policies/procedures, quality control, CAP survey results, and any other questions or 
concerns at that time.  
 
A. General Duties/Responsibilities 
• Verify that all the designated responsibilities are properly performed if 
delegated  
• Must be accessible to the laboratory to provide on-site, telephone, or 
electronic consultation as needed 
• May direct no more than five labs 
• Ensure that the physical plant and environmental conditions are 
appropriate for the testing performed and provide a safe environment from 
physical, chemical, and biological hazards 
• Ensures the communication of lab data 
B. Procedural Duties/Responsibilities 
• Ensuring an effective quality management program 
• Ensure testing systems provide quality laboratory services for pre-analytic, 
analytic, and post-analytic phases of testing 
• Ensure test methods selected have the capability of providing quality 
results 
• Ensure verification procedures used are adequate to determine accuracy, 
precision, reportable range, and other pertinent performance 
characteristics of the method 
• Ensure that reports of test results include pertinent information required 
for interpretation 
• Ensure that consultation is available to the laboratory’s clients on matters 
relating to the quality of the test results reported and their interpretation 
concerning specific patient conditions  
• Review and approve all laboratory policies and procedures  • Ensure that an approved policy and procedure manual is available to all 
personnel  
• Ensure that laboratory personnel are performing the test methods as 
required for accurate and reliable results  
C. Personnel Duties/Responsibilities 
• Employ a sufficient number of laboratory personnel with the appropriate 
education and either experience or training to provide appropriate 
consultation, properly supervise, and accurately perform tests and report 
test results  
• Ensure that prior to testing patient specimens, all personnel have the 
appropriate education and experience, and receive the appropriate training 
for the type and complexity of services offered, and have demonstrated 
that they can perform all testing operations reliably to provide and report 
accurate results  
• Ensure that a general supervisor provides on-site supervision of high 
complexity test performance by certain testing personnel  
• Ensure that policies and procedures are established for monitoring 
individuals who conduct pre-analytical, analytical, and post-analytical 
phases of testing to verify that they maintain competency to:  
o Process specimens  
o Perform test procedures  
o Report test results promptly and proficiently, and, whenever necessary, 
identify needs for remedial training or continuing education to 
improve skills  
D. Proficiency Testing (PT) Duties/Responsibilities 
• Ensure that the laboratory is enrolled in an approved proficiency testing 
(PT) program  
• Ensure proficiency testing and alternative assessment procedures are 
sufficient for the extent of testing performed  
• Ensure that PT samples are tested in the same manner as patient samples  
• Ensure that PT results are returned on time to the PT program  
• Ensure that PT results are reviewed by the appropriate staff and the 
corrective action plan is followed when PT results are found to be 
unsatisfactory  
• Ensure that PT samples are performed according to accrediting agency and 
CLIA regulations  
E. Quality Assurance/Quality Control Duties/Responsibilities 
• Ensure that quality control and quality assessment programs are 
established and maintained to identify failures in quality as they occur 
• Ensure the establishment and maintenance of acceptable levels of 
analytical performance for each test system 
• Ensure that remedial actions are taken and documented whenever 
significant deviations from the laboratory’s established performance 
characteristics are identified. Patient test results are reported only when 
the system is functioning properly • Ensuring QC procedures are sufficient for the extent of testing performed 
F. Functions that may be delegated 
• Review of QC Data 
• Proficiency testing performance 
• Competency assessment 
• Test Methodology performance studies 
G. Functions that MAY NOT be delegated 
• Provision of appropriately trained supervisory and technical staff and the 
identification of their responsibilities 
• Personal on-site assessment of physical and environmental conditions and 
the adequacy of staffing on a periodic basis 
• Approval of new technical policies and procedures, as well as substantial 
changes to existing documents 
• Approval of individualized quality control plans (IQCP) 
 
The Laboratory Medical Director ensures that lab functions are properly carried out by 
qualified personnel within their respective departments. The Respiratory Manager, Blood 
Gas Lab Supervisor, and Director/Senior Director that are Technical Consultants are also 
the Laboratory Director’s Designees. These designees will be listed as Technical 
Consultants on the Laboratory Personnel Roster.  The following roles will assume the 
listed responsibilities as stated below: 
 
 
Role Responsibilities 
Respiratory Manager/Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blood Gas Lab Supervisor 
Signs attestation sheets for proficiency 
testing. 
Oversee initial instrument installation. 
Oversee compliance of Quality 
Management Program.  
Oversee hiring and supervising personnel. 
Performs other duties as requested by the 
Laboratory Director. 
 
Oversee training and competency 
assessment of all testing personnel. 
Reviews quality management data for 
compliance with regulations.  
Technical consultant for laboratory to 
assure compliance with regulatory 
standards. 
 
 