 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Blood Gas Lab 
Subject:  Blood Gas Machine Maintenance  
Date of Last Review: March 25, 2024 Signature:  
Date of Last Revision:March 25, 2024 Serial Code: RC9-08 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure that the required maintenance for the analyzer is completed and thus provide 
proper operation of the analyzer.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Daily Maintenance 
1. Check refrigerator and room  temperatures. The refrigerator temperature 
should be 2-8°C. The room temperature should be 15-25°C.  
NOTE: If the temperature 15 -25°C is not attainable, we will place all 
consumables, QCs, verification material, and the analyzer in an area where 
it is in compliance with manufacturer temperature recommendations.  
 2. Ensure all analytes are operational. (QC and Calibrations WNL) 
3. Check the measured barometric pressure. If it is outside the range of 7 25-
800 mmHg, adjust the barometer setting in the machine to the measured 
value.  Refer to the ABL90 flex operator’s manual for this process.  
4. Check the remaining sample life/expiration date of all sensor cassettes and 
solution packs. 
5. Clean and disinfect the analyzers and work area.  Refer to the maintenance 
section of the ABL90 flex operator’s manual. 
6. On days the analyzer is in operation, the laboratory personnel will check the 
analyzer for readiness of use and record it on the Daily Maintenance 
Checklist log.  
7. On days that an analyzer is in operation, the room temperature will be  
checked and documented on the log daily in each blood gas lab.  The 
acceptable temperature range is  defined by the manufacturer of  the blood 
gas instrument. The temperature maintained in each lab will be according 
to the analyzer and supplies stored within the physical laboratory space. The 
temperature log in each blood gas lab states the temperature range to be 
maintained and checked.  
8. On days that an analyzer is in operation, the room humidity will be checked 
and documented on the log daily in each blood gas lab.  The acceptable 
humidity range is defined by the manufacturer as 20-80%.  
 
 
 B. Weekly Maintenance 
1. The Blood Gas Lab Supervisor  will review all QC , Calibrations, patient 
samples and maintenance tasks including standard deviations, coefficient 
variants weekly.  This will be recorded in Aqure, electronic data management 
system. 
C. Monthly Maintenance 
1. The Laboratory Director’s designees will review and sign all temperature logs, 
maintenance logs, QC, and calibration data monthly .  This review of systems 
will be documented electronically  in Aqure. The designee will notify the  
Laboratory Director of any outliers, trends or omissions. For numeric QC data, 
QC statistics are calculated monthly to define and monitor analytic 
imprecision. This data will be displayed and reviewed in Aqure.  
2. Perform External Quality Controls monthly in accordance with RC9-22 
 
D Semiannual Maintenance 
1. Perform Calibration Verification Testing in accordance with RC 9-10, and also 
under the following conditions: 
a. change of reagent lots for chemically or physically active critical 
components, unless the lab can demonstrate that the use of different 
lots does not affect the accuracy of patient/client test results, and the 
range used to report patient/client test data 
b. if QC reflects an unusual trend or shift or are outside the laboratories  
acceptable limits and other means of assessing and correcting 
unacceptable control values failed to identify and correct the problem 
c. after major preventative maintenance or change of a critical instrument 
component 
d. when recommended by manufacturer 
 
E. All Monthly, Weekly, and Semiannual maintenance will be recorded in Aqure for 
all analyzers. A record of date when placed in service and serial numbers for all 
sensor cassettes and solution packs are maintained and tracked in Aqure. All repairs 
and routine service procedures are maintained for all instruments in the Service 
Repair Tab of the CAP Binder. 
 
F. "As Required Procedures” 
1. Change the Sensor Cassette 
The sensor cassette icon appears on the banner indicating the number of test left on 
the sensor cassette. This enables you to replace the sensor cassette at a time when 
the system is not busy. The analyzer automatically performs a quality control and 
calibration following this procedure in order to validate the new sensor cassette. 
For further guidance refer to the operator’s manual. 
Calibrations are done more frequently in the 24 -hour period that follows a sensor 
cassette replacement. After a sensor cassette replacement, a calibration is 
performed with every measurement for the first four hours. 
 2. Temperature & Humidity Corrections  
Acceptable ranges are specified on all logs. If the humidity, refrigerator or ambient 
temperature is outside the acceptable range as defined by manufacturer for 
temperature and humidity dependent equipment and environments, the following 
steps must be taken.  
a. Adjust the thermostat to correct the temperature or humidity problem. 
While waiting for the temperature  or humidity to come in range, perform 
step “b”. 
b. For refrigerator, transfer sensors to a refrigerator that is functioning 
properly. For room temperature  or humidity , the analyzer will be placed 
“out of use” and all other controls or cartridges will be transferred to a lab 
that is in compliance with manufacturer temperature recommendations.  
c. Notify Plant Services for inspection and/or repair of faulty unit if reset of 
the thermostat does not correct the problem. 
d. Note and initial occurrence and corrective measure taken in the temperature 
log. 
e. Remove from service if the humidity or temperature exceeds 
manufacturer’s recommendations. Prior to resulting lab values, the 
instrument performance must be verified as stated in letter “G” of this 
policy. 
f. If blood gases were ran while the machine was out of acceptable 
temperature or humidity ranges, refer to policy RC9-07, letter “B” of that 
policy.  
 
3.  Change the Solution Pack  
The solution pack icon appears on the banner  indicating the number of activities  
left on the  solution pack. This enables you to replace the  solution pack at a time 
when the system is not busy. For further guidance refer to the operator’s manual . 
When the solution pack changes lot the system automatically runs all three levels 
of internal QC. 
 
4. A video presentation of the above procedures can be viewed by tapping 
Consumables > Replace > Solution Pack buttons. Then tap the “Press to start video 
guidance" button. 
 
5. The operator’s manual is readily available at each instrument.  For instrument set 
up, refer to the operator’s manual.  If the instrument requires a shutdown refer to 
operator’s manual or Radiometer technical support.  
 
6. Annually the barometric pressure within the analyzer will be compared to the 
barometric pressure at the Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport. The Baton Rouge 
Metropolitan Airport barometric pressure can be found at 
www.globalair.com/airport/baton-rouge-metropolitan-ryan-field-btr.aspx. The 
barometric pressure will be converted from inches of mercury to millimeters of 
mercury. The pressure will be within 10 mmHg of each other. If th e barometric 
pressures are not within range, the barometric pressure of the analy zer will be adjusted to be within range per the manufacturer’s manual (See ABL90 Flex Plus 
Instructions For Use). 
 
G.  Service and repair of instruments 
 Performance of instruments is verified after repair to ensure they run according to 
 expectations. This will be validated by running and passing three levels of quality 
 control material. This will be documented in the electronic management system. 
 
H. Laboratory Records will be retained for a minimum of two years.  Should the lab  
 cease operation all records will be maintained for a minimum of two years. 