 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Blood Gas Lab 
Subject:  Operation of the EPOC Blood Gas 
Analyzer Section: Volume 4 
Date of Origination:  April 1, 2012 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision:January 31, 2024 Serial Code: RC9-20A 
                 Reviewed: January 31, 2024 
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to ascertain the following actual values from blood-pH, pCO2, 
pO2, Na, K, Ca, Glucose and in addition these calculated values-base excess, bicarbonate, 
and carbon dioxide content.  It will also define how to order, log-in, enter/verify every lab 
result, and save it in the EMR (electronic medical records). 
 
EQUIPMENT: 
A. Epoc Reader and Epoc Host 
B. Test Cards 
C. Heparinized blood sample 
D. Unsterile gloves 
 
SAMPLING PROCEDURES: (All sampling procedures will be in accordance with 
the manufacturer’s recommendation, located in the operator’s manual).  
 
A. Verify the machine is ready to analyze a sample. 
1. Turn on the epoc Reader and epoc Host. 
2. Start the log in to the epoc Host. Connect the Host to the Reader. 
3. Start the test. 
4. Insert a new Test Card into the Reader. 
5. Enter patient ID, select tests and Type of Sample (arterial, capillary, venous) 
6. Allow the epoc Reader to calibrate. 
7. Mix the blood well. Insert the syringe or capillary tube completely into the 
sample port to prevent leakage. 
8. Introduce blood sample into Test Card. 
9. Observe results and optionally print test results. 
10. Remove Test Card and discard in a biohazard trash receptacle.  
 
 
 
  B. Preparation of the EMR to receive blood gas result 
1. In the EMR, order the appropriate sample type and analytes. 
2. Print the sample barcode and scan to collect the specimen. Change the 
collection time to the correct time the test was performed. 
3.         Log the accession number into the EMR to receive the specimen. 
4. Patient’s blood gas results and settings will be manually entered into the 
patient’s EMR. Verify all patient information and results are correct prior to 
final verify.  
5. For manual entries, print the ticker tape from the analyzer and the EPIC 
Blood Gas Report per the manual entry procedure. Place them in the manual 
entry folder for review by the Blood Gas Lab Supervisor. 
 
 