 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Volume 4 
Subject:  Quality Control for ABL 90 Flex Analyzer  
 Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Origination: October 1995 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision: August 24, 2022 Serial Code: RC9-22 
       Reviewed: October 1, 2024 
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to assure reliable performance of blood gas instruments by 
application of defined QC Limits. 
       
EQUIPMENT: 
A. ABL Flex 90 Blood Gas Analyzers 
B. Solution Pack  
 C. Manual Record Logs  
 D. Aqure system 
 
POLICY:    
A. All daily QC is automated.  The automated schedule has been established by the 
Respiratory Care Director and the Laboratory Medical Director.  Only the Laboratory 
Medical Director, Respiratory Director, or Blood Gas Lab Supervisor has access to change 
Automatic QC schedule.  All Quality Controls are documented in the Aqure System. 
B. A minimum of one levels of QC material is run at least once during each eight-hour shift.  
This one level regimen includes all three levels within a 24- hour period.  The three levels 
of QC represent both high and low values for pH, pCO2, pO2, Na+, K+, Ca+, Cl-, 
glucose, Lactate, Hb, COHb, and MetHb.  The numeric QC data will be recorded and 
plotted.  The standard deviations and coefficient variants will also be documented as 
calculated by the Aqure Information System 
C. External quality controls, of three levels, will be run once monthly or as recommended by 
the manufacturer. These control specimens will be tested in the same manner and by the 
same personnel as patient samples are tested. 
D. QC Limits 
  1. QC ranges are established by the manufacturer.  Prior to a new analyzer being 
placed in service, a minimum of 20 QC data points are obtained for three levels of 
control substance verifying the analyzer is within QC limits.   
  2. Under no circumstances can control ranges exceed the manufacturer 
recommendations.      NOTE: Target ranges for external QC will be scanned into each analyzer prior to 
analyzing the QC.  The analyzer will then reveal the QC results and all out of 
range values will be identified by displaying up or down arrows.   
 
3. When an automated control is out of range the analyzer automatically re-runs the 
control level that failed.  If the analyte is still out of range that analyte is 
automatically disabled.  To reactivate the analyte the machine requires a manual 
calibration and then the control must be manually run.  The analyte will remain 
deactivated until this process is complete and all calibrations and controls are 
within acceptable limits.  If the above process does not correct the supervisor will 
be notified and Radiometer Technical Support will be called.  The Aqure System 
automatically records when controls have failed and reran, and when the sensor 
cassette are changed out.  If more maintenance is needed it will be documented in 
the Service Reports Section of the CAP binder or in Aqure in the Comments 
Section of the failed samples. 
  4. The Blood Gas Lab Supervisor will review weekly all QC data for verification of 
acceptable results. The Leadership Team, which includes the Laboratory Medical 
Director, Respiratory Director, Respiratory Manager and Blood Gas Lab 
Supervisor, periodically assesses the above procedure for appropriateness.  
 5. Storage and disposal of the sensor cassette and solution Pack:  
  The sensor cassette will be stored in a refrigerator between 2 and 8 
degrees Celsius. The solution pack is stored at room temperature. The 
cartridge will be installed prior to the expiration date.  The analyzer will 
not utilize any cartridge that exceeds the manufacturer’s expiration date.  
The sensor cassette and solution pack will be disposed of in the biohazard 
trash. 