 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Human Resources 
Subject:  Support Services Director Duties Section:  100 – Organizational 
Structure 
Date of Origination:   Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
May 24, 2027   Serial Code:  RC/HR/103 
  
POLICY: The Support Services Director will meet the following criteria: 
1. The Director is responsible to ensure that the physical plant and environmental conditions are 
maintained for the type of services delivered.  In addition, the safety of the environment is 
maintained to ensure employee protection from physical, chemical, and biological hazards.  This is 
performed by way of training and use of appropriate protective equipment, as well as, by specific 
work practices in the PMR Department. 
2. The Director is responsible for the personnel management of the department.  This includes 
employment of a sufficient number of qualified and competent rehabilitation staff to provide 
services.  Personnel management includes orientation/training of new employees within each section 
of the department.  Also included is oversight of disciplinary actions associated with personnel.  In 
the event the actions of the employee require reporting to a licensing board, state agency, law 
enforcement agency, the National Providers Data Bank, or any other such agency, the Director is 
responsible, in consultation with the Vice President of Ancillary Services and the Vice President for 
Human Resources, for making this report. 
3. The Director is responsible for ensuring a system is in place to both select and maintain competence 
of department personnel.  Continuing education is one component of the program. 
4. The Director, along with the Medical Director is jointly responsible for establishment of a quality 
improvement program, which includes various service areas in the delivery of rehabilitation services.  
The selection of the components to be reviewed and the results of the quality improvement program 
are performed in conjunction with the Medical Director.  The Director is responsible for ensuring 
participation by all sections and levels of rehabilitation personnel, as well as, providing feedback to 
employees concerning the outcome of the monitoring process. 
5. The Director is responsible for ensuring that a general rehabilitation services policy and procedure 
manual is available to member of the department.  Specific policy and procedure manuals are 
developed by the department managers and approved by the Director.  Each policy and procedure 
manual is also approved by the Medical Director prior to implementation. 
6. The Director develops and maintains position descriptions within the department.  The position 
descriptions delineates the responsibilities and duties of each position within the department.  A 
performance review is performed annually on each employee. 
7. The Director communicates and resolves conflicts by working with other departments within 
OLOLRMC to ensure service to rehabilitation patients on the Rehab Unit and to those referred to 
PMR for service.  The Director participates in division management meetings, the hospitals quality  2 
improvement meetings, the hospital Directors meeting and, in any other committees or task force as 
requested. 
8. The Director is responsible for maintaining clinical equipment in working order.  The Divisional 
Director is responsible for gathering information regarding clinical equipment needs and preparing 
requests for administrative approval.  The Divisional Director along with the Medical Director select 
the final list of equipment to be recommended for purchase each year. 
9. The Director is responsible for financial activities including budget preparation, monitoring of 
expenditure to budget, annual review and recommendations for product/prices. 
10. The Director provides information and plans to the hospital administrator on environmental and/or 
space needs.  The Divisional Director, along with the Medical Director is responsible for strategic 
planning for the department as well as program development. 
 
 
 