 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Program Overview 
Subject:  Patient/Fly Education & Information Section:  200 – The Rehab 
Program 
Date of Origination:  July 1994 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
May 7, 2021 Serial Code:  RC/PO/211 
  
PURPOSE: 
  To provide an overview of the comprehensive services of the Physical Medicine/Rehabilitation Department to 
families and patients who are beginning the rehabilitation process. 
To promote the team approach of rehabilitation with emphasis on patient and family involvement. 
To ensure that patient/family education is a priority and a patient right and cannot be differentiated from treatment 
services as an integral part of all phases of the rehabilitation process. 
To present consistent information to patients, families and significant others. 
To create an open atmosphere which encourages patients and families to ask questions, to promote dialogue and 
interact with other patients and families. 
 
POLICY: 
The support and encouragement of family and friends is a vital element of rehabilitation.  Patients need to know 
that his/her significant others have an understanding of treatment goals and receive adequate education to meet 
and maintain these goals prior to discharge.  Every effort is made to encourage family involvement and training in 
the patient’s plan of treatment.  The patient and his/her family are educated and consulted regarding a plan of care 
and treatment goals. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. Physician referral is necessary to initiate any therapy service. 
2. An assessment is performed to identify patient/family needs and capabilities. 
3. A plan is developed for teaching activities that meet individual learning/training needs. 
4. Patient/family education response, level of understanding, and provided instructional material is documented. 
5. Family involvement may be achieved by the following: 
a. Family conferences are held to ensure communication and education relating to patient’s goals,  2 
medical status, rehabilitation plan of care, discharge planning, available community resources, 
proposed length of stay, and ultimately hear family’s concerns. 
• Patient will attend this conference if considered appropriate by the family and team. 
• Patient/family conferences are scheduled by the Case Manager, as appropriate, after admittance to 
the Rehabilitation Center. 
• Each primary discipline working with the patient is to be represented at the patient/family 
conference.  The patient and family are consulted regarding goals for the rehabilitation stay to 
ensure active participation in the rehabilitation process. 
b. Family members are requested to participate in the rehabilitation program under the direction of the 
patient’s therapists and case manager. 
• Therapists in conjunction with case managers, are responsible for scheduling training sessions 
prior to the patient’s first weekend pass and with any significant change in functional level.  
These meeting are to be scheduled as soon as possible to the family’s convenience. 
• Training shall be specific to the patient/family needs, and shall include, but not be limited to: 
transfer techniques, use of gait assistive devices, stairs, bathroom equipment, wheelchair 
handling, cognitive precautions, orthotics, basic gait safety and range of motion exercise, 
catheterizations, medications, blood sugar monitoring. 
• Therapists are to document training via online daily documentation/ interdisciplinary patient 
education. 
c. Case Manager is responsible for continuing contact with the patient’s family throughout the 
rehabilitation stay in order to maximize reintegration into the home. 
d. At discharge, patient/family education will address recommended follow-up, patient-specific 
instructions and information on the availability of medical resources in the patient’s community, 
medications, to include food-drug interactions, disease process, maintenance of skin integrity, 
bladder/bowel maintenance and any specific home modifications necessary to ensure safe transition 
to home. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             Page 2 