 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Program Overview 
Subject:  Financial Verification Protocol Section:  400 – Admissions/ 
Discharges 
Date of Origination:  April 1993 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
June 18, 2024   Serial Code:  RC/PO/406 
  
PURPOSE: To ensure the coordination of payor requirements for billing and/or reimbursement, patient and/or 
family financial responsibility as well as the development of a complete financial file. 
POLICY: The Rehab Liaison will verify all insurance and/or Medicare coverage.  This information will be 
relayed to the patient and/or family.  The coordinator of Case Management may be accessed to 
assist with any verification of any denials for rehab coverage.  Financial counselors may be 
accessed through the Business office. 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. The Rehab Liaison will call referring unit and/or contact person and complete Pre Admission Assessment 
form. 
2. The Rehab Liaison will call Business office and verify financial information and determine the number of 
Medicare hospital days remaining if possible. 
3. Call insurance company to verify benefits and determine precertification and concurrent medical review 
requirements (e.g. – Letter of Medical Necessity, Plan of Care, Per Diem, Team Conference Notes).  
Responsible parties are as follows: 
 Plan of Care – Rehab Liaison 
 Letter of Medical Necessity – Medical Director 
 Per Diem – Director of Utilization Management 
 Team Staffing Report – Case Manager 
4. Prior to admission, or shortly thereafter, the Case Manager or Rehab Liaison will discuss with the patient 
and/or family the benefits of coverage as verified with the payor source.  Financial arrangements will be 
coordinated via the Business Office. 
5. During the patient’s hospitalization, the Case Manager will provide all services requested by the payor (e.g. – 
Utilization Review on a weekly or biweekly basis).  In addition, the Case Manager will document this 
information on weekly progress notes. 
 