 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Program Overview 
Subject:  Program Overview Section:  200 – The Rehab 
Program 
Date of Origination:   Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: 
Date Last Revised: 
May 24, 2024 
August 1, 2018 
Serial Code:  RC/PO/201 
  
Purpose Statement 
  
 The Rehabilitation Center of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center is committed to providing 
quality service to patients, family, and to the community.  The mission of the department is to provide an 
inter disciplinary team approach to facilitate functional independence and wellness through assessment 
and development of a plan of care based upon a patient’s deficits.  Deficits are addressed through a 
program with short and long-term goals which aim to maximize and improve self care and the rebuilding 
of lives.  All services are patient-directed and are provided with a spirit of understanding and compassion. 
Program Structure 
 The Rehabilitation Center at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center is a 33 bed distinct part unit 
of an 852 licensed bed acute care facility.  The Rehabilitation Center provides comprehensive inpatient 
rehabilitation services to primarily musculoskeletal and neurologically impaired individuals. 
Goal 
 To provide 24 hour, seven days per week, interdisciplinary rehabilitation services to physically disabled 
individuals which helps to prevent/minimize impairment, reduces disability, and assists them to live 
within their community at the highest degree of their physical, social, and economic independence. 
Admission Criteria 
 Patients admitted to the Rehabilitation Center must meet the following criteria: 
 1.) Must have rehabilitation diagnosis. 
 2.) Must be medically stable and able to actively participate in treatment. 
 3.) Must require 24-hour rehabilitation nursing and physician availability. 
 4.) Must be expected to achieve rehabilitation objectives in a reasonable amount of time. 
 5.) Must require at least two rehabilitation services, other than nursing.  2 
 6.) Must demonstrate a source of funding that supports the necessary and appropriate rehabilitation  
  services.  If funding is insufficient the Community Liaison will explore alternative options. 
 7.)  All patients admitted must be at least 18 years of age (the age at which the state of Louisiana 
legally recognizes an individual as an adult).  Emancipated minors (those individuals who have 
had parental control over them legally terminated by the state of Louisiana) also qualify for 
admission as an adult based upon the provision of care under CARF standards.* 
*Definitions of “adult” are referenced in the 2005 CARF Standards Manual – Comprehensive 
Integrated Inpatient Rehabilitation Program Standards 
 
Patients Served 
 The Rehabilitation Center of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center serves individuals with 
physical disabilities that limit functional activities. 
 - Patients evidencing deficits in safety, activities of daily living, communication/cognition, self-
care, mobility, and other functional deficits. 
 - Patients who have disabling impairments of recent onset or recent progression. 
 - Patients who evidence the potential for functional gain resulting from a program of intensified 
rehabilitation. 
Services Provided 
1.)  Physician Management and Consultation    9.)  Chaplaincy Services 
2.)  Physical Therapy      10.)  Prosthetic/Orthotic Referral 
3.)  Occupational Therapy     11.)  Patient/Family Education 
4.)  Speech Therapy      12.)  Home Assessment 
5.)  Activity Therapy      13.)  Community Re-Entry Outings 
6.)  Rehabilitation Nursing     14.)  Transitional Living 
7.)  Case Management/Social Services    15.)  Diagnostic Radiology 
8.)  Pharmacy       16.)  Respiratory Therapy 
        
Program Evaluation System 
 The Rehabilitation Center of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, in being consistent with 
philosophy and mission statement, has established a formal Program Evaluation System.  The Program 
Evaluation System will be used as an objective evaluation of the success of the Rehab Center in meeting 
the needs of all persons served. 
 The system will gather and analyze outcomes information in response to the needs of all stakeholders.   3 
The analyzed information will be applied to improving performance in a variety of areas.  The Rehab 
Center will be responsible for sharing relevant information with stakeholders at a frequency that meets 
their needs.  All information gathered will be analyzed in a quarterly report to accurately reflect the 
performance of the Rehab Center and consider the requests and input of its stakeholders. 
Patient Satisfaction Survey 
 The patient satisfaction survey is used to analyze the patient/family’s impressions of the quality of 
services as well as of the implementation and execution of the overall treatment plan.  Each patient 
discharged to the community from the Rehabilitation Center will receives a “Patient Satisfaction Survey” 
by an outside contract agency after discharge.  Data from the post-discharge surveys is compiled per 
recognized statistical methodology by the agency and presented to Administration.  An administrative 
representative presents the survey results to Rehabilitation Managers and staff. 
Summary 
 The Program Evaluation System used at the Rehabilitation Center of Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center facilitates better management procedures and evaluates the quality and efficiency of the 
program.  The system reflects the mission, goals, and objectives of the Rehabilitation Center.  The system 
reviews overall effects of the program and the quality of its performance and cost containment.  The 
Rehabilitation Center of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center is committed to creating and 
implementing this Program Evaluation System in order to assure service excellence. 