 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Program Overview 
Subject:  Admissions Criteria Section:  400 – Admissions/ 
Discharges 
Date of Origination:  July 1988 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: 
Date Last Revised: 
June 18, 2024 
May 7, 2021 
Serial Code:  RC/PO/403 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide written admission criteria consistent with the Rehabilitation Center’s standard of care.  
PROCEDURE: 
1.) All patients will be evaluated prior to admission to the Rehabilitation Center by a Rehabilitation 
Physician and a Rehab Liaison. 
  
2.) A patient admitted to the Rehabilitation Center will fulfill the following criteria. 
a.) Deficits must require an intensive, coordinated program of care provided by an 
interdisciplinary rehab team that cannot be met at a lower level of care. 
b.) Significant practical improvement can be expected in a reasonable period of time and 
establish an anticipated plan of care. 
c.) The client will have demonstrated a source of funding that supports the necessary and 
appropriate rehabilitation services; if funding appears to be insufficient, alternative 
approaches will be explored by the Rehab Liaison. 
d.) There should be delineated an appropriate discharge setting and package of support 
services so that skills and capabilities learned and achieved while in the Rehabilitation 
Center will be utilized and maintained by the client after discharge. 
 
3.) The patient population requiring intensive interdisciplinary rehabilitation will generally (but not 
exclusively) fit the following primary (and/or comorbid) diagnostic categories: 
 a.) Stroke 
b.) Spinal cord injury 
c.) Congenital deformity 
d.) Amputation 
e.) Major multiple trauma 
f.) Fracture of femur (hip fracture)  2 
g.) Brain injury 
h.) Neurological disorders, including multiple sclerosis, motor neuron diseases, polyneuropathy, 
muscular dystrophy, and Parkinson's disease 
i.) Burns 
j.) Active, polyarticular rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and seronegative arthropathies 
resulting in significant functional impairment of ambulation and other activities of daily 
living that have not improved after an appropriate, aggressive, and sustained course of 
outpatient therapy services or services in other less intensive rehabilitation settings 
immediately preceding the inpatient rehabilitation admission or that result from a systemic 
disease activation immediately before admission, but have the potential to improve with 
more intensive rehabilitation 
k.) Systemic vasculidities with joint inflammation, resulting in significant functional impairment 
of ambulation and other activities of daily living that have not improved after an appropriate, 
aggressive, and sustained course of outpatient therapy services or services in other less 
intensive rehabilitation settings immediately preceding the inpatient rehabilitation admission 
or that result from a systemic disease activation immediately before admission, but have the 
potential to improve with more intensive rehabilitation 
l.) Severe or advanced osteoarthritis (osteoarthrosis or degenerative joint disease) involving two 
or more major weight bearing joints (elbow, shoulders, hips, or knees, but not counting a 
joint with a prosthesis) with joint deformity and substantial loss of range of motion, atrophy 
of muscles surrounding the joint, significant functional impairment of ambulation and other 
activities of daily living that have not improved after the patient has participated in an 
appropriate, aggressive, and sustained course of outpatient therapy services or services in 
other less intensive rehabilitation settings immediately preceding the inpatient rehabilitation 
admission but have the potential to improve with more intensive rehabilitation. (A joint 
replaced by a prosthesis no longer is considered to have osteoarthritis, or other arthritis, even 
though this condition was the reason for the joint replacement.) 
m.) Knee or hip joint replacement, or both, during an acute hospitalization immediately 
preceding the inpatient rehabilitation stay and also meet one or more of the following specific 
criteria:  
a. The patient underwent bilateral knee or bilateral hip joint replacement surgery during 
the acute hospital admission immediately preceding the IRF admission. 
b. The patient is extremely obese with a Body Mass Index of at least 50 at the time of 
admission to the IRF 
c. The patient is age 85 or older at the time of admission to the IRF. 
4.) At the time of admission the following must also be demonstrated: 
a.) Patient requires physician supervision by a rehabilitation physician (with specialized  3 
training/experience in inpatient rehabilitation) 
b.) Patient requires nursing care (performed by staff trained in rehabilitation nursing) 
c.) Patient is able and willing to participate in at least three hours of daily (five out of seven 
days) or 15 hours of weekly therapy of a combination of Occupational Therapy, Physical 
Therapy, Speech/Language Therapy, and/or Prosthetic/Orthotic Therapy, in addition to other 
activities and therapies (including psychological). 
d.) Have completed and or updated a preadmission assessment within 24-48 hours of admit. 
e.) Patient medical problems are stable, without complications that interfere with intensive 
rehabilitation. 
f.) Rehab physician approval and signature (dated and timed) is documented on the assessment 
prior to patient’s admission. 
5.) Should it be deemed that the patient is unable to fully participate in rehabilitation after admission, 
patient/family will be informed and the discharge process will be implemented 
6.) Only physicians with specific privileges for rehabilitation will be allowed to admit patients.  The 
referring physician, as well as consultants, may continue to share responsibility for the patient’s care 
7.) The Rehabilitation Center provides comprehensive care on an adult level.  Patients admitted should 
be at least 18 years of age.  Exceptions to the age limit will be considered on a case by case basis by 
the Rehabilitation Center Medical Director depending on his/her appropriateness to interact with the 
patient population and the ability to receive interdisciplinary treatment on an adult level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRF=inpatient rehabilitation facility 