 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Occupational Therapy Scope of Service  Section:  500 – Occupational 
Therapy 
Date of Origination:  September 1997 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: June 7, 2024 Serial Code:  RC/TS/502 
  
PURPOSE:  To define the scope of service of the Division of Occupational Therapy 
POLICY:  It is the policy of the Occupational Therapy Division to treat patients with motor, 
sensory, cognitive, perceptual and selfcare deficits according to the standards adopted by 
the American Occupational Therapy Association, the Louisiana Board of Medical 
Examiners and JCAHO while upholding the mission and philosophy of OLOLRMC. 
PROCEDURE: The Physical Medicine/Rehabilitation department provides Occupational Therapy 
services through the skilled expertise of occupational therapist and certified occupational 
therapy assistants.  Supportive personnel such as trained aides, transporters, and clerical 
staff work together with the therapist under the direction of the individuals responsible 
for delivery of patient care to assist patients in reaching their highest functional potential. 
   The Occupational Therapy rehab team provide services to the inpatient, rehabilitation 
patients. Occupational Therapist may also treat on the acute care units, depending on the 
given staffing needs.  Occupational Therapists evaluate neuromotor, developmental 
sensory, cognitive, perceptual and selfcare deficits.  This evaluation provides the basis for 
selecting the appropriate therapeutic procedure to facilitate independence in Activities of 
Daily Living.  Physical Medicine/Rehabilitation professionals use interdisciplinary 
approach to patient care.  Together they work to achieve a unified goal; assisting the 
patient to reach his/her highest possible potential.  This will also include family/patient 
education, instruction in self-treatment and living with a physical disability in preparation 
for discharge. 
   The services provided by Occupational Therapy follows the concept in the Physical 
Medicine/Rehabilitation policy titled Scope of Services, these concepts include: a referral 
by a licensed physician, assessment/evaluation of functional status, development of 
treatment plan with physician and patient/family input, a time frame for achievement, 
documentation of progress, patient/family education, discharge planning and follow up 
care. 