 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Family Conference Section:  300 – Treatment 
Planning 
Date of Origination:  October 1988 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: June 17, 2024  Serial Code:  RC/TS/307 
  
PURPOSE: To encourage and foster appropriate channels of communication to and from the family and 
treatment team. 
 
POLICY: Periodically the family will be asked to come to the Rehabilitation Center to meet with the 
treatment team.  Patients can be included in the conference when it is deemed appropriate.  The 
conferences will include a review of the patient’s status, patient progress, review and clarification 
of treatment goals, post-discharge living arrangements, patient/family education, projected 
equipment needs, anticipated discharge date or confirmation of discharge date, outside referrals, 
follow-up plans, and other concerns expressed by the family. 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. The Family Conference may be arranged through a Case manager at any time during the patient’s 
Rehabilitation stay.  The Family Conference may occur either by the team’s or the family’s request. 
2. The Case Manager will coordinate with all team members to arrange the date and time for the 
Family Conference. 
3. On the day of the Family Conference, all members of the treatment team will meet at the designated 
time. 
4. The Case Manager will open the session by reporting the reason for the meeting, and all disciplines 
will take turns giving report of the patient’s progress, relying primarily on the FIM system scale and 
format. 
5. Family members will have the opportunity to voice any concerns as to the patient’s status, care, or 
future plans. 
6. The Case Manager will document skills, which the family needs to learn should the patient be 
discharged home. 
7. The Case Manager will provide the family with at list of alternative discharge sites, e.g., nursing 
home, should this be indicated. 
8. The Case Manager will provide a list of home health agencies, sitter services, and other available 
community resources. 
9. The Case Manager will record the names and relationships of all family members present as well as 
list the names of all participants from the treatment team.  The Case Manager will summarize each  2 
discipline’s report, the family’s concerns and level of understanding, and the treatment teams’ 
recommendation.   
10. This information will be documented as part of the medical record per case management 
documentation method. 
 