 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Physical Therapy Scope of Service Section:  400 – Physical 
Therapy 
Date of Origination:  September 1994 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: June 7, 2024 Serial Code:  RC/TS/402 
  
POLICY: It is the policy of the Physical Therapy discipline to treat patients with neuromuscular, musculo-
skeletal and sensorimotor impairments according to the standards adopted by the American 
Physical Therapy Association, the Louisiana State Board of Physical Therapy Examiners, 
JCAHO, and CARF while upholding the mission and philosophy of OLOLRMC. 
 
  The Physical Medicine/Rehabilitation department provides physical therapy services 
through the skilled expertise of physical therapist and licensed physical therapist assistants.  
Supportive personnel such as trained aides, transporters and clerical staff work together with the 
therapist under direction of the individuals responsible for delivery of patient care to assist 
patients in reaching their highest functional potential. 
 
  The physical therapy discipline provides services to all inpatients, outpatients, 
rehabilitation patients, skilled nursing patients and Ollie Steele Manor patients. 
 
  Physical Therapists evaluate neuromuscular, musculo-skeletal, sensorimotor and related 
cardiovascular and respiratory functions of the patient.  This evaluation provides the basis for 
selecting the appropriate therapeutic procedures such as: exercises for increasing strength, 
endurance, coordination and range of motion, stimuli to facilitate motor activity and learning, 
instruction in the use of assistive devises and the application of physical agents such as heat and 
cold, sound or water to relieve pain or alter physiological status. 
 
  Physical Medicine/Rehab professionals use an interdisciplinary approach to patient care.  
Together they work to achieve a unified goal; assisting the patient to reach his/her highest 
possible functional potential. This will also include family/patient education, instruction in self-
treatment and living with a physical disability in preparation for discharge. 
 
  The services provided by physical therapy follow the following concepts  2 
1. A referral by a licensed physician; 
2. An assessment/evaluation of functional status; 
3. Development of a treatment plan with physician and patient/family input; 
4. A time frame for achievement; 
5. Documentation of progress; 
6. Patient/family education; 
7. Discharge planning; and 
8. Provide recommendation for follow-up care 
 
 
 
 
 