 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Individual Program Planning and 
Management 
Section:  300 – Treatment 
Planning 
Date of Origination:  November 1988 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed/ 
Revised: 
June 17, 2024 Serial Code:  RC/TS/303 
  
PURPOSE: To assure that each person served is an active participant in the planning and implementation of 
their rehabilitation. 
POLICY: The case manager will be responsible for coordinating the individual treatment plan for each 
person served.  This process will begin at the time the rehab liaison or physician assesses the 
patient and it is determined that the patient meets admission criteria.  The patient and/or family 
member will become an integral component of the treatment plan.  The team conference will 
serve as the catalyst for continued input from the person served and individuals involved in their 
treatment. 
PROCEDURE: 
1. During the preadmission phase, each potential patient and/or family member will be contacted by a Rehab 
liaison. 
2. The Rehab liaison assesses the patient’s current medical status, provides the patient/family with literature, 
coordinates tours, and addresses any other patient/family concerns. 
3. The case manager will meet with the patient and/or family within 1-2 business days from admit, to discuss the 
rehabilitation process, patient/family expectations and discharge plans. 
4. A team conference will be scheduled within approximately one week of admission by the case manager. 
5. The case manager will inform the team members of patient’s or family member needs, preferences, and goals 
as well as psychosocial issues. 
6. The case manager will document the team conference report per documentation protocol. 
7. The case manager will review the therapy status with the patient and/or family member, following each team 
conference. 
8. Patient/Family conferences will be scheduled by the case manager at the request of the patient, family, team, 
physician, or payer source. 
9. Each team member will complete an initial assessment and develop a treatment plan tailored to the patient’s 
expressed needs and capabilities. 
10. Goals for discharge will be discussed at each team conference and modified as appropriate with the patient 
and/or family input. 
11. Team conferences will be held weekly to assure the continuity of care and program planning.  The 
interdisciplinary will each update their respective discipline areas on the Team Conference form.   
12. The case manager will facilitate discharge planning activities and coordinate disposition arrangements. 
 