 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Case Management Duties Section:  800 – Case 
Management 
Date of Origination:  January 1996 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed/ 
Revised: 
May 24, 2024   Serial Code:  RC/TS/807 
  
POLICY: A single case manager is designated for each individual served.  A case manager assesses and 
follows a patient from the point of admission through discharge.  The primary objective of the 
case manager is to ensure that services provided each person, whether by staff, by affiliation, or 
by consultation are coordinated to constitute an integrated program geared toward the 
accomplishment of specific goals for the person.  The case manager is the liaison person 
responsible for communication of the individual’s rehabilitation program to the family and 
insurance company.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. The case manager will meet the patient/ family to provide additional orientation to Rehab services.  They will 
discuss the role of the case manager and will discuss the process of the team conference for the development 
of the program goals and the individual’s participation in goal setting and program planning. (See Orientation 
Policy and Procedure) 
 
2. The case manager will schedule the initial team conference within a week of admission.  All team members, 
including the case manager, will consistently participate in team conferences concerning the person served. 
 
3. The case manager will contact the patient/ family to complete initial assessment and begin discharge 
planning, assist with goal setting and identify barriers to discharge.  The discharge planning process begins 
the day of admission. 
 
4. The case manager will contact the insurance company to discuss estimated length of stay, treatment plan, and 
progress report.  This will be done on a weekly basis unless otherwise requested.  
 
5. The case manager will make appropriate referrals, (i.e., psychological, vocational, community).  All staff 
members have equal opportunity to recommend other services that the person may require. 
 
6. The case manager will attend team conferences to assess progress toward goals and barriers to discharge, and 
to coordinate a team approach for continuity of care, in order to assist in development of a comprehensive 
individualized plan. 
  2 
7. The case manager will communicate with insurance companies to obtain authorization for Rehab stay. 
 
8. The case manager will promote the individual’s participation in the program. 
 
9. The case manager will assure that the individuals program proceeds in an orderly, purposeful, and goal 
directed manner. 
 
10.  The case manager will coordinate and arrange home health therapies/outpatient therapy per physician’s and 
therapy recommendations. 
 
11.  The case manager will assist the family with nursing home/SNF placement as needed, as well as assist with 
alternate long term placement in the community.  
 
12. The case manager will assist and coordinate equipment needs. 
 
13.  The case manager will assure that the discharge arrangements and any appropriate support services are 
completed. 
 
 
 