 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Bringing Children of Patients into the Rehab 
Center  
Section:  500 – Occupational 
Therapy 
Date of Origination:  October 1988 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: June 7, 2024 Serial Code:  RC/TS/503 
  
PURPOSE:  In Occupational Therapy, patients are instructed in skills to meet independence of 
function in all daily routine tasks.  On several occasions it has been noted that one large 
area of concern is the care of small children upon return to home.  Activities such as 
dressing, diapering, feeding, and handling children can be simulated with the use of a doll 
to learn exact techniques.  However, an actual child then needs to be worked with to 
allow the patient to gain confidence, competence, and allowing the patient and child to 
become comfortable with each other. 
   Because this situation can be stressful and anxiety producing for both patient and child a 
quiet environment is most suitable.  Along with decreasing the stimulation of the 
surroundings, the safety of the child from injury and illness must be considered.  
Therefore, treatments with the patient and child will be performed either in the patient’s 
room or in the quiet room. 
POLICY:  Children of the patient’s will be permitted on the unit during therapy hours but only when 
the patient is ready to practice childcare techniques on the child.  Tasks will be performed 
in the quiet room to decrease distraction and ensure infection control. 
PROCEDURES:     
1. Baby/child techniques are practiced with a doll to gain knowledge and skills of procedure. 
2. When patient is ready to work with the actual child, arrangements must be made to schedule the time and day 
that the baby/child will stay on the unit and if the family member bringing the baby/child should or should not 
be present for the session.  All involved will be informed of this information before the baby/child is brought. 
3. Exact skills to be practiced and the area that to be used will be discussed and scheduled prior to the day. 
4. All necessary equipment like a rocking chair, bolsters, pillows, etc. will be brought to the treatment room 
prior to the baby/child’s arrival. 
5. Skills scheduled will be practiced with the baby/child, patient, therapist, and family member if indicated. 
6. Upon end of the session, the baby / child will be taken off the unit by the family member. 
   