 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Case Manager’s Role in Discharge Planning Section:  800 – Case 
Management 
Date of Origination:  August 1995 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: May 24, 2024 Serial Code:  RC/TS/806 
  
PURPOSE: To provide a comprehensive and systematic approach to the coordination of a patient’s discharge 
from the hospital so as to provide for optimal satisfaction and preparation of patient and family. 
 
POLICY: All patients will receive a projected estimated length of stay at the initial team conference which 
will serve as a target date of planning and preparation for patient, family and treatment team.  The 
Case Manager works closely with the team and patient/family to assure early and adequate 
discharge planning.  The Case Manager will address the psychosocial and emotional aspects of 
the decision-making process in difficult disposition issues. 
   
PROCEDURE: 
 
 
1. Discussion with patient and family towards determining disposition is an integral component of the initial 
evaluation. 
2. Determining a projected discharge date involves ascertaining patient’s functional limitations, family 
resources, treatment goals and insurance coverage.  This date may be subject to change from various factors 
including patient’s demonstrated progress toward treatment goals. 
3. Coordination of appropriate in-hospital referrals (e.g. – psychological, psychiatric) is an important aspect of 
discharge planning. 
4. Providing patient/family with appropriate resources for financial assistance may be required. 
5. Coordinate with rehabilitation team to assure adequate patient/family education and training. 
6. Coordinate appropriate community resources (e.g. – Adult Day Care, Transportation assistance, Respite 
Care). 
7. Coordinate with treatment team re: alternative placement (e.g. – Nursing Home) to secure all appropriate 
services and supplies. 
8. Provide guidance and counseling to patient and family throughout hospitalization involving planning and 
preparation of discharge plans. 