 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Recreational / Activity Therapy Scope of 
Service 
Section:  700 – Recreational 
Therapy 
Date of Origination:  April 1994 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: June 17, 2024  Serial Code:  RC/TS/702 
  
PURPOSE: To state the Rehabilitation Center’s plan for Activity Therapy within the inpatient physical 
rehabilitation setting. 
 
POLICY: To provide appropriate patients with recreational and other leisure time activity services designed 
to promote the development, maintenance, and expression of leisure/social lifestyle for 
individuals with physical, mental, emotional or social limitations. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
Each patient admitted to the Rehabilitation Center will be evaluated by the attending physician for 
appropriateness for referral to Recreational Therapy/ Activity Therapy.  The Activity Therapist will carry out a 
complete initial assessment on each patient referred (refer to Recreation Therapy Assessment P&P). 
1. An assessment of the patient’s leisure, social, and recreational abilities as well as deficiencies, barriers, life 
experiences, needs, and potential for various areas of lifestyle development. 
a. The assessment is to be completed and on the medical chart within 3 working days from admission. 
b. Patient and family will have adequate involvement into the implementation of goals to be 
incorporated into the overall Rehabilitation treatment plan.  Goals will be reviewed and updated 
weekly with patient and family. 
2. The Activity Therapy treatment plan is designed by the recreational therapist to improve social, emotional, 
cognitive, and physical functional behaviors as necessary per requisites to future leisure/social involvement.  
Such therapy is designed with input from the patient/family and other members of the rehab team. 
a. In accordance with Activity Therapy for Rehab, one (1) note per week will be documented on 
patient’s medical chart. 
b. Follow-up care:  As a part of the Rehab Center follow-up program evaluation, patient’s community 
re-entry and leisure activities will be assessed. 
3. Leisure education is designed to help the patient acquire the knowledge, skills, and attitudes needed for 
independent leisure/social involvement, adjustment in the community, decision-making ability, and 
appropriate use of free time. 
4. Outings and community re-entry excursions (trips to restaurants, movies, shopping malls, etc.) are planned by 
the Activity Therapist in coordination with the other Rehab disciplines (see separate policy on Community 
Re-entry). 
5. The Activity Therapist is a member of the treatment team and as such reports at weekly team conferences on 
assigned patients.  Input from the Recreational Therapist will include information regarding the patient’s fine 
motor skills, socialization skills, affect and cognitive abilities. 
6. The Activity Therapist will ensure that recreational therapy services are monitored in regard to the extent to  2 
which goals are achieved relative to the use of leisure time and the acquisition of socialization skills. 
7. A discharge plan, including follow-up activities, a list of community resources, and any other information 
needed to pursue recreational/leisure activities is provided to the patient and documented in the chart. 
 