 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Rehabilitation Center Medicine Scope of 
Service 
Section:  100 – Rehab 
Medicine 
Date of Origination:  March 1988 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: June 17, 2024 Serial Code:  RC/TS/102 
  
POLICY: It is the policy of the Rehabilitation Center that medical services are provided for each patient by 
a physiatrist, neurologist, or other physician qualified by training, experiences, and knowledge, to 
identify the nature and extent of impairment and functional disability and to perform the 
necessary diagnostic examinations to detect or confirm pathological states that underlie, 
complicate, or exist concurrently with physical impairment and disabling conditions. 
PROCEDURE: 
Each patient that is referred to the Rehabilitation Center will be evaluated by means of a complete 
history and physical examination by a physician associated with the Rehabilitation Center.  This 
Rehabilitation Physician, in concurrence with the referring physician, will recommend the patient’s 
disposition.  Should the patient prove a candidate for rehabilitation, arrangements will be made for 
transfer to the Rehabilitation Center (refer to separate policy re: Admission Criteria).  Transfers will be 
coordinated by the Rehab Liaison, who will communicate all details to the Rehabilitation Physician, 
referring physician, consulting physicians, and the patient and family.  The Rehabilitation Physician will 
follow patients on other services that are candidates for admission to the Rehabilitation center but are 
not yet ready to be transferred. 
Each patient transferred to the Rehabilitation Center will be admitted under the name of a Rehabilitation 
Physician.  Referring physicians may continue to follow their patients, as they deem appropriate.  The 
Rehabilitation Physician will ensure that each patient is also attended by an internist, or other physician 
qualified by training and experience and knowledge to provide for general medical care.  When patients 
are transferred to the Rehabilitation Center, it is understood that the attending Rehabilitation Physician 
will be responsible for the majority of day-to-day medical management and will call upon appropriate 
consultants as necessary. 
Rehabilitation medical services include: 
1. Assessment of patient’s general medical condition and impairments, functional limitations, 
psychosocial status, and vocational history. 
2. Neuromusculo-skeletal and mental status examinations and a general medical examination. 
3. Analysis of body movement, postural control, gait, and upper extremity skills. 
4. Examination and/or interpretation of supplemental laboratory, radiological electrodiagnostic, 
and special procedure testing.  2 
5. General medical management by liaison with previous physician of record, or arrangements 
for general medical management by another appropriately qualified physician, with specialty 
consultation and management provided as required by the physician’s condition. 
6. Medication prescription, monitoring, and appropriate revision. 
7. Prescription of rehabilitation intervention commensurate with the patient’s medical status and 
care requirements. 
The individual Rehabilitation Physicians serve as members and leaders of the various Rehabilitation 
Center treatment teams.  As such, the Rehabilitation Physicians coordinate services with, consult with, 
and guide transdisciplinary treatment team members, patient’s families, and community agency 
representatives. 
The Medical Director of the Rehabilitation Center will ensure that the Rehabilitation Physicians 
participate in monitoring the quality and effectiveness of medical care given.  Monitoring will include 
evaluation of patient’s progress towards the achievement of rehabilitation goals, health maintenance, and 
the degree of success in preventing complications known to occur over time in the natural history of 
disorders treated. 
 