 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Semi-Private Patient Room Guidelines Section:  200 – Rehab Nursing 
Date of Origination:  July 1990 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: July 3, 2023  Serial Code:4 RC/TS/213 
  
PURPOSE:  The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines for semi-private patient rooms 
as it pertains to infection control. 
POLICY: 
I. Environmental Practices 
 A. Patient articles used for personal hygiene: 
1. Personal hygiene items should be stored in patient’s bedside table. 
2. Personal articles such as bedpans and water pitchers will be labeled with the 
patient’s name with a water proof pen. 
  3. Additional clean linen will not be left or stored in rooms. 
 B. All bath areas (shower stalls and toilet areas) will be cleaned daily and as needed by 
housekeeping.   
  1. Disposable paper towels will be used to clean area. 
  2. Universal precautions will be followed. 
 C. Food items (snacks, dietary, supplements, etc....) will be stored in a fashion to prevent 
food contamination / spoilage and vector infestation.  Food will be labeled with patient’s 
name and dated.  Any food items in refrigerator longer than five days will be discarded. 
 D. Personal Hygiene: 
  1. Patient awareness of hand washing and sanitary practices should be emphasized 
and assessed by the staff.  Education should be provided if needed. 
II. Patient Placement 
 A. Patient should be assessed for active infectious disease process, carrier state or 
colonization upon admission to the Rehabilitation Center and concurrently during their 
stay. 
1. Separation of patients who are likely to be reservoirs for microorganisms should  2 
be considered. 
2. Questions regarding micro-organisms should be referred to the Infection Control 
Department. 
3. Patient infected or colonized with the same micro-organism can be co-horded 
(placed in the same room, if not assigned to a private room). 
4. The decision to place the patient in a cohort setting is based upon the disease, 
mode of transmission, patient condition / hygiene and susceptibility of the 
roommate.  This decision should be made in consultation with Infection Control 
Staff and attending physician. 
  
 B. Patients of the same gender will be placed in a semi-private room. 
 C. Patients will be allowed to have visitors during the hours of 8:00am to 4:00pm daily.  
 D.  One same gendered visitor will be allowed to stay overnight with the patient if needed.  