 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Therapeutic Pass Section:  1000 – Community 
Re-Entry 
Date of Origination:  April 1993 Supersedes: RC/TS/1009 
Date Last Reviewed/ 
Revised: 
June 29, 2023 Serial Code:  RC/TS/1008 
  
POLICY: Therapeutic Passes may be granted for the purpose of assisting in the reduction of handicap and 
re-integration of the patient and family into their home and the community.  Transition from 
hospital to home requires the support of the professional Rehabilitation staff as well as caregiver 
involvement.  Therapeutic passes will help enable the patient and family to apply strategies and 
techniques learned in therapy to the home/community setting. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Patients will be permitted to go on a therapeutic home pass after approval from the treatment team, written 
physician approval/order, and proper family training.  Passes should be agreed upon by all members of the 
treatment team within the context of the team conference to allow for full staff input and planning for pass 
training.  Goals for the pass outing should also be discussed and documented. 
2. Therapeutic passes will typically be granted for a weekend day (Saturday or Sunday); however, special 
circumstances may allow for a weekday pass.  If the pass is scheduled on a day the patient receives therapy, 
he/she will be expected to attend all therapy prior to leaving on pass. 
3. Case Management will coordinate the time for pass training with the treatment team and patient’s 
family/caregivers.  The person(s) who will be transporting and caring for the patient while on pass will 
schedule a time with Case Management to learn the necessary techniques from the treatment team in order to 
properly care for the patient.    This person(s) will also be instructed to bring the car that will be used for 
transporting the patient on pass so that car transfers can be practiced.  Case Management will inform the 
patient and/or family of the goals established in the team conference. 
4. The family will come to the Rehab Center for pass training and skills will be checked off and documented by 
each discipline conducting the training. 
5. On the day of the pass, the trained family member(s) must complete the Therapeutic Pass Release form which 
documents time of departure, return time, and responsible party.  The patient may leave after attending all 
therapy and must return by 9:00 p.m.  Exceptions to this must be agreed upon by the physician, nursing, and 
Case Management.  No overnight passes are permitted. 
6. Nursing will administer necessary medications prior to departure and the patient must return for evening 
medications, in order for the medications to be administered. Oxygen needs will be discussed with nursing 
prior to pass. 
7. The therapeutic pass will not relieve the patient and family of financial responsibility for that day to the 
Rehabilitation Unit. 
8. It will be the responsibility of the patient and/or family to provide transportation of the pass.  Assistive  2 
devices for mobility or self-care may be provided by the Rehab Center per family request.  Case Management 
will provide assistance in obtaining these items if necessary. 
9. Directions for possible medical emergencies will be advised by nursing with each release form. 
10. Patient/ family, upon arrival back to hospital, will check back in at front desk to inform nursing of the 
patient’s return. 
 