Page 1 of 2 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Access Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:    
Subject:  Red Flags: Medical Identity Theft Section:    
Date of Origination: March 2010  Supersedes:       
Date Las t Revised or Reviewed:   
April 2011, February 2015 ; Jan 
2018 
   Serial Code:    
 
PURPOSE: 
 
To establish a written program to prevent medical identity theft.  
(“Medical identity theft” is the use of a person’s name or other aspects of their identity -such as insurance 
information or Social Security Number-without the person’s knowledge or consent to obtain medical services or to 
obtain money by falsifying records of or claims for medical services.) media.  To also establish proper protocol as to 
what to do in the event medical identity theft is suspected. 
 
POLICY: 
Each Access Service Team Member covered by this policy shall implement processes to detect, prevent and mitigate 
medical identity theft. Such processes will be guided by the background materials contained in the Attachments (see 
lake link Organization policies). The medical identity theft prevention program will be considered an aspect of the 
organization’s corporate compliance program. 
 
 
PROCEDURES: 
Awareness is an effective weapon against medical identity theft. Be alert for the following potential behaviors and 
activities. 
• Individual is unable to remember their own date of birth or social security number upon registration. 
Identifying information belongs to another individual. (Be especially aware of an incorrect social 
security number provided to staff during registration.) 
• Individual presents with no form of identification (e.g. driver’s license, State ID Card, employee badge 
with photo) or proof of insurance and is unable to verbally provide other information.   
• Individual provides little or no demographic information Individual has no proof of insurance, yet 
rejects attempts for financial assistance (e.g. will not complete a financial questionnaire).  
• Individual cannot recall information from a photo ID, insurance card, or other documents presented at 
registration. (For example, the individual must refer to the documents when asked for an address or phone 
number).  
• Individual becomes agitated when you attempt to confirm demographic information. (For example, the 
individual is upset that you confirm their address, date of birth, etc. upon completion of registration).  
 
Should any individual engage in these behaviors, please note account in Cerner under Patient ID section 
(with a general note, no specifics), scan all relevant documentation and notify your supervisor immediately.  
The patient should not be informed that the identification is questionable and that they are suspected to be 
committing medical identity theft. Supervisors will collect all relevant details and notify Charge Nurse on 
duty and Risk Management of the incident. 
 
Red Flags Power point is also available for review on Lake link >Departments>Admissions>Policies Page 2 of 2 
 