Revenue Management Department 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  Refunds Section:  
Date of Origination: 10-17-01 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: 12-05-02 Serial Code:  
Purpose: 
 
To ensure that the amount of refund being requested is correct and timely. 
 
Policy: 
 
It is the policy of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Revenue Management, to  
review all refund requests greater than $1,000.00; notify payors of overpayments greater then $20.00 in 
writing and deny any refund requests that are untimely. 
 
I. Procedure:   
 
 Refund requests that are over $1,000.00 are forwarded from the Refund Clerk in the  
 Business Office to Revenue Management. The refunds are divided among the Managed Care  
 Contract Auditors according to their assigned payors each has been given.  
 
A. The Managed Care contract auditor first verifies that the request is timely in  
Accordance with Regulation 74, section 6015 of the Payment of Health Coverage  
Claims Act. See attached copy of regulation 74, exhibit AI. 
 
I. Regulation 74: 
 
Contracted Health Insurance issuers that limit the period of time that 
a claim may be filed for payment of benefits shall have the same 
limited period of time following payment of such claims to perform 
any review or audit for the purpose of reconsidering the validity of such 
claims.  
 
For example: 
 
Under the Coventry contract, Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center has 90 days to file claims. Therefore, 
Coventry has 90 days to request a refund from the date of payment.  
If there is no limitation written in the contract, then a contracted 
Payor can request a request refund at any time.   
  
 This regulation also applies to non contracted payors who utilizes Our Lady  
  of the Lake Regional Medical Center's contracted networks. The time limits 
 are located in each network contract and is listed on the Hospital Contract Grid.  
 
B. If a refund request is timely, then an audit is conducted to determine if the amount  
requested is correct by following the steps listed below: 
 
 
  
I. Complete the appropriate fields on the Managed Care Data Base using the  
payor or Network's Contract Summary to determine the type of payment,  
per diem, case rate, stop loss, fee schedule or percent of charges.  See 
exhibit AII. 
   
II. Document audit findings on the memos in the Patient Account Management. 
Screen In CAAM. See exhibit AIII.  
 
A. If the refund amount is under $5,000.00, the Managed Care Contract 
Auditor is to sign off on the Refund Document Form (if attached) in red 
Ink and route it to the Refund Clerk in the Business Office via interoffice  
Mail. 
 
B. If the refund amount is over $5,000.00,  after the Managed Care Contract 
Auditor has audited the refund request, it is to be routed to the Managed 
Care Contract Analyst for review and approval who will then route it to the 
Refund Clerk for processing.      
 
C. If the refund amount is over $10,000.00, the Managed Care Contract 
Analyst will review and then route it to the Divisional Director of Revenue 
Cycle Operations for approval.  
   
III. If there is no Refund Document Form attached, complete the amount section 
under insurance refund document section of a blank form and attached it to the 
request from the payor. See exhibit AIV. 
   
V. If the refund is untimely, complete steps I and II in section B. Attached the 
Regulation 74 denial notice to the request from the payor, draw a line through 
the Refund Request Form if one is attached and route the request to the Refund 
Clerk. See exhibit AV 
 
Note:  If denying a refund and it is over $5,000.00, it does not need 
to go to the Managed Care Contract Analyst nor the Divisional 
 Director of Revenue Cycle Operations for approval. 
  
II. Identified Overpayments from Managed Care Audit: 
 
A. If an overpayment is found during a Managed Care Audit, the payor 
Will not be notified if the amount of overpayment is under 
$20.00.  
    
B. If the amount of overpayment is over $20.00, verify that the time limit 
For the contracted payor has not expired. Refer to section I, Regulation 
74 of this policy and procedure.  
    
C. If the time limit has expired, the payor does not need to be notified. 
Document the memos in the Patient Account Management. Screen. See 
exhibit AIII.  
 
D. If the time limit has not expired, notify the payor in writing of an 
overpayment and document the memos in the Patient Account 
Management. Screen. See exhibit AIII and AVI.  
 
Supporting emails documenting the above are attached.  
    
 
 
 