Page 1 of 186 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
SCOPE OF SERVICE 
FY 2025 
MISSION STATEMENT 
 
 
Inspired by the vision of St. Francis of Assisi and in the tradition of the Roman Catholic Church, 
we extend the healing ministry of Jesus Christ to God’s people, especially those most in need. 
 
We call forth all who serve in this healthcare ministry, to share their gifts and talents to create a 
spirit of healing–with reverence and love for all of life, with joyfulness of spirit, and with 
humility and justice for all those entrusted to our care.  
 
We are, with God’s help, a healing and spiritual presence for each other and for the 
communities we are privileged to serve. 
 
CORE VALUES 
Core Values: The ministry of Jesus Christ and the spirit of St. Francis of Assisi call us to live these 
core values. 
 
SERVICE – The privilege of reaching out to meet the needs of others. We strive to exceed   
expectations and create an environment where patients and families feel welcome, 
comfortable and safe. We are committed to furthering the healthcare ministry of Jesus Christ. 
 
REVERENCE AND LOVE FOR ALL OF LIFE – Acknowledging that all of life is a gift from God. We 
serve with honesty and integrity and recognize the value of all work. We see Christ in all people 
and express a caring, courteous and loving concern for others. 
 
JOYFULNESS OF SPIRIT – An awareness of being blessed by God in all things. We demonstrate a 
dedication and commitment to those we serve. We recognize that everything speaks of God. Page 2 of 186 
We share the joy each day brings. 
 
HUMILITY – Being authentic in serving as an instrument of God.  We are faithful to God in word 
and deed. Our relationships with each other and our patients and families are built on trust. We 
recognize that God has given all of us gifts and talents to share with others. 
 
JUSTICE – Striving for equity and fairness in all relationships with special concern for those most 
in need. We demonstrate accountability and responsibly manage our resources. We base our 
decisions on how it will impact and affect those most in need 
 
STATEMENT OF PHILOSOPHY 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, sponsored by the Franciscan Missionaries of Our 
Lady, is an extension of the healing ministry of Jesus in the Church. 
 
This healing ministry is demonstrated by our caring for the sick without discrimination and 
according to the principles of Christian Social Justice and Natural Law. Our love flows from the 
love of God and serves Jesus Christ in the person of the sick. Our service is based on the 
recognition of the sanctity of life and the essential dignity of each individual. 
 
The Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady and the Staff of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical 
Center are committed to respect the life of each human being from the moment of conception 
until the moment of death. We are committed to the maintenance of the highest standards of 
quality patient care; to furthering the  professional development of physicians, nurses, and 
other hospital personnel; to promoting research in medicine, nursing, the allied fields and 
health care administration; and to exercising responsible stewardship for institutional 
resources. In the spirit of St. Francis of Assisi we dedicate ourselves to these principles. 
 Page 3 of 186 
PATIENT CARE SERVICES  
Definition of Patient Services, Patient Care and Patient Support 
Patient services at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) occur through 
organized and systematic processes designed to ensure the delivery of safe, effective and 
timely care and treatment. Providing patient services and the delivery of patient care requires 
specialized knowledge, judgment and skill derived from the principles of biological, physical, 
behavioral, psychosocial, pastoral or spiritual, and medical services. As such, patient services 
will be planned, coordinated, provided, delegated, and supervised by professional health care 
providers who recognize the unique physical, emotional and spiritual (body, mind and spirit) 
needs of each person. Patient care encompasses the recognition of disease and health, patient 
teaching, patient advocacy, spirituality, and research. Under the auspices of Our Lady of the 
Lake Regional Medical Center, Medical Staff, Nursing, and all clinical Health Care Professionals, 
as well as Support Services, function collaboratively as part of a multidisciplinary team to 
achieve positive outcomes. 
In the strictest sense, patient services are limited to those departments that have direct contact 
with patients. The full scope of patient care is provided only by those professionals who are also 
charged with the additional functions of patient assessment and planning patient care based on 
findings from the assessment. Patient Care Services and patient care are provided by licensed 
staff. 
The individual practice acts and licensure requirements guide the multidisciplinary team 
professionals’ practice for patient care. Patient support is provided by a variety of individuals 
and departments, which may not have direct contact with the patients, but who supports the 
care provided by the hands-on care provider. 
 
Nursing Theory and Philosophy  
Our philosophy is greatly influenced by OLOL’s mission, core values, and service standards, as 
well as, Watson’s Theory of Human Caring. As members of the Catholic Health Association, we 
believe that every life is to be respected and valued. Watson’s theory portrays human life as a 
“valued life to be cared for, respected, nurtured, understood, and assisted.”  As a faith-based 
organization, we believe in the power of prayer.  Watson views health as “unity and harmony 
within the mind, body, and soul.” In nursing, we believe that spiritual well-being is essential to 
achieving a healthful state.   
 Page 4 of 186 
As nurses at the Lake, we share the responsibility for achieving excellence in the delivery of 
nursing services to all God’s people.  We promote a collaborative, supportive and safe work 
environment that places the patient, family and community in the center of all we do.  
We make a conscious effort to preserve human caring within our clinical, administrative, 
educational, and research practices.  We deliver competent and compassionate services at 
every opportunity, extending the Spirit of Healing to all those entrusted to our care.  
Our Nursing Vision 
We will make a significant difference in every life we touch. 
Definition of Nursing 
Caring is the foundation of our nursing practice at OLOL and is consistent with the overall 
organizational initiatives for partnership, service, quality, and excellence. Nursing Services at 
OLOL is based on the principles of The Theory of Human Caring (Watson, 1999), the LA Nurse 
Practice Act, and Nursing’s Social Policy Statement (ANA, 2010).   
Aligned with Nursing’s Social Policy Statement (ANA, 2010), “Nursing is the protection, 
promotion, and optimization of health and abilities, prevention of illness and injury, alleviation 
of suffering through the diagnosis and treatment of human response, and advocacy in the care 
of individuals, families, communities, and populations.” 
Definitions of nursing have evolved to reflect the essential features of professional nursing: 
• Provision of a caring relationship that facilitates health and healing 
• Attention to the range human experiences and responses to health and illness withijng 
the physical and social environments 
• Integration of assessment data with knowledge gained from an appreciation of the 
patient or the group 
• Application of scientific knowledge to the processes of diagnosis and treatment through 
the use of judegment and critical thinking 
• Advancement of professional nursing knowledge through scholarly inquiry 
• Influence on social and public policy to promote social justice 
• Assurance of safe, quality, and evidence-based practice  
 Page 5 of 186 
Our Care Delivery Model  
The foundation of OLOL’s model for the delivery of care is interdisciplinary communication and 
collaboration that is team-based and patient-focused.  
The Collaborative Care Model is utilized to support a team approach to assist the primary, 
registered nurse in the daily care management of the patients and their environment. Care 
delivery is provided by registered nurses as well as licensed practical nurses supported by 
Certified Nursing Assistants, and Clinical Service Representatives, and a network of ancillary 
healthcare team members, all of whom aid in the comprehensive care of the various patient 
populations. Nursing team communication is accomplished via a variety of means, such as staff 
meetings, change of shift reports, everyday excellence and team huddles. Continuity of care is 
maintained in various hand-off situations, including but not limited to admits, shift reports, 
transfers, and discharges, through team communication using the SBAR (Situation, Background, 
Assessment and Recommendation) methodology.  
The Collaborative Care Model empowers our professional nurses to coordinate patient care to 
achieve the highest possible patient benefit. The model facilitates a multidisciplinary approach 
to patient care by incorporating active collaboration of diverse skills and disciplines. 
Interdisciplinary huddles and patient care conferences may be used in the planning of care and 
resources within the nursing unit and among other disciplines and departments.  These team 
discussions are a means of care coordination and an evaluation of patient’s progress toward 
goals, promoting continuity of care and timely, effective discharge planning. Each discipline 
contributes in their respective area of expertise by participating in multidisciplinary team 
huddles and ongoing electronic, written, and verbal communication with other members of the 
healthcare team.  This collaborative approach to care promotes optimal clinical outcomes and 
enhances the patient experience. 
Clinical Practice Guidelines 
Leadership promotes the use of evidence-based nursing practice and the implementation of 
nationally recognized clinical practice guidelines.  Nursing practice is implemented and 
evaluated through the established Performance Improvement (PI) process. 
Criteria for the implementation of evidence based nursing practice and clinical practice 
guidelines include, but are not limited to: 
• Published research findings  
• Quality and patient safety goals  
• Standards of nursing practice through the ANA and/or Specialty Nursing Organizations  
 Page 6 of 186 
Published nursing research and clinical practice guidelines shall be a reference source for the 
development and revision of nursing policies, nursing procedures and new or enhanced clinical 
programs. 
Process and outcome measures are identified and monitored, as appropriate, throughout the PI 
process. Through ongoing surveillance, clinical variation is identified, analyzed, and resolved to 
assure the provision of quality nursing care. 
Standards of Patient Care 
OLOL will perform the correct procedures, treatment, interventions, and care. Efficacy and 
appropriateness of procedures, treatments, interventions, and care provided will be 
demonstrated based on patient assessments/ reassessments, evidence-based practice, desired 
outcomes, and with respect for patient rights and confidentiality.  
OLOL will correctly and competently do the correct procedures, treatments, interventions, and 
care by following policies, procedures and protocols that have been established to ensure 
patient safety. 
The OLOL staff will design, implement and evaluate systems and services for care delivery 
(assessments, procedures, treatments, interventions, and quality patient care) which will be 
delivered: 
• With compassion, respect and dignity for each individual without bias, 
• In a manner that best meets the individualized needs of the patients, 
• In a timely manner based on the individualized needs of our patients, 
• Coordinated through multidisciplinary team collaboration to ensure continuity and 
seamless delivery of care, 
• In a manner that maximizes the efficient use of our financial and human resources by 
streamlining processes, decentralization of services, altered provider roles, enhanced 
communication, professional development of staff, and technological advances and 
enhancement. 
 
Transporting patients to and from patient care areas is determined by the patient’s condition 
and physician orders.  The primary nurse assesses the appropriate level of supervision required 
and consults with the physician for any unclear patient needs or direction. (See the policy 
“Transport of Critical Care Patients” NCA-015) 
Availability of Necessary Team Members (staff) 
The Nurse Manager has 24-hour-a-day accountability for the daily operations of each patient 
care area and is supported by the Divisional Director.  Clinical Nurse Specialists and Nursing Page 7 of 186 
Professional Development practitioneers are available for  education and orientation purposes.  
A charge nurse is assigned for each shift to facilitate operational efficiency and the delivery of 
safe, quality patient care.     
Patient care is provided in concert with the patient’s physician by Registered Nurses, Licensed 
Practical Nurses, Certified Nursing Assistants, nurse technicians and Clinical Service 
Representatives supported by the other healthcare professionals and ancillary/support team 
members such as Medical Management, Respiratory Therapists, Cardiac Rehabilitation, 
Pharmacists, Social Workers, Physical Therapists, Occupational Therapists, Speech Therapist, 
Dietary, Radiology, and Pastoral Care. Support services include but are not limited to ECG, Lab, 
Blood Bank, Transport, Central Supply, etc.  All nursing care is administered by or under the 
direction of the Registered Nurse(s).  
 
 
Staffing Plans 
Staffing levels are guided by benchmarks in nursing care hours per patient day.  Targets have 
been established according to a historical perspective of patient acuity typical for each area as 
well as national benchmarking data from sources such as Action QI (VHA) and the National 
Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI). A staffing matrix has been established utilizing 
the targeted nursing care hours per patient day along with the following:  the level and scope of 
care provided the frequency of the care, historical and anticipated patient days and average 
daily census, skill mix, and shift distribution percentages.   
Individual Unit Staffing Plans are available in the Patient Care Services office, located on the 
first floor of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center. 
The provision of staff is reviewed and validated each shift by the Director of Nursing/Designee 
and the House Manager/Supervisor to assure appropriate staff coverage and competency levels 
to meet the acuity and needs of the patients.  
The assessment of staffing needs incorporates the following: 
▪ Patient needs based on the assessment/reassessment process. 
▪ Review of complexity of patient needs based on multidisciplinary team collaboration. 
▪ Documentation from patient care staff that addresses patient needs, complexity, and 
condition. 
▪ Assessment of potential for admission and discharge activity. 
▪ Assessment of potential activity generated by scheduled procedures. 
▪ Identification of potential high risk, problem prone patients. Page 8 of 186 
Based on patient needs, the following resources are utilized to ensure appropriate staffing: 
• Utilization of additional staff, including overtime, as necessary. 
• Utilization of cross-trained professional staff from similar units. 
• Utilization of PRN staff (“Nurses as Needed”). 
• Utilization of Float Pool staff. 
• Utilization of Directors of Nursing and Nurse Supervisors in staffing. 
• Agency and inhouse contract 
 
This assessment is ongoing and staffing is adjusted as changing activity (admissions, transfers, 
and discharges) and patient needs dictate.  
The Collaborative Care Model is adapted to each unit based on the complexity and anticipated 
needs of the patient population on the unit. Each team members is assigned according to their 
scope of practice, expertise and competencies with consideration given for patient acuity, 
procedures, interventions and other services needed.  
Staff is reallocated to and from patient care areas by the Manager/designee in collaboration 
with the Patient Care Services office in accordance with the Zone Staffing and Reallocation of 
Resources guidelines.  Each patient care area is included in a staffing zone that includes other 
units with similar scopes of service and specialties.  Staff may be reallocated within each 
staffing zone to support patient care needs with consideration for competencies.  During times 
of decreased census, staff may be given the option to relocate within the zone to accommodate 
staffing on other units or go home if desired with or without pay.  In times of high census or 
staffing shift deficits, the zone will be utilized to fill staffing vacancies.  If no staff is available, 
the Nurse Manager will call off-duty staff, request flex pool staff, and/or cover the unit needs 
him/herself.   
Data on clinical and service screening indicators in combination with human resource screening 
indicators will be used to assess for a correlation of staffing effectiveness in direct patient care 
units/departments. The primary focus of these indicators will be in using the clinical data in 
combination with the human resource data to assess for staffing effectiveness. 
Budgeted Positions  
 Budgeted FTEs are available for each unit/department 
 
 
 Page 9 of 186 
METHODS USED TO MEET PATIENT/FAMILY CARE NEEDS 
Admission assessment and reassessment 
Patients are assessed on admission, at regular intervals as outlined in policy, and as needed or 
as ordered by their physician.  Reassessment occurs after intervention, with change in 
condition, and additionally when returning to the unit after procedures/testing.   
Patient Satisfaction Initiatives 
Patient needs are assessed as noted above with a plan of care developed to provide patient, 
family, and physician satisfaction.  Daily rounds are accomplished by the unit Nurse Manager or 
designee to support priority rounding by staff.  Follow-up is initiated immediately upon 
identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for process improvement. 
There is special focus on meeting patient needs through positioning, personal needs, pain 
management, and prayer which promotes improvement efforts for quality care and 
patient/family satisfaction with the service provided. 
Guest Services 
Guest Services is a support department of the hospital that provides needed assistance to 
patients, families, and guests.  Such services include acting as a welcoming presence, assisting 
with visitor badging, information sharing, surgical updates, wayfinding, service recovery and 
visitor escorts to various destinations.  The department also operates PBX, an inhospitable 
telephone system that assists with transfer of incoming and outgoing calls as well as life safety 
support directing various teams during codes to the proper locations for intervention.   
Management of Complaints/Issues 
Unfavorable comments/complaints are identified and addressed on the nursing unit or in the 
department where it occurred by the staff present to promote prompt attention. A complaint 
may also be reported to the Charge Nurse, Patient Experience Director, Manager, or Divisional 
Director to offer additional service recovery, follow-up, and trending of issues.  In addition, the 
hospital monitors the Patient Advocate line where complaints and grievances can be filed.  Per 
regulatory guidance, all grievances that cannot be resolved at bedside before discharge are 
assigned for further investigation.  Complainants receive written notification of investigation 
results within seven days as a goal. Some grievances require as long as thirty days to resolve in 
which case, complainants are notified of such with a letter. Leaders respond to complaints 
immediately with further follow-up within one week as indicated. 
 Page 10 of 186 
Post-Discharge Phone Calls 
The continuity of care extends beyond discharge with a nurse’s call to each patient discharged 
from his/her unit.  The call is made on the second or third day after discharge, primarily for 
inquiry as to the patient’s continued recovery and to elicit the patient’s opinion on the care 
received.  If a patient has concerns about his physical status, the nurse refers him to his 
attending physician.  If a negative opinion is expressed about the care, the patient is 
encouraged to share details that may help OLOL to improve its quality and continuity of care 
delivery.  In the event that a patient cannot be reached by phone, a note is sent in the mail. Page 11 of 186 
Nursing Organizational Chart 
President 
Charles L. Spicer, Jr. 
 
Chief Operating Officer (COO) 
Logan Austin 
and 
Chief Nursing Officer (CNO) / VP of Patient Care Services 
Nicole Telhiard, DNP, CPN, NE-BC 
↑ 
Vice President Nursing/Vice President Patient Care Services 
↑ 
Senior Director of Nursing 
↑ 
Director of Nursing / House Manager/House Supervisor 
 
Nurse Supervisor / Charge Nurse 
 
Registered Nurse 
 
Licensed Practical Nurse 
 
Unlicensed Assistive Personnel (CNA, NT, ER Tech)  
 Page 12 of 186 
 
Service Type Services 
Provided
Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical 
Center 
5000 Hennessey Blvd
Baton Rouge, LA
OLOL Ascension
1125 West Hwy 30
Gonzales, LA
OLOL Children's 
Hospital
8300 Constatin 
Blvd
Baton Rouge, LA
OLOL Livingston
5000 O'Donovan 
BLVD
Walker, LA
North Baton 
Rouge Campus
5439 Airline Hwy
Baton Rouge, LA
TAU Mental & 
Bhavioral Health
8080 Margaret 
Ann Drive
Baton Rouge, LA
Perkins Surgical
9032 Perkins Rd
Baton Rouge, LA
 Outpatient  
Infusion Clinic  
MOB II
Baton Rouge, LA
 Non-Oncology 
Outpatient Infusion 
Clinic  MOB I
Baton Rouge, LA
Medical/ 
Surgical X X X
Cardiac 
Monitoring / 
Telemetry
X X X
Critical Care X X X
Mental 
Behavioral 
Health
X X
Emergency 
Services X X X X X
OR - Surgery X X X X
Endoscopy X X X X
Heart & 
Vascular X X
SPD X X X X
Inpatient X X
Infusion 
Centers X X
X
Our Lady of the Lake
Service Line Grid
*The types described are not all inclusive of care provided nor exclusive of special needs accommondations
Locations
Oncology 
Services
Surgical 
Services
Inpatient 
Services
Non-Oncology 
Infusion CenterPage 13 of 186 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center is located at 5000 Hennessey Boulevard, Baton 
Rouge, LA.  Inpatient units include Intensive Care/Medical/Surgical / Cardiac / Trauma / Neuro 
Critical Care Units and Medical / Surgical / Telemetry / Oncology / Nephrology / and Mental 
Behavioral Health Units. Emergency Department Services are also included. Other departments 
include Surgical Services, Cardiac Cath Lab, Imaging, Respiratory and Laboratory Services, 
Pharmacy, Physical Medicine, Case Management, Social Services, Plant Operations, 
Environmental Services, Materials Management, Food and Nutritional Services, as well as 
Administration, Guest Services, Admissions, and Pastoral Care. 
 
Levels of Care to Meet Patient Needs 
Below are brief descriptions of patient care bed types provided at Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center (OLOL).  The types described are not all inclusive of care provided nor exclusive 
of special needs accommodations. 
 
Medical/Surgical Unit:    Nurse/Patient Ratio Target:  1:6 
Any patient care area that provides medical/surgical level care without telemetry monitoring. 
 
Monitored (Telemetry) Bed:    Nurse/Patient Ratio Target:   1:5-1:6  
Patients requiring special monitoring can be provided within an area equipped with access to 
an antennae system and with telemetry transmitter availability as ordered by a physician.  The 
telemetry unit is applied to the patient and cardiac rhythms are observed in the Central 
Monitoring Station.  Arrhythmias and heart rate changes are reported to the nurse caring for 
the patient by the monitoring technician. Patients assigned to a monitored bed do not have a 
primary cardiac diagnosis.  If the patient demonstrates unstable hemodynamics or cardiac 
rhythm, then the physician should be notified, and plans initiated to transfer to a higher level of 
observation: Progressive Care or Intensive Care Unit (ICU).  Monitored beds can be individually 
identified and located within a Medical/Surgical unit.  If isolated beds are monitored, staff 
assigned to the monitored bed must have competencies to provide the specified level of care. 
 
 Page 14 of 186 
Progressive Care:    Nurse/Patient Ratio Target:  1:3 to 1:4 
Progressive Care provides an intermediate level of care for acuity levels between that of the 
Intensice Care Unit, Monitored Bed, or Medical/Surgical Bed category.   Cardiac monitoring is 
one of the assessments available within this level of care along with non-titrated infusions, IV 
push medications to address hemodynamics, and other methods of treatment to address or 
observe for instability of the more complex patient that does not require intensive care 
services. Infusions are paired with nurse competency for that specific unit.  Cardiac progressive 
care units have competencies for administration of cardiac related medications/infusions.  
Med/Surg Progressive Care Units have competencies compatible of continuing levels of care 
initiated in the non-cardiac focused ICUs. 
  
Intensive Care:     Nurse Patient Ratio Target:  1:1 to 1:2 
Intensive Care/PACU/ECU provides care for patients with assessed high acuity with varied 
interventions and observation capability as per the Scope of Care for each unit.   
 
Adult Emergency Care 
Staffing Ratio target in B-Side, ECDU and ER Treatment Center is 5:1, and Main ER staffing ratios 
are 4:1, in Traumas staffing ratios are 2:1. ER Staff float within the various areas of the ER 
depending on their experience and skill level. All ER RN’s are required to have CPR, ACLS, and 
the EKG Course. Nurses that work in the Main ER are required to complete the Trauma Nursing 
Core Course. The Emergency Department does receive assistance from the float pool which 
includes ICU nurses and staff nurses. Support Services available to the ER include Transport, 
Central Supply, Housekeeping, Pharmacy, Lab, EKG, Radiology and Dietary. Patients going to 
ICU, who are on special drips requiring monitoring, or who are designated as “critical” will be 
transported with an RN and a monitor.  
 Page 15 of 186 
HVCU- Heart and Vascular Cardiac Universal Unit 
 
Unit Definition 
HVCU is an integrated universal cardiovascular thoracic nursing unit encompassing intensive 
care, step-down care and surgical telemetry nursing. HVCU team members specialize in the 
care of cardiovascular patients experiencing serious cardiovascular and cardiothoracic and 
vascular medical and surgical health conditions, including, but not limited to patients 
experiencing a serious cardiac event to pre- and post-surgical care.  Age range of patients is 
adolescent (age 16 or older) through senior geriatric.  Patients are assessed/reassessed upon 
admission, every 1-4 hours and as needed or as ordered by the patient’s physician.   
HVCU has 24 private beds. The unit operates on a 24-hour basis and has an average daily 
census of 14.5.   HVCU is staffed with Registered Nurses, Nurse Techs, Certified Nursing 
Assistants and CSR’s. 
 
Unit-specific competencies include, but are not limited to the following: 
 
• Arrhythmia recognition 
• Care of the cardiovascular patient 
• Hemodynamic monitoring 
• Temporary and permanent cardiac pacing 
• BLS and ACLS certification 
• Code management 
• IABP management 
• Targeted Temperature Management 
• Open chest resuscitation 
• Conscious sedation 
• Care of the ventilated patient 
• Blood administration 
• Chest tube management 
• Femoral Sheath removal and hematoma management 
• CVVHDF management 
 
HVCU is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipating, or recovering from: 
• Coronary artery disease  
• Cardiovascular surgery including 
o On and off pump cardiac bypass 
o Aortic, mitral, pulmonic repair or replacement 
o Thoracic and Abdominal Aortic aneurysm repair 
o Aorto-bifem bypass grafts 
• TAVR- Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement 
• LARIAT- to reduce risk of stroke from atrial fibrillation Page 16 of 186 
• Convergent procedure for the ablation of Atrial Fibrillation 
• Use of insulin infusion for tight glycemic control 
• Management of patients with open sternotomy  
• Chest pain, angina, myocardial infarction  
• Congestive Heart Failure and shock 
• Cardiac interventional procedures including cardiac catheterization,  
coronary angioplasty, pre-post cardiac stenting, pre-post permanent pacemaker/ICD 
insertion, targeted temperature management ( CODE ICE), directional coronary 
arthrectomy, and pre/post-operative coronary artery bypass/cardiac valve surgery 
• Elective cardioversions 
• Cardiac arrhythmias  
• Diabetes Mellitus, acute and chronic 
• Renal Failure, acute and chronic 
 
Cardiovascular modalities specific to HVCU include but are not limited to: 
• Care of patients requiring controlled vasoactive and/or antiarrhythmic IV medications 
requiring titration, maintenance and monitoring  
• Surgical wound management 
• Chest Tube insertion and management 
• Central line management 
• Eckos Catheter management 
• Blood product administration and monitoring 
• Cardiac monitoring and management of cardiac arrhythmias 
• Hemodialysis/hemofiltration/CRRT 
• Ventilator support 
• Maintenance of arterial and venous sheaths 
• Invasive monitoring including pulmonary artery catheters 
• Hemodynamic profile calculation 
• Management of patients with Intra Aortic Balloon Pumps  
• Initiating emergency and life-saving measures/Cardiopulmonary arrest management 
 
Special procedures performed in HVCU include but are not limited to: 
• Central line placement 
• Arterial line insertion 
• IABP insertion 
• Venous and arterial sheath care 
• Elective cardioversion 
• External cardiac pacing 
• Chest tube insertion 
• Lumbar puncture, bone marrow aspiration, thoracentesis 
• Lumbar drain management 
• Pacemaker interrogations Page 17 of 186 
• Pulmonary artery catheter insertion 
• Removal of arterial sheaths 
 
Unit-Specific Methods Used to Meet Needs of Patient Population 
Patient needs are assessed as noted above with a plan of care developed to provide patient, 
family, and physician satisfaction.  The occurrence of daily morning rounds with the attending 
Cardiovascular surgeon, Mid-level practitioner and unit supervisor/charge nurse develop the 
appropriate plan and level of care. Daily rounds by the unit Nurse Manager support priority 
rounding by staff throughout the 24 hours.  Follow-up is initiated immediately upon 
identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for process improvement. 
There is special focus on meeting patient needs through prayer, special needs, positioning, and 
pain control which continue as improvement efforts to provide quality care, and exceed 
patient/family expectations for service. 
 
Scope of planned new services 
No anticipated change in service is noted at this time. 
 
 Page 18 of 186 
SCOPE OF SERVICE 
               
HV-7 
CARDIOVASCULAR AND CARDIOTHORACIC PROGRESSIVE CARE UNIT 
 
 
 
Unit Definition 
HV-7 is a cardiothoracic progressive care nursing unit that provides patient care to non-critical 
medical and surgical cardiovascular and cardiothoracic patients.  The unit’s primary care team 
consists of RNs, CNA, CSRs and nurse techs and provides care for both inpatient and 
observational needs pre- and post-procedure through discharge. Additional resources include 
Nurse Practitioners and Physician Assistants. Age range of patients is adolescent (age 16 or 
older) through geriatric. Patients are assessed/reassessed upon admission, every 4 hours and as 
needed or as ordered by the patient’s physician.   
 
HV-7 consists of 24 private care beds. The unit operates on a 24-hour basis. The designated 
patient population is the pre and post –op care of vascular , thoracic surgical patients, pre and 
post interventional and electrophysiology patients and cardiovascular disease patient  
population All RN’s are BLS /ACLS certified and specially trained in the care of cardiovascular 
and cardiothoracic thoracic surgery nursing care , with advanced training in EKG monitoring, 
arrhythmia recognition and treatment.  
 
Unit-specific competencies include, but are not limited to the following: 
1. EKG monitoring, arrhythmia recognition and treatment 
2. Care of the cardiovascular  and cardiothoracic patient  
3. Stroke recognition and basic management. 
4. Administration and monitoring of IV inotropic and vasoactive  drugs that do not require 
titration  
 
HV-7 is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipating, or recovering from: 
• Pre-op Coronary Artery Bypass with or without Cardiac Catheterization 
• Pre-op TAVR 
• Pre-op Cardiac Valve Replacement 
• Cardiovascular disease 
• Heart Failure  
• Chest Pain 
• Cardiac Arrhythmia and Conduction disorders 
• Acute Myocardial Infarction 
• Post Percutaneous Cardiovascular Procedures 
• Post Electrophysiology studies and therapies and ablations Page 19 of 186 
• Syncope 
• Permanent Implanted Cardiac Pacemaker 
• Other procedures and medical conditions requiring progressive care as determined by 
patient need for cardiac monitoring 
• Vascular and thoracic procedures to include  but not limited to: Femoral-popliteal, 
endovascular stent grafts, carotid endarterectomies, thoracotomies, lobectomies, 
 
 
Cardiovascular competencies specific to HV-7 include but are not limited to: 
• BLS/ACLS certification 
• Arrhythmia management 
• Surgical wound management 
• Chest Tube insertion and management 
• Central line management 
• Blood administration 
• Cardiac monitoring and treatment with oral and IV medications 
• Patients requiring controlled vasoactive and/or antiarrhythmic IV medications, not 
requiring frequent titration 
• Care of the pre- and post surgical and  interventional patient including  Convergent 
procedures, post- thoracotomy (see above) 
• Femoral hematomas detection and management 
• Evaluation of retro-peritoneal bleeds 
• Cardiac Teaching 
• Care of the patient with Acute Coronary Syndrome which includes post MI patients 
• Pre- and post-permanent pacemaker and cardiac defibrillator implantation 
• Moderate sedation 
• Arterial and venous sheath removal 
• Atrial fibrillation ablation 
• V-tachycardia ablation 
 
 
Special procedures performed on HV-7 include but are not limited to: 
• Central line placement 
• Elective cardioversions 
• External cardiac pacing 
• Chest tube insertion 
• Thoracentesis 
• Pacemaker interrogations 
• Cardio/pulmonary arrest management 
• PCA 
• Epidurals 
 Page 20 of 186 
Unit-Specific Methods Used to Meet Needs of Patient Population 
Patient needs are assessed as noted above with a plan of care developed to provide patient, 
family, and physician satisfaction.  Daily rounds are accomplished by the unit Nurse Manager to 
support priority rounding by staff throughout the 24 hours.  Follow-up is initiated immediately 
upon identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for process 
improvement. There is special focus on meeting patient needs through prayer, special needs, 
positioning, and pain control which continue as improvement efforts to provide quality care, 
and exceed patient/family expectations for service. 
 
Scope of planned new services 
No anticipated change in service is noted at this time. 
 
 Page 21 of 186 
SCOPE OF SERVICE 
 
HV-8  
CARDIOVASCULAR AND VASCULAR PROGRESSIVE CARE UNIT 
 
 
 
Unit Definition 
HV-8 is a cardiothoracic progressive care nursing unit that provides patient care to non-critical 
medical and surgical cardiovascular, cardiothoracic and vascular patients.  The unit’s primary 
care team consists of RNs, CNA, CSRs and nurse techs and provides care for both inpatient and 
observational needs pre- and post-procedure through discharge. Additional resources include 
Nurse Practitioners and Physician Assistants. Age range of patients is adolescent (age 16 or 
older) through geriatric. Patients are assessed/reassessed upon admission, every 4 hours and as 
needed or as ordered by the patient’s physician.   
 
HV-8 consists of 24 private care beds. The unit operates on a 24-hour basis. The designated 
patient population is the vascular medical and pre and post –op care of vascular surgical 
patients.  All RN’s are BLS/ACLS certified and specially trained in the care of cardiovascular, 
cardiothoracic and vascular surgery nursing care, with advanced training in EKG monitoring, 
arrhythmia recognition and treatment  
 
 
Unit-specific competencies include, but are not limited to the following: 
5. EKG monitoring, arrhythmia recognition and treatment 
6. Care of the cardiovascular and vascular patient , including peripheral vascular disease 
management 
7. Stroke recognition and basic management. 
8. Administration and monitoring of IV inotropic and vasoactive  drugs that do not require 
titration  
 
HV-8 is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipating, or recovering from: 
• Pre and Post-Coronary Artery Bypass with or without Cardiac Catheterization 
• Pre-op cardiac valve surgery 
• Cardiovascular disease management 
• Peripheral vascular disease management 
• Heart Failure  
• Chest Pain 
• Cardiac Arrhythmia and Conduction disorders 
• Acute Myocardial Infarction 
• Post Percutaneous Cardiovascular/vascular  Procedures Page 22 of 186 
• Syncope 
• Permanent Implanted Cardiac Pacemaker 
• Other procedures and medical conditions requiring progressive care as determined by 
patient need for cardiac monitoring 
 
 
 
Cardiovascular competencies specific to HV-8 include but are not limited to: 
• BLS/ACLS certification 
• Arrhythmia management 
• Surgical wound management 
• Chest Tube insertion and management 
• Central line management 
• Blood administration 
• Cardiac monitoring and treatment with oral and IV medications 
• Patients requiring controlled vasoactive and/or antiarrhythmic IV medications, not 
requiring frequent titration 
• Aquapheresis 
• Care of the peripheral endovascular interventional and , post- thoracotomy, post 
cardiothoracic surgery patient  
• Femoral hematomas detection and management 
• Evaluation of retro-peritoneal bleeds  
• Cardiac Teaching 
• Care of the patient with Acute Coronary Syndrome which includes post MI patients 
• Pre- and post-permanent pacemaker and cardiac defibrillator implantation 
• Moderate sedation 
 
Special procedures performed on HV-7 include but are not limited to: 
• Central line placement 
• Elective cardioversions 
• External cardiac pacing 
• Chest tube insertion 
• Thoracentesis 
• Pacemaker interrogations 
• Cardio/pulmonary arrest management 
• PCA, Epidurals 
 
Unit-Specific Methods Used to Meet Needs of Patient Population 
Patient needs are assessed as noted above with a plan of care developed to provide patient, 
family, and physician satisfaction.  Daily rounds are accomplished by the unit Nurse Manager to 
support priority rounding by staff throughout the 24 hours.  Follow-up is initiated immediately 
upon identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for process 
improvement. There is special focus on meeting patient needs through prayer, special needs, Page 23 of 186 
positioning, and pain control which continue as improvement efforts to provide quality care, 
and exceed patient/family expectations for service. 
 
Scope of planned new services 
No anticipated change in service is noted at this time. 
 Page 24 of 186 
Scope of Service 
Non-Invasive CardioVascular Lab (NICVL) 
 
Unit Definition 
The Non-Invasive CardioVascular Lab is an 4 private bed care center for the provision of 
managing bedside procedures, open day shift 5 days a week.  Patients are sent to the NICVL 
from inpatient beds or outpatient admit for procedures. 
Special procedures performed in NICVL include but not limited to: 
1. Stress echocardiography (by a mid-level practitioner or Registered nurse in presence of a 
cardiologist) 
2. TEE 
3. Cardioversion 
 
The observation period serves the purpose of evaluating symptoms, defining diagnosis, and 
standardizing disease management to expedite care and improve outcomes.   
CCDU team members are specialized in the provision of cardiovascular nursing care and are 
supported by an on-site or on-call mid-level practitioner as well as physician coverage.   The 
unit is staffed with Registered nurses, Nurse practitioners, certified nursing assistants and 
clinical service representatives. Patients range in age from adolescent (age of 16 or older) 
through geriatric.  Each patient is assessed upon admission, every 2-4 hours, and as needed or 
as ordered by the patient‘s physician.  
Unit Specific Competencies 
Unit specific competencies include, but are not limited to the following: 
1. Care of the cardiovascular patient population 
2. BLS certified 
3. Cardiac Arrhythmia recognition/management 
4. Code management 
5. Moderate sedation 
6. Cardiovascular procedural support ( TEE, Cardioversion, stress echocardiography) 
7. Temporary/Permanent cardiac pacing 
8. Arterial line monitoring/central line management 
9. Respiratory care to include oxygen therapy 
10. Sterile technique Page 25 of 186 
11. Infusion of antiarrhythmic , vasoactive agents  not requiring titration* 
12. TIMI, Crusade Bleeding Time, and Grace Patient Scoring 
 
Methods used to meet patient needs: 
The unit is staffed with nurse practitioners during day shift, 5 days a week. A cardiologist is 
always available. 
 Page 26 of 186 
Scope of Service 
 Tower Heart & Vascular 3 (THV3) 
 
Unit Definition 
THV3 is a cardiovascular telemetry nursing unit that provides progressive level patient care to 
non-critical medical/cardiovascular patients. This patient population will consist primarily of the 
cardio/med patient that is admitted to other specialties outside of the cardiovascular team. The 
unit’s primary care team consists of RNs and CNAs, that provide care to those seriously ill 
patients requiring an intermediate level of care for both inpatient and observational needs 
through discharge. Age range of patients is adolescent (age 16 or older) through geriatric. 
Patients are assessed/reassessed upon admission, every 4 hours and as needed or as ordered 
by the patient’s physician.  
 
THV3 consists of 20 private care beds. The unit operates on a 24-hour basis and has an average 
daily census of 18.  THV3 is staffed with registered nurses, CNAs, Nurse Techs, and CSR’s. 
 
Unit-specific competencies include, but are not limited to the following: All nurses are BLS and 
ACLS certified (within the first year of employment). Core competencies include EKG monitoring 
and basic cardiovascular care knowledge, stroke recognition and basic management. 
 
THV3 is specifically designed for the primary care of the CHF patient and is also equipped, and 
staffed to meet the needs of patients with, anticipating, or recovering from: 
 
• Cardiac Arrhythmia and Conduction Disorders 
• Heart Failure & Chest pain 
• Percutaneous Cardiovascular Procedures 
• Syncope 
• Permanent Cardiac Pacemaker 
• Syncope 
• Atrial Fibrillation 
• Cardiovascular Disease  
• Other procedures and medical conditions requiring progressive care as determined by 
patient needs  
 
Cardiovascular competencies specific to THV3 include but are not limited to: 
• Surgical wound management 
• Chest Tube insertion and management 
• Central line management 
• Cardiac monitoring and treatment with oral and IV medications 
• Arrhythmia management Page 27 of 186 
• Patients requiring controlled vasoactive and/or antiarrhythmic IV medications, not 
requiring titration 
• Care of the pre- and post-cardiac surgical/interventional patient 
• Cardiac Teaching 
• Pre- and post-permanent pacemaker and cardiac defibrillator implantation 
• BLS and ACLS certification 
 
Special procedures performed on THV3 include but are not limited to: 
• Chest tube insertion 
• Lumbar puncture, bone marrow aspiration, thoracentesis 
• Pacemaker interrogations 
 
Unit-Specific Methods Used to Meet Needs of Patient Population  
 
Patient needs are assessed, as noted above, with a plan of care developed to provide patient, 
family, and physician satisfaction.  Daily rounds are accomplished by the unit Nurse Manager to 
support priority rounding by staff throughout the 24 hours.  Follow-up is initiated immediately 
upon identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for process 
improvement. There is special focus on meeting patient needs through prayer, special needs, 
positioning, and pain control which continue as improvement efforts to provide quality care, 
and exceed patient/family expectations for service. 
 
 
 
Scope of planned new services 
No anticipated change in service is noted at this time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 28 of 186 
Scope of Service 
Tower Heart & Vascular 4 (THV4) 
 
Unit Definition 
THV4 is a cardiovascular telemetry nursing unit that provides progressive level patient care to 
non-critical medical/cardiovascular patients. This patient population will consist primarily of the 
cardio/med patient that is admitted to other specialties outside of the cardiovascular team. The 
unit’s primary care team consists of RNs and CNAs, that provide care to those seriously ill 
patients requiring an intermediate level of care for both inpatient and observational needs 
through discharge. Age range of patients is adolescent (age 16 or older) through geriatric. 
Patients are assessed/reassessed upon admission, every 4 hours and as needed or as ordered 
by the patient’s physician.  
 
THV4 consists of 29 private care beds. The unit operates on a 24-hour basis and has an average 
daily census of 24.  THV4 is staffed with registered nurses, CNAs, Nurse Techs, and CSR’s. 
 
Unit-specific competencies include, but are not limited to the following: All nurses are BLS and 
ACLS certified (within the first year of employment). Core competencies include EKG monitoring 
and basic cardiovascular care knowledge, stroke recognition and basic management. 
 
THV4 is specifically designed for the primary care of the CHF patient and is also equipped, and 
staffed to meet the needs of patients with, anticipating, or recovering from: 
 
• Cardiac Arrhythmia and Conduction Disorders 
• Heart Failure & Chest pain 
• Percutaneous Cardiovascular Procedures 
• Syncope 
• Permanent Cardiac Pacemaker 
• Syncope 
• Atrial Fibrillation 
• Cardiovascular Disease  
• Other procedures and medical conditions requiring progressive care as determined by 
patient needs  
 
Cardiovascular competencies specific to THV4 include but are not limited to: 
• Surgical wound management 
• Chest Tube insertion and management 
• Central line management 
• Cardiac monitoring and treatment with oral and IV medications 
• Arrhythmia management Page 29 of 186 
• Patients requiring controlled vasoactive and/or antiarrhythmic IV medications, not 
requiring titration 
• Care of the pre- and post-cardiac surgical/interventional patient 
• Cardiac Teaching 
• Pre- and post-permanent pacemaker and cardiac defibrillator implantation 
• BLS and ACLS certification 
 
Special procedures performed on THV4 include but are not limited to: 
• Chest tube insertion 
• Lumbar puncture, bone marrow aspiration, thoracentesis 
• Pacemaker interrogations 
 
Unit-Specific Methods Used to Meet Needs of Patient Population  
 
Patient needs are assessed, as noted above, with a plan of care developed to provide patient, 
family, and physician satisfaction.  Daily rounds are accomplished by the unit Nurse Manager to 
support priority rounding by staff throughout the 24 hours.  Follow-up is initiated immediately 
upon identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for process 
improvement. There is special focus on meeting patient needs through prayer, special needs, 
positioning, and pain control which continue as improvement efforts to provide quality care, 
and exceed patient/family expectations for service. 
 
 
 
Scope of planned new services 
No anticipated change in service is noted at this time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 30 of 186 
Heart and Vascular Ambulatory Unit (HVAU) 
 
Scope of Service 
 
 
Unit Definition 
HVAU is a short stay nursing unit that comprises 12 licensed inpatient beds and 9 outpatient 
observation beds that provides care to ambulatory, medical and surgical patients requiring an 
intermediate level of nursing care, treatment and observation.  HVAU team members specialize 
in the care of cardiovascular patients: pre-and post-cardiac catheterization, pre and post-
operative care of vascular patients, pre-op care of open heart surgery patients and patients 
with chest pain.  Age range of patients is adolescent (age 16 or older) through geriatric.  
Patients are assessed/reassessed upon admission, every 2-4 hours and as needed or as ordered 
by the patient’s physician. 
 
HVAU has 21 private beds.  The unit is available to patients on a 24-hour basis.  HVAU is staffed 
with registered nurses,  nurse techs, certified nursing assistants and clinical service 
representatives. 
 
Unit-specific competencies include, but are not limited to the following: 
• Arrhythmia recognition 
• Care of the cardiovascular patient 
• Temporary and permanent cardiac pacing 
• BLS certification/ ACLS for nurses responsible for procedures that requirel moderate 
sedation 
• Code management 
• Moderate sedation 
• Blood administration 
• Sterile technique 
• Wound management 
• Arterial and venous sheath removal 
• Cardiovascular procedural support (TEE, cardioversion) 
• Arterial line monitoring 
 
HVAU is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipating, or recovering from: 
 
• Chest pain 
• Left Heart Catheterization with/without stent 
• Vascular and coronary interventional procedures  
• Pre and post device implant  
• Cardiac Arrhythmia Page 31 of 186 
• Atherosclerosis 
 
Special procedures performed on HVAU include but are not limited to: 
 
• Sheath removal and manual pressure application 
• TEE 
• Cardioversion 
• Arterial line monitoring 
• Telemetry monitoring 
• Moderate sedation 
 
 
Support services that are available: ECG, LAB, Medical Management, Pastoral care services, 
Respiratory Therapy, PT, OT, ST, Dietary, and Cardiac Rehab. 
 
The following may require special considerations during transport: bed rest, groin precautions, 
oxygen requirements, telemetry monitoring, and arterial lines. 
 
 
Unit-Specific Methods Used to Meet Needs of Patient Population  
 
Patient needs are assessed as noted above with a plan of care developed to provide patient, 
family, and physician satisfaction.  Daily rounds are accomplished by the unit Nurse Manager to 
support priority rounding by staff throughout the 24 hours.  Follow-up is initiated immediately 
upon identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for process 
improvement. There is special focus on meeting patient needs through prayer, special needs, 
positioning, and pain control which continue as improvement efforts to provide quality care, 
and exceed patient/family expectations for service. 
 
 
 
 Page 32 of 186 
CARDIOVASCULAR LAB 
Scope of Service 
 
Unit Definition 
The Cardiovascular Labs are utilized to diagnose and treat coronary artery disease, peripheral 
vascular disease, and congenital anomalies in infants to the geriatric population.  The 
Electrophysiology Labs are utilized to diagnose and treat electrical conduction anomalies in the 
heart ie.. Atrial fibrillation ablations / Convergent procedures, V. Tach ablations, Wolff 
Parkinson White (WPW), and range in ages from adolescence to geriatrics.  The Hybrid OR is 
designated for endovascular cases that may require converting to open procedures and 
requiring fluoroscopy ie.. Coronary stenting with coronary artery bypass, TAVR.  The staffing 
mix in the Cardiovascular Labs consist of Registered Nurses (RN’s), Radiology Technologists 
(RT’s), Cardiovascular Technologists (CVT’s), and Radiology Technologist Assistants (RTA’s). 
 
Unit-Specific Methods Used to Meet Needs of Patient Population 
Patient needs are assessed holistically and staffing is based upon patient acuity.  There are at 
least 3 team members on each case assisting the physician.  There is at least 1 RN and 1 RT on 
every case.  The on-call team consists of 4 team members with 2 RN’s and 2 RT’s on call to 
cover Heart Alerts, Intra-aortic balloon pump, pacemaker and permanent internal 
cardiodefibrillator devices, Hybrid room coverage (RT), and scheduled cases.  The team is 
available after hours, on weekends and holidays. 
  
Unit competencies include, but are not limited to the following: 
1. Moderate sedation 
2. BLS / ACLS certification 
3. Age specific 
4. Initial competency for each specialty (RN, RT, CVT, and RTA) 
5. Procedural competencies 
6. Arterial sheath & groin management 
7. Sheath removal 
8. Defibrillators 
9. EKG recognition 
10. Heart Alert / Dual Heart Alerts Page 33 of 186 
11. Aseptic technique 
12. 02 / C02 tank maintenance 
13. Co-ox Rapid point (RN’s only) 
14. Infection Control 
15. ACT testing (RN’s only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 34 of 186 
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT SERVICE LINE 
Scope of Service 
ADULT EMERGENCY CARE UNIT (ECU) 
Unit Definition 
The Adult ECU is a 66 bed unit that is located on the 2nd floor and provides a wide range of care 
from emergent, to intermediate, to low acuity patients, who arrive with a variety of 
presentations to include acute illnesses, chronic illnesses, or traumatic injuries. Our average 
daily census is 225 patients per day, but has gone as high as 250, with approximately 75 to 80 
admissions per day. The age range is 16 years through geriatric. ECU is staffed with registered 
nurses, licensed practical nurses, ER Techs, Nurse Techs, CSR’s, Patient Liaisons, ER Coders, and 
a Social Worker; along with Physicians, Scribes, Nurse Practitioners & Physician Assistants.   
 
Areas of the Adult ECU: 
• A, C, & P side areas  provide care for the highest acuity Adult Emergency patients. 
• B-Side area that provides a safe environment for our patients that present with 
Emotional Disturbances.  Four Trauma bays that are equipped for the care of the acute 
Adult and Pediatric Level I or Level II trauma activation patients 
• D-Pod area  is equipped to manage the lower acuity Adult Emergency patients. 
• Emergency Mental Behavioral Health Unit (EMBH) is a psychiatric extension of the 
Emergency Department to provide a safe area for mental and behavioral health patients 
who originate from the Emergency Department 
 
The EMBH unit provides one mental and behavioral health examination area, eight MBH 
patient interview rooms, two patient waiting areas and a secure holding area.   Upon 
completion of the MBH  evaluation the patients’ disposition will include admission to an 
appropriate care facility, referral to lower level of care or discharge to home. The expected 
volume of the Mental and Behavioral Expansion is expected to be between 25 and 40 patients 
per/day in a licensed capacity of 22.  Staffing will include Psychiatrists, Residents, mid-level 
Providers, Registered Nurses, Mental Health Techs, and COPE Specialists (LCSW, LMSW, LMFT, 
and LPCs).  The RNs, MHTs and COPE Specialists  will provide 24/7 day a week coverage.   
 
The Adult ECU is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients 
experiencing the following conditions: 
• Chest Pain 
• Bronchitis Page 35 of 186 
• Traumatic Injury 
• Syncope 
• Cellulitis 
• Extremity Pain 
• Difficulty Breathing 
• Urinary Tract Infection 
• Acute Upper Respiratory Infections 
• Acute Pharyngitis  
• Ischemic and Hemorrhagic Stroke 
• Other disease processes 
 
Special procedures performed in the Adult ECU include, but are not limited to:  
• Laceration repairs 
• Incision and drainage 
• Splinting and strapping 
• Lumbar punctures 
• Foreign body removal 
• Minor burn wound care 
• Reduction of dislocations 
• Vaginal exams 
• Eye exams    
• Rape Exams 
• CT Tubes 
• Central line placement 
• Intubation 
• Defibrillation 
 
Special Services 
The Adult ECU has a multitude of services available 
• Physicians, 24-hour coverage 
• On-call schedule that covers nearly all specialty areas 
• Trauma Service, Hospital Medicine Service, and Intensivist Service available in-house, 24 
hours a day 
• Includes the ACS designated level II Trauma suite; provides staffing support during 
trauma activations and initial evaluation of patients 
Required Competencies: BLS, ACLS, CPI and TNCC. PALS and ENPC is required for nurses who 
care for pediatric patients. 
Methods Used to Meet Patient / Family Care Needs  Page 36 of 186 
From the time the patient arrives to the ER to the disposition, all processes are date/time 
stamped in order to ensure all are completed for each patient. Patient complaints/issues are 
followed up by the Nurse Manager, Medical Director, Nurse Supervisors, and Charge Nurses. 
The Complaint Tracker is used as a method of tracking complaints and follow-up.  
 
Emergency Department Observation Unit 
Purpose 
To provide an overview of the services provided, populations served and methods of meeting 
high quality patient care needs for the Emergency Department Observation Unit at Our Lady of 
the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC)  
 
Unit Definition 
The Emergency Department Observation Unit (EDOU) at OLOLRMC will provide care to 
emergency patient populations between age eighteen and geriatric who require extended, ER 
focused care and active treatment management for an expected length of stay less than 24 
hours. This unit will utilize physician/provider driven diagnosis specific order set protocols 
based on best practice and clinical evidence. 
Scope of Services/Procedures Provided 
OLOL RMC Emergency Department Observation Unit is open, staffed and operational 24 hours 
a day, 7 days per week.  The EDOU is comprised of 15 treatment beds. 
The EDOU core objectives is to provide quality safe patient care, expedite patient transfers 
from the Emergency Department and assure appropriate utilization of hospital inpatient and 
outpatient services 
OLOL RMC Emergency Department Observation Unit has the capabilities for evaluation of 
cardiac, medical, non-surgical neurological, respiratory, surgical, orthopedic, gynecologic, 
ophthalmic, ENT, and urology patients.  Post Trauma Resuscitation and Cardiac Arrest patients 
will not utilize EDOU services due to the critical needs of this patient population. 
Patient Care Processes Within the Emergency Department Observation Unit 
1) Patient Assessment/Triage 
a) Nursing care delivered in the Emergency Department Observation Unit is 
based on the standards of Emergency Nursing Practice outlined by the Page 37 of 186 
Emergency Nursing Association (ENA) and the Nurse Practice Act for the 
State of Louisiana.  The EDOU nurses will utilize the nursing process in care of 
the patient, to include assessment, diagnosis, planning, implementation and 
evaluation.  
b) All patients are triaged upon their arrival to OLOL RMC Emergency 
Department by a Registered Nurse. The emergency nurse determines the 
priority of care based on a rapid, systematic collection of data relevant to 
each patient’s chief complaint, age, cognitive level, past medical history, and 
social situation. This information is used to determine patient acuity and any 
immediate physical or psychosocial needs.   
2) Plan of Care 
a) The plan of care is developed based on the patient’s initial assessment and 
chief complaint in the Emergency Department  
b) It is the responsibility of the physician/provider to discuss, diagnosis, treat 
and provide a follow up plan to the patient 
c) Patients needing  extended emergency treatment with expected discharge 
between 8-18hours who meet EDOU  inclusion criteria will be transferred to 
EDOU to completed treatment plan in an outpatient status 
3) Discharge Criteria 
a) The physician/provider will review patients medical progress no less than 
every 4 hours and will determine if discharge criteria has been met 
b) The emergency department observation unit nurse is to review the discharge 
and follow up care instructions given by the provider with the patient and/or 
family. The person receiving the instructions will acknowledge receipt with a 
signature and a copy will be provided to the patient/family.  
c) Documentation of teaching or discharge instructions is to be documented in 
the electronic health record and After Visit Summary (AVS) including 
medication reconciliation information will be provided to the patient at 
discharge. 
 
Availability of Staff 
1) Organization of the Department: 
a) The Nursing Director is responsible for assuring quality, safety, and 
appropriateness of patient care and for day-to-day administrative functions 
of the department and the management of the nursing team. Supported by 
the unit supervisor 
b) The Medical Director is responsible for the oversight of all aspects of the 
medical care provided in the department including hiring and supervision of 
EDOU clinical/clerical staff  
c) The charge nurse is identified on each shift by the Nurse Manager and is 
responsible for daily operations and patient flow in conjunction with the 
Nursing House Manager Page 38 of 186 
d) The EDOU Nurse Leader and EDOU Medical Director will partner to assure 
quality care  delivery, and patient experience outcomes , including  regular 
meetings to evaluate data and feedback 
e) In the absence of EDOU leadership, the emergency department supervisors 
will act as a resource for EDOU staff. 
2) Definition of Practice and the Role of Multidisciplinary Care 
a) A multidisciplinary team delivers care to the patients in the Emergency 
Department. The team may consist of the Emergency Department RN, 
physician, nurse practitioner, physician assistant, and emergency room 
technician, as well as other specialty physicians as necessary, respiratory 
therapists, radiology technologists, chaplains, and mental health 
professionals, and others as appropriate.  
3) Staffing Plan/Grid 
a) The staffing plan varies based on, but not limited to, patient volume, patient 
acuity, staff competency and environmental factors with goal to staff 3 RNs 
at a 4:1 nurse patient ratio,  2 ER Techs/Nurse Techs and 1 CSR during max 
capacity of unit 
4) Staff Competency 
a) All team members attend hospital and department orientation. New hires 
are precepted by an appropriate staff member. All Emergency Department 
Observation Unit staff are required to have current BLS certification. 
b) All RN staff is required to have ACLS certification within 3 months of hire and 
maintain certification thereafter. 
c) All RN staff is encouraged to obtain TNCC certification within 6 months of 
hire and maintain certification thereafter.  
d) All RN staff are required to complete CPI every two years. 
 
Methods Used to Assess and Meet the Patient Needs/Services 
1) The Emergency Department utilizes systematic, ongoing measurements to assess 
the quality of patient care and/or services being delivered.  Performance 
Improvement activities are planned, designed, measured, analyzed and 
improvements are made in accordance with the hospital wide PI process and 
throughput metrics. 
2) OLOLRMC EDOU measures patient satisfaction on a consistent basis. Metrics and 
outcomes are communicated to all associates and providers within the ED.  
 
 
 
 Page 39 of 186 
CRITICAL CARE SERVICE LINE 
Scope of Service 
MEDICAL INTENSIVE CARE UNIT (MICU) 
 
Unit Definition 
MICU is an intensive care nursing unit designed and equipped to provide and maintain a clinical 
area for medical patients requiring intensive nursing care, treatment, and observation.  MICU 
team members specialize in providing care for patients experiencing multiple system failures.  
Patients receive continuous cardiac and respiratory monitoring.  The nursing staff consists of all 
RNs trained in Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS), well versed in initiating life saving 
measures, and experienced in the usage of advanced and specialized equipment utilized in the 
care of critically ill patients.   
 
MICU consists of 12 private beds and  operates on a 24-hour basis .  Age range of patients is 
adolescent (16 years of age or older) through senior geriatric. MICU is staffed with Registered 
Nurses, Nursing Assistants, Nurse Techs, and CSR’s.   
 
Unit-specific competencies include, but are not limited to the following: All nurses are BLS and 
ACLS certified. Core competencies include EKG monitoring and basic critical care knowledge. 
Annual competencies include rapid sequence intubation, moderate sedation, Ventriculostomy 
and Lumbar drains. 
 
MICU is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipating, or recovering from: 
• Intracranial Hemorrhage and/or cerebrovascular accident (CVA) 
• Septicemia 
• Respiratory System Conditions requiring close observation, intensive nursing care and 
treatment and/or mechanical ventilation 
• Diabetic Ketoacidosis 
• Renal Failure  
• Drug Overdose 
• GI Hemorrhage 
• Acute Ischemic Stroke Page 40 of 186 
• Other procedures and medical conditions including, but not limited to the following, 
Guillian-Barre Syndrome, hypertensive and hypotensive crisis, respiratory and cardiac 
arrests, and post-operative abdominal and vascular surgery 
 
Special Services particular to MICU include, but are not limited to:  
• Multidisciplinary Rounding on critically ill patients including Physicians, Dieticians, 
Nurses, Medical Management, Pharmacists, Pastoral Care, and Respiratory Therapists 
with the goal to optimize the patient outcome through strategic, individualized care 
planning.   
• Evidence-based practices in the delivery of care to critically ill patients are incorporated 
into the care delivery and order sets   
• IV pumps, oxygen monitors, ECG monitors, and BP machines are capable of 
downloading directly into the patient’s chart through the ICU’s computerized charting 
system.   
 
Special procedures performed in MICU include, but are not limited to:  
• Ventilator management 
• Hemodynamic support and monitoring 
• Vasoactive and inotropic drugs 
• Diuretic therapy 
• Endoscopic procedures 
• Management of patient on acute hemodialysis/hemofiltration/CRRT 
• ICP monitoring 
• Chest tubes 
• Ventriculostomies 
• Hypothermia treatment for cardiac arrests 
• Other therapies requiring intensive care as determined by patient needs  
 
Unit-Specific Methods Used to Meet Needs of Patient Population  
• Multidisciplinary Rounding on critically ill patients including Physicians, Dieticians, 
Nurses, Medical Management, Pharmacists, Pastoral Care, and Respiratory Therapists 
with the goal to optimize the patient outcome through strategic, individualized care 
planning.   
• Evidence-based practices in the delivery of care to critically ill patients are incorporated 
into the care delivery and order sets   
• IV pumps, oxygen monitors, ECG monitors, and BP machines are capable of 
downloading directly into the patient’s chart.   
 Page 41 of 186 
Critical Care Service Line 
SURGICAL INTENSIVE CARE UNIT (SICU) 
Scope of Service  
Unit Definition 
SICU is an intensive care nursing unit designed and equipped to provide and maintain a clinical 
area for surgical patients requiring intensive nursing care treatment and observation.  SICU 
team members specialize in the detection of early signs and symptoms of the complications or 
regression of the surgical patient.  Patients receive continuous cardiac and respiratory 
monitoring.  The nursing staff consists of all RNs trained in Advanced Cardiac Life Support 
(ACLS), well versed in initiating life saving measures, and experienced in the use of advanced 
and specialized equipment utilized in the care of critically ill patients.   
SICU has 12 private beds. The unit operates on a 24-hour basis and has a patient age range of 
adolescent (16 years of age or older) through senior geriatric.  
Unit-specific competencies include, but are not limited to the following: All nurses are BLS and 
ACLS certified. Core competencies include EKG monitoring and basic critical care knowledge. 
Annual competencies include rapid sequence intubation, moderate sedation. 
SICU is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipating, or recovering from conditions such as: 
• Intracranial Hemorrhage and/or cerebrovascular accident (CVA) 
• Trauma 
• Craniotomy 
• Intracranial vascular procedures 
• Major and small bowel obstruction 
• Tracheostomy 
• Respiratory System Conditions requiring close observation, intensive nursing care and 
treatment and/or mechanical ventilation 
• Management of patients before organ donation 
• Other procedures and conditions including, but not limited to, spinal surgeries, vascular 
surgeries and complex abdominal surgeries, multi-trauma patients and vast 
neurosurgery, major vascular surgeries, major plastic surgery, and hemodynamically 
unstable patients before, during or after a surgery.   
 
Special Services particular to SICU include, but are not limited to:  
• Multidisciplinary Rounding on critically ill patients including Physicians, Dieticians, 
Nurses, Medical Management, Pharmacists, Pastoral Care, and Respiratory Therapists Page 42 of 186 
with the goal to optimize the patient outcome through strategic, individualized care 
planning.   
• Evidence-based practices in the delivery of care to critically ill patients are incorporated 
into the care delivery and order sets   
• IV pumps, oxygen monitors, ECG monitors, and BP machines are capable of 
downloading directly into the patient’s chart.   
 
Special procedures performed in SICU include, but are not limited to:  
• Ventilator management 
• Hemodynamic support and monitoring 
• Epidural pain management 
• Intracranial pressure monitoring 
• Administration of vasoactive and inotropic drugs 
• Diuretic therapy 
• Management of patient on acute hemodialysis/hemofiltration/CRRT 
• Chest tubes 
• Ventriculostomies 
• Targeted Temperature Management  
• Other therapies requiring intensive care as determined by patient  
 
 
Scope of planned new services 
None at this time 
  Page 43 of 186 
Critical Care Service Line 
Trauma Neuro Critical Care Unit (TNCC) 
Scope of Service  
 
Number of beds: 12 
 
Type of service:  TNCC is a monitored, 12 bed intensive care unit designed and equipped to 
provide and maintain a clinical area for the critically injured trauma patients. It operates on a 
24- hour basis to care for individuals 16 years of age through senior geriatric.  
Describe the care team/model of care:  The nursing staff specializes in the care of the trauma 
patients, many patients have multiple injuries. The nursing staff consists of all RNs trained in 
Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS), well versed in initiating life saving measures; and 
experienced in the usage of advanced and specialized equipment of critical care.  Care is 
provided by registered nurses supported by Certified Nurse Aides, Nurse Techs, and Clerical 
Service Representatives supporting the accomplishment of the physician’s plan of 
care/treatment.  A network of health ancillary care team members including Social Workers, RN 
Case Managers, Speech and Physical therapists, Respiratory therapists, and other disciplines, 
assist the primary nurse in the daily care management of the patient and their environment.   
 
Type of patients-list top diagnoses: Examples of diagnosis include but not limited to: Trauma 
patients with multiple injuries that may include, head injuries, limb fractures, spinal cord 
injuries and internal injuries.  
 
Types of special procedures performed:  Ventilator management, hemodynamic support and 
monitoring, vasoactive and inotropic drugs, endoscopic procedures such as percutaneous 
tracheotomies and insertion of PEG tubes, management of patient on acute hemodialysis, 
CRRT, CVVHDF, ICP monitoring, chest tubes, application of Halo vest and  ventriculostomies. All 
patients receive continuous cardiac and respiratory monitoring.  
 
Special Services Available:  We participate in Multidisciplinary Rounding Daily on every ICU 
patient.  Physicians, Dieticians, Nurses, Medical Management, Pharmacists, Pastoral Care, and 
Respiratory Therapists meet daily to optimize the patient outcome through strategic, 
individualized care planning. The Trauma Team consists of Trauma physicians, advanced 
practice providers,  and  trauma nurses. The Trauma surgeon is available 24/7.  TNCC utilizes 
the latest technology in ICU medicine.  Our IV pumps, Oxygen monitors, ECG monitors, and BP 
machines are capable of downloading directly into the patient’s chart.   
 
 Page 44 of 186 
Availability of Staff 
 
 
Manager Responsibility:  Supervises and coordinates patient care services for the nursing unit 
on a 24-hour basis.  The Nurse Manager ensures that physicians' orders are followed; ensures 
that patient conditions and progress are accurately reported; ensures that patient care is 
administered by all professional and non-professional personnel in the unit according to 
organization and regulatory policies and guidelines; and has staffing and budget control 
responsibilities for the unit.  The manager coordinates unit meetings and daily huddles.  Service 
recovery is also a key role of the manager. 
 
Types of Staff:  Patient care is provided by RN’s and Nursing Assistants twenty four hours a day 
with support from other disciplinary departments such as respiratory, pharmacy, dietary etc. 
 
 
Staffing Ratio Target:  1:2 Nurse/Patient Ratio 
 
Benchmarking:  Availability of staff is guided by benchmarks in paid and worked hours per 
patient day targets.  Targets have been established according to a historical perspective of 
acuity typical for TNCC as well as national benchmarking.  
 
Staffing:   A staffing matrix has been established utilizing the targeted worked hours per patient 
day along with varying census, skill mix, and shift distribution percentages.  Staffing is adjusted 
each shift utilizing this matrix and other relevant information pertaining to patient acuity.  Staff 
is reallocated to and from TNCC in collaboration with supervision from the Charge Nurse, Nurse 
Supervisor, or Director. TNCC along with SICU, NCCU, HVCU, MSCC and MICU, participates in a 
staffing pod, whose sole purpose is to flex staff to other units to accommodate adequate 
staffing.  Staff may be reallocated within the staffing pod to support patient care needs with 
consideration for competencies.  If census drops, staff may be given the option to move within 
the pod to accommodate staffing on other units or to go home if desired with or without pay.  
In times of high census or staffing shift deficits, the pod will be utilized to fill the holes.  If no 
staff is available, the Director will call off duty staff and offer the shift in order to fill vacancies.   
 
 
METHODS UTILIZED TO MEET PATIENT AND FAMILY NEEDS 
 
Admission assessment and reassessment:  Patients admitted to TNCC are assessed on 
admission, every 2 hours, and PRN or as ordered by their physician.  Reassessment occurs after 
intervention, with change in condition, and additionally when returning to the unit after 
procedures/testing.   
 
Patient Satisfaction initiatives:  Patient needs are assessed as noted above with a plan of care 
developed to provide patient, family, and physician satisfaction.  Daily rounds are accomplished 
by the unit Director to support priority rounding by staff throughout the 24 hours.  Follow-up is Page 45 of 186 
initiated immediately identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for 
process improvement.  Special staff focuses on meeting patient needs for prayer, special needs, 
positioning, and pain control continue as improvement efforts to provide quality care and 
exceed patient/family expectations for service. Patient satisfaction scores are discussed weekly 
with the entire team in TNCC. Any opportunities for improvement are discussed and a plan of 
action to improve are implemented. 
 
 
Follow-up guidelines regarding complaints/issues:  Unfavorable comments/complaints are 
handled by the first responder to promote prompt attention and then reported to the Charge 
Nurse/Director/ House Manager/or Divisional Director to complete attempts of service 
recovery, trending of noted issues, and follow-up.   Page 46 of 186 
Critical Care Service Line 
Progressive Care Unit (PCU) 
Scope of Service  
Unit Definition 
Progressive Care Unit is a progressive care nursing unit that is designed and equipped to 
provide and maintain a clinical area for seriously ill medical and adult surgical patients requiring 
an intermediate level of nursing care, treatment, and observation.  PCU provides care to 
patients requiring both inpatient and observational needs through discharge.  PCU team 
members specialize in providing nursing care to the pulmonary and post-operative surgical  
patient population requiring special monitoring, ventilatory management, and/or telemetry 
monitoring. 
PCU consists of 33 private beds  and  operates on a 24-hour basis.   Age range of patients is 
adolescent (16 years of age or older) through senior/geriatric.  PCU is staffed with registered 
nurses, virtual nurses, Nurse Techs, Certified Nursing Assistants, CSR’s, Medical Management 
Nurse and a Social Worker. 
Unit-specific competencies include, but are not limited to the following: All nurses are BLS 
certified with additional ACLS certification. Core competencies include EKG monitoring and 
basic critical care knowledge. Annual competencies include rapid sequence intubation, 
moderate sedation, defibrillator use, and chest tube management. 
The unit is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with or 
recovering from: 
• Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) 
• Heart Failure and Shock 
• Pneumonia and/or Pleurisy 
• Pulmonary Edema 
• Bronchitis  
• Asthma 
• Respiratory Infections and Inflammation 
• Septicemia 
• Tracheotomy/Mechanical ventilation 
• Respiratory failure 
• Emphysema 
• Pulmonary Embolism 
• Cancers of the throat and neck 
• Trauma Page 47 of 186 
• Limb Fractures 
• Abdominal Surgery 
• Reconstructive Surgery 
• Other medical conditions requiring intermediate care as determined by patient needs  
 
Special Services particular to Progressive Care Unit include but are not limited to: 
• Cardiac monitoring 
• Virtual monitoring 
• Ventilator management 
• ENT Surgical Procedures 
1. Wound vacuum management 
2. Continuous oxygen saturation monitoring 
Special procedures performed on Progressive Care Unit include but are not limited to: 
• Thoracentesis 
• Central line placement 
• Pleurodesis 
• Bronchoscopy 
• Laryngoscopy 
• Chest tube insertion 
• Lumbar puncture, bone marrow aspiration 
 
Unit-Specific Methods Used to Meet Needs of Patient Population  
Patient needs are assessed as noted above with a plan of care developed to provide patient, 
family, and physician satisfaction.  Daily rounds are accomplished by the unit Director to 
support priority rounding by staff throughout the 24 hours.  Follow-up is initiated immediately 
upon identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for process 
improvement. There is special focus on meeting patient needs through prayer, special needs, 
positioning, pain control, and education which continue as improvement efforts to provide 
quality care, and exceed patient/family expectations for service. 
Scope of planned new services: 
None at this time. 
 
 Page 48 of 186 
Critical Care Service Line 
NEURO CRITICAL  CARE UNIT (NCCU) 
SCOPE OF SERVICE  
 
The Neuro Critical Care Unit (NCCU) is a 20-bed, monitored inpatient nursing unit specializing in 
the care of critically ill adult  patients. NCCU staff provide nursing services for stroke  and 
neurosurgical patients.    
Patient care is provided by RN’s and CNA’s twenty four hours a day with support from other 
disciplines, such as Respiratory Therapy, Pharmacy, Dietary, Physical Therapy, Occupational 
Therapy, and Speech Therapy.  The unit provides care to seriously ill patients requiring an 
intermediate level of care for both inpatient and observational needs through discharge. Care is 
provided by Registered Nurses (RN) supported by Certified Nursing Assistants (CNA) and Clinical 
Service Representatives all of whom aid in the accomplishment of the physician’s plan of 
care/treatment. A network of health care team members including Social Workers, RN Case 
Managers, Speech and Physical Therapists, Respiratory Therapists, and other disciplines, assist 
the primary nurse in the daily care management of the patient and their environment. The 
Collaborative Care Model is utilized to support a team approach for provisioning of care with 
team communication accomplished in staff meetings, change of shift report, and daily 
multidisciplinary huddles. 
Special services include but are not limited to cardiac monitoring, wound vacuum management, 
ventilator management, continuous oxygen saturation monitoring, palliative care, including 
extubation and administration of drugs requiring cardiac monitoring. 
Special procedures performed include but not limited to central line placement, chest tube 
insertion, etc. 
NCCU nurses have the following competencies:  NIH Stroke Scale certification, EKG, Critical Care 
course, BLS and ACLS. 
The director supervises and coordinates patient care services for the nursing unit on a 24-hour 
basis.  The director ensures that physicians' orders are followed; ensures that patient 
conditions and progress are accurately reported; ensures that patient care is administered by 
all professional and non-professional personnel in the unit according to organization and 
regulatory policies and guidelines; and has staffing and budget control responsibilities for the 
unit.  The director coordinates unit meetings and daily huddles.  Service recovery is also a key 
role of the director. Page 49 of 186 
NCCU is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipating, or recovering from conditions such as: 
 designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, anticipating, or recovering 
from conditions such as: 
• Intracranial Hemorrhage and/or cerebrovascular accident (CVA) 
• Acute Ischemic Stroke 
• Craniotomy 
• Intracranial vascular procedures 
• Trauma 
• Tracheostomy 
• Respiratory System Conditions requiring close observation, intensive nursing care and 
treatment and/or mechanical ventilation 
• Management of patients before organ donation 
• Other procedures and conditions including, but not limited to, vast neurosurgery, spinal 
surgeries, vascular surgeries and complex abdominal surgeries, multi-trauma patients, 
major vascular surgeries, major plastic surgery, and hemodynamically unstable patients 
before, during or after a surgery.   
Special Services particular to NCCU include, but are not limited to:  
• Multidisciplinary Rounding on critically ill patients including Physicians, Dieticians, 
Nurses, Medical Management, Pharmacists, Pastoral Care, and Respiratory Therapists 
with the goal to optimize the patient outcome through strategic, individualized care 
planning.   
• Evidence-based practices in the delivery of care to critically ill patients are incorporated 
into the care delivery and order sets   
• IV pumps, oxygen monitors, ECG monitors, and BP machines are capable of 
downloading directly into the patient’s chart.   
 
Special procedures performed in NCCU include, but are not limited to:  
• Ventilator management 
• Hemodynamic support and monitoring 
• Epidural pain management 
• Intracranial pressure monitoring 
• Administration of vasoactive and inotropic drugs 
• Diuretic therapy 
• Management of patient on acute hemodialysis/hemofiltration/CRRT 
• Chest tubes 
• Ventriculostomies 
• Targeted Temperature Management  
• Other therapies requiring intensive care as determined by patient  Page 50 of 186 
CRITICAL CARE SERVICE LINE 
Scope of Service 
Medical Surgical Critical Care (MSCC) 
 
Unit Definition 
MSCC  is an intensive care nursing unit designed and equipped to provide and maintain a 
clinical area for medical patients requiring intensive nursing care, treatment, and observation.  
MSCC team members specialize in providing care for patients experiencing multiple system 
failures.  Patients receive continuous cardiac and respiratory monitoring.  The nursing staff 
consists of all RNs trained in Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS), well versed in initiating life 
saving measures, and experienced in the usage of advanced and specialized equipment utilized 
in the care of critically ill patients.   
 
MSCC consists of 12 private beds and operates on a 24-hour basis.  Age range of patients is 
adolescent (16 years of age or older) through senior geriatric. MSCC is staffed with Registered 
Nurses, Nursing Assistants, Nurse Techs, and CSR’s.   
 
Unit-specific competencies include, but are not limited to the following: All nurses are BLS and 
ACLS certified. Core competencies include EKG monitoring and basic critical care knowledge. 
Annual competencies include rapid sequence intubation, moderate sedation, Ventriculostomy 
and Lumbar drains. 
 
MSCC is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipating, or recovering from: 
• Intracranial Hemorrhage and/or cerebrovascular accident (CVA) 
• Septicemia 
• Respiratory System Conditions requiring close observation, intensive nursing care and 
treatment and/or mechanical ventilation 
• Diabetic Ketoacidosis 
• Renal Failure  
• Drug Overdose 
• GI Hemorrhage 
• Acute Ischemic Stroke Page 51 of 186 
• Other procedures and medical conditions including, but not limited to the following, 
Guillian-Barre Syndrome, hypertensive and hypotensive crisis, respiratory and cardiac 
arrests, and post-operative abdominal and vascular surgery 
 
Special Services particular to MSCC include, but are not limited to:  
• Multidisciplinary Rounding on critically ill patients including Academic Providers, 
Dieticians, Nurses, Medical Management, Pharmacists, Pastoral Care, and Respiratory 
Therapists with the goal to optimize the patient outcome through strategic, 
individualized care planning.   
• Evidence-based practices in the delivery of care to critically ill patients are incorporated 
into the care delivery and order sets   
• IV pumps, oxygen monitors, ECG monitors, and BP machines are capable of 
downloading directly into the patient’s chart through the use of the ICU’s computerized 
charting system.   
 
Special procedures performed in MSCC include, but are not limited to:  
• Ventilator management 
• Hemodynamic support and monitoring 
• Vasoactive and inotropic drugs 
• Diuretic therapy 
• Endoscopic procedures 
• Management of patient on acute hemodialysis/hemofiltration/CRRT 
• ICP monitoring 
• Chest tubes 
• Ventriculostomies 
• Hypothermia treatment for cardiac arrests 
• Other therapies requiring intensive care as determined by patient needs  
Unit-Specific Methods Used to Meet Needs of Patient Population  
• Multidisciplinary Rounding on critically ill patients including Physicians, Dieticians, 
Nurses, Medical Management, Pharmacists, Pastoral Care, and Respiratory Therapists 
with the goal to optimize the patient outcome through strategic, individualized care 
planning.   
• Evidence-based practices in the delivery of care to critically ill patients are incorporated 
into the care delivery and order sets   
• IV pumps, oxygen monitors, ECG monitors, and BP machines are capable of  
            downloading directly into the patient’s chart.  Page 52 of 186 
 
MEDICINE SERVICE LINE 
Scope of Service 
MEDICINE 1, MEDICINE 5, and MEDICINE 6 
Unit Definition 
Medicine 1, Medicine 5, and Medicine 6 are medical surgical nursing units.  The nursing staff 
specializes in the care of medical surgical patients. Remote telemetry monitoring is available for 
patients on these units.  The units provide care to those requiring acute level of care for both 
inpatient and observational needs through discharge, no IV drugs requiring titration are 
provided in this level of care. Age range of patients is adolescent (age 16 or older) through 
geriatric.  
Medicine 1 consists of 35 private care beds.  Medicine 5 consists of 29 private care beds.   
Medicine 6 consists of 35 private care beds. All medicine units are staffed with registered 
nurses, licensed practical nurses, certified nursing assistants, clinical service representative, 
Medical Management and a Social Worker.   
Unit-specific competencies include but are not limited to the following: All nurses are BLS 
certified. Annual competencies include blood administration, restraints, falls, chest tubes, and 
defibrillator. Nurses caring for telemetry patients have passed an EKG course.   
All medicine units are specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients 
with, anticipating, or recovering from but not limited to: 
• Digestive Disorders 
• Diabetes Mellitus 
• Cellulitis 
• Kidney and Urinary Tract Infections 
• Septicemia 
• Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
• Renal Failure 
• Sickle Cell Anemia 
• Congestive Heart Failure 
• Pneumonia 
• Dementia 
• Post-operative surgeries 
• Infectious Diseases 
• Other procedures and medical conditions requiring acute care as determined by patient 
needs  Page 53 of 186 
 
Special Services particular to Medicine units include but are not limited to: 
• IV Therapy 
• Blood transfusions 
• Management of feeding tubes 
• Nutrition 
• Glucometer monitoring 
• Dressing changes 
• Foley catheters 
• Nasogastric suctioning 
• Trach Care 
• Wound VAC management 
 
Special procedures performed on Medicine 1, Medicine 5, and Medicine 6 include but are not 
limited to: 
• Nasogastric feeding tube placement 
• Providing assistance with central line insertions 
• Providing assistance with Chest tube insertions 
• Providing assistance with Thoracentesis 
• Providing assistance with Paracentesis 
• Providing assistance with Bone marrow biopsy 
 
Scope of Planned New Services  
No new services planned.  
 
 Page 54 of 186 
MEDICINE SERVICE LINE 
Scope of Service 
NEPHROLOGY 
Unit Definition 
Nephrology is a medical surgical nursing unit.  The nursing staff specializes in the care of 
patients experiencing renal conditions and has the capability of remote telemetry monitoring.  
The unit provides care to those requiring acute level of care for both inpatient and 
observational needs through discharge; no IV drugs requiring titration are provided in this level 
of care. Age range of patients is adolescent (age 16 or older) through geriatric.  
Nephrology consists of 20 private care beds. The unit operates on a 24-hour basis and has an 
average daily census of 17.5.    The unit is staffed with registered nurses, licensed practical 
nurses, certified nursing assistants,  customer service representative, Medical Management and 
a Social Worker, along with MD’s.   
Unit-specific competencies include but are not limited to the following: All nurses are BLS 
certified. Annual competencies include blood administration, restraints, falls, chest tubes, and 
defibrillator.  
The unit is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipating, or recovering from, but not limited to, the following:   
• Renal Failure 
• Other Kidney and Urinary Tract Infections and/or Disorders 
• Septicemia 
• Heart Failure 
• Nutritional and Metabolic Disorders 
• Circulatory System Disorders 
• Gastrointestinal and Digestive Disorders 
• Shunt Revisions 
• Diabetes Mellitus 
• Sickle Cell Anemia 
• Pneumonia 
• Infectious Diseases 
• Other medical surgical conditions requiring acute care as determined by patient needs  
 
Special Services particular to Nephrology include but are not limited to: Page 55 of 186 
• Remote telemetry monitoring 
• IV Therapy 
• IV drips requiring special monitoring, but not titration of drips 
• Blood transfusions 
• Management of feeding tubes 
• Nutrition 
• Glucometer monitoring 
• Dressing changes 
• Foley catheters 
• Nasogastric suctioning 
 
Special procedures performed on Nephrology include but are not limited to: 
• Nasogastric feeding tube placement 
• Providing assistance with central line insertions 
• Chest tube insertions 
• Thoracentesis 
• Paracentesis 
• Bone marrow biopsy 
 
Scope of Planned New Services 
No new services planned.  
 
 Page 56 of 186 
MEDICINE SERVICE LINE 
Scope of Service 
REHABILITATION 
The Rehabilitation unit at Our Lady of the Lake is a fully accredited, comprehensive inpatient 
acute rehabilitation unit for adults ages 16 and older with physical, cognitive, and 
communicative limits. Our goal is to help patients regain mobility, restore function, reduce pain 
and adjust emotionally after life-altering illness or injury.  
The rehabilitation unit has a total of 30 private care beds, licensed for 33 beds. The unit 
operates on twenty-four- hour basis and has an average daily census of 27. The rehabilitation 
care team includes: 
• Specialized rehabilitation doctors  
• Nurse Practitioner 
• Rehabilitation nurses – Registered nurses and Licensed practical nurses  
•   
• Physical therapists  
• Occupational therapists  
•  Speech therapists  
•   
• Activity therapists  
• Physical Medicine Aides 
• Dietitians  
• Pharmacists  
• Case managers/Social workers  
• Certified Nursing assistants 
• Clinical Service Representative 
• Transporters Page 57 of 186 
• Physical Medicine Aides 
• Rehabilitation Liaisons 
• Post Acute Care Coordinator 
• Administration Assistant 
The average nurse to patient ratio for the rehabilitation unit is 1:6. 
Unit-specific nursing competencies include but are not limited to the following: all nurses are 
BLS certified, defibrillator, blood administration, pressure ulcer prevention, wound care, fall 
prevention, restraints, pain management, tracheostomy care, central lines, PICC lines, IV 
maintenance, nasogastric tubes, PEG tubes, bladder scans, intermittent catheterization, and 
Foley insertion. 
Through early intervention, treatment with specialized equipment and extensive patient/family 
education, patients gain optimal independence in a reasonable amount of recovery time. We 
offer a comprehensive, proven program for patients with the following: 
• Stroke  
• Brain injury  
• Spinal cord injury  
• Orthopedic injury (fracture, joint replacement, back surgery)  
• Multiple trauma  
• Amputation  
• Neurological disorder (Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral    
              sclerosis (ALS) (also known as Lou Gehrig's disease) and Guillain-Barré Syndrome  
• Autoimmune disorders  
• Medically complex diagnoses  
• Cardiopulmonary 
 
 Page 58 of 186 
Special services particular to the Rehabilitation unit include but are not limited to: 
• IV therapy 
• Blood Transfusions 
• Management of feeding tubes 
• Nutrition 
• Glucometer monitoring 
• Wound care/Dressing Changes/Wound vac maintenance 
• Bladder scan 
• Foley catheters/Intermittent catheterization 
• Spinal Bowel Program 
• Tracheostomy Care 
• Physical Therapy 
• Occupational Therapy 
• Speech Therapy 
• Activity Therapy 
 
Scope of Planned New Services 
No new services planned. Page 59 of 186 
MEDICINE SERVICE LINE 
Scope of Service 
ONCOLOGY SERVICE LINE 
Unit Definitions 
The Oncology Inpatient Unit is a medical surgical nursing unit consisting of 30 private beds.  The 
nursing staff specializes in the care of patients experiencing hematologic or oncologic diseases 
and has the capability of remote telemetry monitoring.  The inpatient units provide care to 
those requiring acute level of care for both inpatient and observational needs through 
discharge. Age range of patients is adolescent (age 16 or older) through geriatric. The unit 
operates on a 24-hour basis and has an average daily census of 22.   
Our Lady of the Lake Gamma Knife- opened in June 2016.The Gamma Knife is located in the 
Mary Bird Perkins Cancer Center Treatment Room 3. The treatment vault houses an intracranial 
stereotactic radiosurgery system used for treating patients with certain cancerous and non-
cancerous diseases of the brain. The Gamma Knife treats approximately 150 patients per year 
Monday through Friday. Through contractual agreement radiation oncologists, radiation 
technologists, and physicists are credentialed Mary Bird Perkins employees who provide these 
services to OLOL patients. 
Unit-specific competencies include, but are not limited to BLS and a general oncology and 
chemo/biological therapy administration program. All nursing staff must pass yearly and annual 
associated competency tests.     
The inpatient unit is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients 
with, anticipating, or recovering from, but not limited to, the following:   
• Chemotherapy Administration 
• Red Blood Cell Disorders 
• Respiratory Neoplasms 
• Hematologic and Immunologic Diagnoses 
• Nutritional and Metabolic Disorders 
• Septicemia 
• GI Disorders 
• Malignancy of Hepatobiliary System 
• Other oncological diagnoses, such as melanoma, cancer of the colon, breast, prostate, 
bladder, head & neck, etc.) 
• Other medical surgical conditions requiring acute care as determined by patient needs  
 Page 60 of 186 
Special Services particular to Oncology include but are not limited to: 
• Chemotherapy and Immunotherapy Administration and Management 
• Radiation Therapy 
• Monoclonal antibody therapy 
• Pain Control 
• Supportive Care 
• Remote telemetry monitoring 
• IV Therapy 
• IV drips requiring special monitoring,  
• Blood transfusions 
• Management of feeding tubes 
• Nutrition 
• Glucometer monitoring 
• Dressing changes 
• Foley catheters 
• Nasogastric suctioning 
• Inpatient Hospice Care 
 
Special procedures performed on Oncology include but are not limited to: 
• Nasogastric feeding tube placement 
• Providing assistance with central line insertions 
• Chest tube insertions 
• Lumbar punctures 
• Thoracentesis 
• Paracentesis 
• Bone marrow biopsy 
 
Scopes of Planned New Services 
No new services are planned at this time. 
 
 
 
 
 Page 61 of 186 
MEDICINE SERVICE LINE 
Scope of Service 
OUTPATIENT INFUSION CLINIC Medical Plaza II 
The outpatient infusion clinic is a 40- chair infusion clinic located on the 6th floor of Medical 
Plaza IIbuilding.   The nursing staff specializes in hematologic or oncologic diseases.  It serves 
our patients and community requiring outpatient treatment.  The outpatient infusion clinic is 
available to physicians in the community and offers a variety of supportive care and diagnostic 
services including but not limited to, blood product transfusions, chemotherapy, IV therapy, 
and injections.  All care is administered by or under the direction of a registered nurse.  The 
hours of operation are from 8AM – 5PM Monday through Friday. 
Unit specific competencies include but are not limited to BLS and a general oncology and 
chemo-biological therapy administration program. 
 
NON-ONCOLOGY OUTPATIENT INFUSION 
 
The non-oncology infusion clinic is a 9chair infusion clinic located on the 5th floor of Medical 
Plaza I building.  The nursing staff specializes in many types of intravenous medication therapies 
as well as blood transfusions.  It serves or patients and community requiring a variety of 
intravenous therapy.  All care is administered under the direction of a registered nurse.  The 
hours of operation are from 8AM-5PM Monday through Friday.   
 
Unit specific competencies include but are not limited to BLS.   
 Page 62 of 186 
NEUROLOGICAL SCIENCES SERVICE LINE 
Scope of Service 
NEUROLOGY (Neuro) 
Unit Definition 
Neurology is a neuroscience unit providing patient care specializing in medical and surgical 
neurosciences care. The unit provides care to those requiring acute level of care for inpatient, 
no IV drugs requiring titration are provided in this level of care. Age range of patients is 
adolescent through geriatric. 
Neurology consists of 35 private care beds.  This unit operates on a 24-hour basis.  It is staffed 
with registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, nurse techs, clinical service representatives, 
and certified nursing assistants. Annual Competencies include stroke and meeting patient care 
needs. 
Unit-specific competencies include but are not limited to the following: All nurses are BLS 
certified. Core nursing competencies include EKG monitoring and NIHSS certification.   
The unit is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipating, or recovering from but not limited to: 
• Seizures 
• Stroke  
• Neuromuscular Diseases 
• Spinal Disorders 
• Brain and Spinal Tumors 
• Dementia 
• Post-operative surgeries 
• Dural/Lumbar CSF leak 
 
Neurology provides care for patients with the following diagnoses:  
• Intracranial and/or cerebral hemorrhage 
• Cervical/ thoracic/lumbar spinal fusion 
• Headache 
• Medical back problems 
• Seizures 
• Craniotomy 
• Trauma 
• Transient Ischemic Attack Page 63 of 186 
• Syncope 
• Other medical surgical conditions requiring acute care as determined by patient needs  
 
Scopes of Planned New Services 
No new services planned.  Page 64 of 186 
SURGICAL/SPECIALTY SERVICE LINE 
Scope of Service 
ORTHOPEDICS UNIT (Ortho) 
Unit Definition 
Orthopedics is an acute care, inpatient nursing unit that provides patient care to non-critical 
surgical patients.  The nursing staff specializes in the care of surgical patients requiring 
orthopedic surgical procedures, in particular, total joint and spine procedures, in acute care 
setting for both inpatient and observational needs pre- and post-procedure through discharge. 
Age range of patients is adolescent (age 16 or older) through geriatric.  
Orthopedics consists of 30 private care beds. The unit operates on a 24-hour basis and has an 
average daily census of 9.4.  Orthopedics is staffed with registered nurses, licensed practical 
nurses, certified nursing assistants, and Clinical Service Representatives.   
Unit-specific competencies include but are not limited to the following: All nurses are BLS 
certified. Core competencies include mobility and orthopedic knowledge. Annual competencies 
include mobility, pain, wound/skin, restraints, and defibrillator. 
The unit is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipating or recovering from: 
a. Total joint replacements 
b. Spinal procedures 
 
Ortho provides care for patients with the following diagnoses:  
• Major Joint Replacements 
• Spinal Fusion 
• Cervical Fusion 
• Back and Neck procedures 
• Revision of hip or knee replacement 
• Knee procedures 
• Hip and femur procedures 
• Shoulder, elbow, forearm procedures 
• Fractures 
• Other medical surgical conditions requiring acute care as determined by patient needs  
 
 Page 65 of 186 
Unit-Specific Methods Used to Meet Needs of Patient Population  
Special Services provided by orthopedics include but are not limited to: 
Monitoring infection control, nutrition/hydration, discharge planning, medication 
administration, nursing process, pain management, patient education, patient safety, patient 
satisfaction, skin integrity, neurovascular assessment and fracture management.  
There are several clinical pathways in use including ACL, back pain, fracture hip, fracture femur, 
lower extremity fracture, upper extremity fracture, shoulder reconstruction, total hip, total 
knee and spine procedures. 
In order to better prepare patients undergoing total joint replacement or spine surgery, OLOL 
provides a total joint and spine education program at no cost. The Lake Joint Effort provides 
information on the sequence of events that will occur throughout the hospital stay. Before 
surgery, patients are scheduled to attend a total joint or spine education class. Family members 
are encouraged to attend.   
 
Scopes of Planned New Services 
No new services planned. 
 Page 66 of 186 
SURGICAL TRAUMA UNIT (STU) 
Unit Definition 
Surgery Trauma (STU) is a post-surgical nursing unit providing progressive patient care of non-
critical trauma and general surgery patients on a 24 hour basis.  The unit provides care to those 
seriously ill patients requiring an intermediate inpatient level of care from admission to 
discharge. The Surgery Trauma Unit consists of 35 private care beds.  Age range of patients is 
adolescent through geriatric.  STU is staffed with registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, 
nurse techs, certified nursing assistants and clinical service representatives. All nurses are BLS 
certified. 
The unit is specifically designed, equipped and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipating or recovering from: 
• Traumatic injury 
• Trauma, orthopedic, spine, bariatric and other general surgery 
• Patients requiring controlled, vasoactive and/or antiarrhythmic PO and IV medications, 
not to be frequently titrated. 
• Patients with arrhythmias 
• And other procedures and medical conditions as required in overflow situations 
 
Special Services particular to STU include but are not limited to care of the patient with: 
• Acetabular fracture 
• Muscle and skin flaps secondary to traumatic injury 
• Bariatric gastric bypass and sleeve 
• The need for cardiac monitoring and arrhythmia management 
 
Special procedures performed on STU include but are not limited to: 
• Central line placement 
• Chest tube insertion  
• Tracheostomy care  
• Wound vacuum therapy 
• Pin, external fixator and traction maintenance 
• Lumbar puncture, bone marrow aspiration, thoracentesis 
 
Scope of Planned New Services 
No new services planned. Page 67 of 186 
SURGICAL UNIT (SURG) 
Unit Definition 
SURG is an acute care, inpatient nursing unit that provides patient care to non-critical surgical 
patients.  The nursing staff specializes in the care of surgical patients requiring an acute care 
setting for both inpatient and observational needs pre- and post-procedure through discharge. 
Age range of patients is adolescent (age 16 or older) through geriatric.  
SURG consists of 35 private care beds. The unit operates on a 24-hour basis and has an average 
daily census of 26.   SURG is staffed with registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, Nurse 
Techs, Clinical Service Representatives and Certified Nursing Assistants.   
Unit-specific competencies include, but are not limited to the following: All nurses are BLS 
certified. Core competencies include General Surgery post-op care. Annual competencies 
include the care of patients with chest tubes, PCA pumps, Epidural pumps, pain, wound/skin, 
restraints and Defibrillator training.  
The unit is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipating or recovering from: 
c. Extracranial Procedures 
d. Amputation for circulatory disorders 
e. Small & Large Bowel Procedures 
f. Cardiovascular procedures 
g. Other vascular procedures 
h. Appendectomy with complications 
i. GI Obstruction 
j. Gastrointestinal Disorders 
k. Rectal Resection 
l. Small & Large Bowel Procedures 
 
SURG provides care for patients with the following diagnoses:  
• Heart Failure  
• Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
• Gastrointestinal Disorders 
• Gastrointestinal Hemorrhage 
• Diabetes Mellitus 
• Intracranial Hemorrhage and/or CVA 
• Renal Failure 
• Syncope Page 68 of 186 
• Cellulitis  
• Chest Pain 
• Septicemia 
• Sickle Cell Anemia 
• Pneumonia 
• Atrial Fibrillation 
• Dementia 
• Infectious Diseases 
• Other medical surgical conditions requiring acute care as determined by patient needs  
 
Special Services particular to SURG include but are not limited to: 
• IV Therapy 
• IV drips requiring special monitoring, but not titration of drips 
• Blood transfusions 
• Management of feeding tubes 
• Nutrition 
• Glucometer monitoring 
• Dressing changes 
• Foley catheters 
• Nasogastric suctioning 
 
Special procedures performed on SURG include but are not limited to: 
• Nasogastric feeding tube placement 
• Providing assistance with central line insertions 
• Chest tube insertions 
• Thoracentesis 
• Paracentesis 
• Bone marrow biopsy 
 
Scope of Planned New Services 
No new services planned. 
 Page 69 of 186 
Surgical Unit 2 (SUR2) 
 
Unit Definition 
SUR2 is an acute care, inpatient nursing unit that provides patient care to non-critical surgical 
patients.  The nursing staff specializes in the care of surgical patients requiring an acute care 
setting for both inpatient and observational needs pre-and post-procedure through discharge.  
Age range of patients is adolescent (age 16 or older) through geriatric.   
SUR2 consists of 35 private care beds.  The unit operates on a 24-hour basis.  SUR2 is staffed 
with registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, nurse techs, clinical service representatives 
and certified nursing assistants.   
Unit-specific competencies include, but are not limited to the following:  All nurses are BLS 
certified.  Core competencies include General Surgery post-op care.  Annual competencies 
include the care of patients with chest tubes, PCA pumps, Epidural pumps, pain, wound/skin, 
restraints and Defibrillator training. 
The unit is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipating or recovering from: 
a. Extracranial Procedures 
b. Amputation from circulatory disorders 
c. Small & Large Bowel Procedures 
d. Cardiovascular procedures 
e. Other vascular procedures 
f. Appendectomy with complications 
g. GI Obstruction 
h. Gastrointestinal Disorders 
i. Rectal Resection 
j. Small & Large Bowel Procedures 
 
SUR2 provides care for the patients with the following diagnoses: 
1. Heart Failure 
2. Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
3. Gastrointestinal Disorders 
4. Gastrointestinal Hemorrhage and/or CVA 
5. Renal Failure 
6. Syncope 
7. Cellulitis Page 70 of 186 
8. Chest Pain 
9. Septicemia 
10. Sickle Cell Anemia 
11. Pneumonia 
12. Atrial Fibrillation 
13. Dementia 
14. Infectious Diseases 
15. Other medical surgical conditions requiring acute care as determined by patient 
needs 
 
Special Services particular to SUR2 include but are not limited to: 
• IV Therapy 
• IV drips requiring special monitoring, but not titration of drips 
• Blood transfusions 
• Management of feeding tubes 
• Nutrition 
• Glucometer monitoring 
• Dressing changes 
• Foley catheters 
• Nasogastric suctioning 
 
Special procedures performed on SUR2 include but are not limited to: 
• Nasogastric feeding tube placement 
• Providing assistance with central line insertions 
• Chest tube insertions 
• Thoracentesis 
• Paracentesis 
• Bone marrow biopsy 
 
Scope of Planned New Services 
No new services planned. 
 
 Page 71 of 186 
Surgical Services Division 
Scope of Service 
 
The Surgical Services Division coordinates and provides nursing care for the preoperative, 
intraoperative and postoperative phases of care for inpatient and ambulatory patients.  This 
also involves clinical support areas that ensure inventory resource management and 
preparation of surgical instrumentation.  Surgical administration oversees the operations of the 
division with support from a Divisional Director, Service Line Administrator and Administrative 
assistant. Quality nursing care is provided 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. 
 
OPERATING ROOMS (OR) 
Unit Definition 
The Operating Rooms consists of 40 operating/procedure rooms in four locations (Main OR, 
Tower OR, Heart & Vascular OR, and Endo-Urology) that are available to patients of all ages 
(neonates to geriatrics) needing operative procedures, requiring sedation, general, regional or 
local anesthesia. This includes elective, urgent and emergency procedures. Procedures include, 
but are not limited to, cardiovascular/thoracic, neurosurgical, urological, orthopedic, general 
surgery, pediatric, laparoscopic, bariatric, robotics, gynecological, plastic, oral, dental, and eye, 
ear, nose, and throat (EENT), pediatric endoscopy and ECT procedures. Coverage is provided in 
all specialties except obstetrics and organ transplant.  
 
All nurses and case technicians are BLS certified. 
 
Availability of Operating Rooms and Staff 
Operative services are provided 24 hours a day, 7 days a week with on-call specialty teams 
beyond normal operating hours and/or dedicated blocks.  There are 16 rooms available in the 
Main OR, 4 rooms available in the Endo-urology suite, 14 rooms available in the Tower OR, and 
6 rooms in Heart and Vascular OR .  Procedures are performed in designated areas based on the 
specialty, but flexibility is maintained for multispecialty cases. 
   
Hours of Service 
Monday-Friday 
• 7am-3pm - All operative and procedure areas are available for routine elective 
scheduling, unless a predetermined physician, group or service specific block has been 
granted. 
• 3p-11pm – 12 rooms are available for inpatient, urgent and emergent cases 
• 11pm-7am – 3 rooms are available for emergent cases 
 
Saturday & Sunday 
• 7am-7pm – 6 rooms are available for inpatient, urgent and emergent cases until 3pm 
at which time the room availability changes to 3 
• 7pm-7am–2 rooms are available for emergent cases 
 Page 72 of 186 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
 
Assessment/Reassessment:  
Patients are initially assessed by the Circulating RN and Anesthesia Provider in the pre-op area, 
SMAU or a Critical Care Unit.  Patient is re-assessed upon admission to the operating or 
procedure room, during positioning and with the placement of equipment and supplies on the 
patient. An Anesthesiologist and/or CRNA re-assesses the patient throughout the procedure. 
The Circulator is responsible for monitoring the environment to assure that sterility of the 
operating field and team is maintained from setup and throughout the procedure. 
 
Patient Satisfaction initiatives:   
Actions to support patient and family satisfaction begin with the Circulator’s initial interaction.  
The RN reviews the patient record, assures that all documentation and patient statements are 
in agreement for the procedure and appropriate laterality, all pre-op assessments and results 
are complete and within expected or acceptable ranges.  Prior to patient being brought to the 
OR, patient and family/representative are given opportunities to ask questions and receive 
clarification from the RN, Anesthesia provider and Surgeon.  The RN will explain the process of 
taking the patient to the OR, preparation prior to administration of medication/anesthesia and 
plan for recovery in PACU or Critical Care Unit.  The RN will communicate to patient’s 
family/representative, via the surgical waiting room reception staff, when the procedure starts 
and, at least hourly, on the progress of surgery. Special focuses for the staff, meeting the 
patient’s needs for prayer, special needs, positioning, appropriate equipment, instrument and 
supplies are improvement efforts to provide quality care and exceed patient and 
family/representative expectation for service. 
 
 
 
Support Services 
 
 
 
Surgery Billing 
The surgical billing department is responsible for charge capture services which include  Vendor 
Invoice Payment Processing and the capture of minute and supply/implant charges for all 
operating rooms, Anesthesia, Lithotripsy and PACU areas.  The Charge Capture Representatives 
are trained to navigate through the various systems to ensure charges are applied to the 
patient bills accurately and timely 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 73 of 186 
 
SPECIAL SERVICES 
 
Perfusion Services 
The Perfusion Service provides cardiopulmonary support under the direction of the surgeon 
and anesthesiologist for patients undergoing open-heart and other major thoracic/vascular 
procedures. They provide staffing coverage for three heart rooms. Cardiopulmonary bypass 
coverage is provided for patients from 10 years of age to geriatrics. Perfusion service is 
provided by perfusionists who are board certified as Cardiovascular Perfusionist by the 
American Board of Cardiovascular Perfusion and Licensed by LSBME. 
 
Anesthesiology Service 
The Anesthesia Technicians provide assistance and support to the Anesthesia Providers by 
providing supplies, instruments, and equipment management. As needed, the anesthesia techs 
are available for assistance with  anesthesia machine support and for the operation of the 
blood salvage/recovery system during surgical procedures for all ages of patients.  
 
Lithotripsy 
Lithotripsy is a non-invasive procedure for the treatment of kidney stones. The procedure is 
typically performed on an outpatient basis but may serve inpatients, as well. American Kidney 
Stone Management (AKSM), a contract company, provides staffing, equipment and services, 
including scheduling, training, quality assurance, maintenance, and regulatory compliance. 
Medical care is rendered by the Urologist utilizing the lithotripter. The unit is staffed with a 
radiology tech and a registered nurse.  
 Page 74 of 186 
ENDOSCOPY 
 
Unit Definition 
The Endoscopy Unit consists of 3 procedure rooms performing noninvasive/diagnostic 
gastroenterology and pulmonary procedures.  This unit receives adult patients for elective, 
urgent and emergency procedures utilizing sedation or anesthesia services.  Bedside procedure 
coverage can be provided by the endoscopic team in a critical care environment.   
 
All nurses are BLS and ACLS certified. 
 
Availablity of Endoscopy Rooms and Staff  
Endoscopic services are provided 24 hours a day, 7 days a week with on-call teams beyond 
normal operating hours.  Endoscopic teams include Registered Nurses and Case Technicians. 
 
Hours of Service 
Monday-Friday 
• 7am-3pm – all endoscopic procedure rooms are available for routine scheduling 
• 3pm-7am – 1 room is available for inpatient, urgent and emergent cases via on call 
services 
Saturday-Sunday 
• 7am-3pm – 1 room is available for inpatient, urgent and emergent case  
• 3pm-7am – 1 room is available for inpatient, urgent and emergent cases via on call 
services 
 
 
 
 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
 
Assessment/Reassessment:  
Patients are initially assessed by the RN and Anesthesia Provider in the pre-op holding area or a 
Critical Care Unit.  Patient is re-assessed upon admission to the procedure room, during 
positioning and with the placement of equipment and supplies on the patient. A Registereded 
Nurse or Anesthesia provider re-assesses the patient throughout the procedure according to 
the sedation being administered.  
 
Patient Satisfaction initiatives:   
Actions to support patient and family satisfaction begin with the RNs initial interaction.  The RN 
reviews the patient record, assures that all documentation and patient statements are in 
agreement for the procedure, all pre-op assessments and results are complete and within 
expected or acceptable ranges.  Prior to patient being brought to the procedure room, patient 
and family/representative are given opportunities to ask questions and receive clarification 
from the RN, Anesthesia provider and Physician.  The RN will explain the process of taking the 
patient to the procedure room, preparation prior to administration of medication/anesthesia Page 75 of 186 
and plan for recovery according to the sedation administered.  The RN will communicate to 
patient’s family/representative prior to the procedure and place them in a consultation room 
to be immediately available for the physician following the procedure. Special focuses for the 
staff, meeting the patient’s needs for prayer, special needs, appropriate equipment and 
supplies are improvement efforts to provide quality care and exceed patient and 
family/representative expectation for service. 
 
 
POST ANESTHESIA CARE (PACU) 
 
Unit Definition 
Post Anesthesia Care Unit (PACU) is comprised of Main PACU, Tower PACU, Pediatric PACU, and 
Heart & Vascular PACU.  The four PACU areas consist of 42 monitored cubicles.  The PACU Units 
are part of a multidisciplinary team caring for Phase I post anesthesia patients.  Scope of 
practice includes Neonates through Geriatric levels of care.   The PACU units utilize a 
multidisciplinary caring team of nurses, physicians, anesthesia providers and support staff to 
meet the needs of patients.  The scope of peri-anesthesia nursing practice involves the 
assessment for, diagnosis of, intervention of, sedation/analgesia or anesthetic agents and 
techniques.  The practice in PACU is systemic in nature and includes the nursing process, 
decision making, analytical and scientific thinking and inquiry.  The PACU nurses’ role during  
Phase I focuses on providing post anesthesia nursing care to the patient in the immediate post 
anesthesia period, and transitioning them to Phase II level of care in the inpatient, intensive 
care or ambulatory setting for continued care. PACU primarily cares for patients who have 
received anesthetic agents (local, IV sedation, regional and general) for surgical or diagnostic 
procedures or anesthesia interventions. The services include airway management, assessment 
and intervention, invasive and non-invasive monitoring, prevention, recognition of post 
anesthetic complications, medication administration, pain and nausea control, and patient 
safety.  Procedures recovered in the PACU include, but are not limited to, 
cardiovascular/thoracic, neurosurgical, urological, orthopedic, general surgery, pediatric, 
laparoscopic, bariatric, gynecological, plastic, oral, dental, and eye, ear, nose, and throat 
(EENT), endoscopy and ECT procedures. This includes elective, urgent, or emergency 
procedures. Coverage is provided to all specialty areas except obstetrics and organ transplant.  
Quality nursing care is provided in the PACU’s twenty-four hours a day, 7 days a week, and 
additional on-call staff is available Saturday – Sunday from 7am to 7pm for inpatient, urgent 
and emergent procedures.  All nurses are BLS and ACLS certified. 
 
In the event of high patient census, post operative patients requiring inpatient or critical care 
nursing or inpatients who require cardio/respiratory resuscitation may remain beyond phase 1 
recovery or be admitted to PACU.  The inpatient plan of care will be initiated and the 
nurse/patient ratio will adjust to match inpatient and critical care unit standards.   
 
 
 
 Page 76 of 186 
Availability of Staff 
Phase I Level of Care and Nurse to Patient Ratio (based on 2012-2014 Standards of 
Perianesthesia Nursing Practice: 
One nurse to two patients who are: 
1. One unconscious, stable, without artificial airway, and over the age of 8 years; and one 
conscious, stable and free of complications. 
2. Two conscious, stable, and free of complications. 
3. Two conscious, stable 8 years of age and under, with family or competent support staff 
present. 
 
One nurse to one patient: 
• At the time of admission, until the critical elements** are met 
• Requiring mechanical life support and/or artificial airway.   
• Any unconscious patient 8 years of age and under. 
• A second nurse must be available to assist as necessary 
 
Two nurses to one patient: 
• One critically ill, unstable, complicated patient. 
 
Two Registered Nurses, one of whom is a RN competent in Phase I post-anesthesia nursing, are 
in the same room where the patient is receiving Phase I level of care.  A RN from OR can serve 
as a second RN for the PACU as needed. 
 
Critical elements can be defined as:  
• Patient has a patent airway without assistance. 
• Initial assessment is complete. 
• Patient is hemodynamically stable. 
• Report has been received from the anesthesia care provider, questions answered, and 
the transfer of care has taken place. 
 
Hours of Service 
Monday-Friday 
• All cubicles are staffed with RNs with a nurse patient ratio of 1:2.  After 3pm, nurse 
ratios remain 1:2, but available cubicles are determined by the OR schedule.  On site 
staff coverage is provided for urgent/emergent cases from 11pm-7am in the Main and 
Tower PACUs. 
Saturday & Sunday 
• Staffing is provided in the PACU to accommodate OR schedules in the Main and Tower  
PACU areas, with additional on-call staff as needed based on number of patients to be 
recovered. 
**Pediatric patients can also be recovered in Main or Tower PACUare staffed with RNs with a 
nurse patient ratio as indicated by age and acuity. 
 Page 77 of 186 
 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
 
Assessment/Reassessment:  
The RN conducts the initial patient assessment upon admission to the PACU unit and provides 
ongoing assessment and intervention throughout the stay.  The RN and support staff integrates 
safety and protection for patients and staff when implementing the policies and procedures 
and using equipment. The RN communicates with patients and families, team members and 
management in an accurate, timely manner.    
 
Patient Satisfaction initiatives:   
The RN reports pertinent, concise information accomplishes complete, timely charting and 
effectively uses the electronic medical record system.  The PACU RN also protects 
confidentiality of patients and colleagues and develops and maintains human care 
relationships. The RN integrates the influence of the individual’s human experience of health, 
illness, and healing into the nursing care plan.  The skilled RN advocates for the needs of 
patients, provides care in an ethical and legal manner, and refers concerns/issues to 
appropriate resources.   
 
 
 
ST. MARY ADMISSION UNIT  
 
Unit Definition 
St. Mary’s Admission Unit, (SMAU) is a 25 bay admission area and St. Mary’s Admission Unit 
(SMAT) is a 14 bay admission area.  These areas provide preoperative care for ambulatory, AM 
admits and inpatients. SMAU and SMAT admit patients of all ages (neonates to geriatrics) 
needing operative and diagnostic procedures requiring sedation, general, regional or local 
anesthesia. The patient status may be elective, urgent, or emergency. Procedures include, but 
are not limited to, vascular, neurosurgical, urological, orthopedic, general surgery, pediatric, 
laparoscopic, bariatric, gynecological, plastic, oral, dental, and eye, ear, nose, and throat 
(EENT),endoscopy, ECT, lithotripsy, invasive diagnostic and interventional radiology procedures. 
Coverage is provided in all specialty areas except obstetrics and organ transplant. Quality 
nursing care is provided in the operating rooms twenty-four hours a day, 7 days a week.  The 
third area, 2- South A Hall has thirteen post-operative rooms used for discharge of same day 
procedure patients.  The units are staffed Monday–Friday during the hours of 0430-2130.  The 
averages daily admit census is 80 and an average of 45 daily discharges.  Team consists of RNs, 
Clinical Service Reps and Certified Nursing Assistants. 
 
Care Team/Model of Care  
Utilizing a Primary Care Nursing model, an all RN staff completes a head to toe admission 
assessment.  An admit profile, plan of care, Falls Risk and Braden Scale is completed on every 
patient.  Vital signs and NPO status are assessed, home medications are listed, with dosage and 
frequency and last dose taken.  Special notation of education is made, and who will be Page 78 of 186 
transporting patient home as well as who will be staying with patient for first 24hrs, if 
anesthesia is given.  The nurses do a pain assessment, explaining the pain scale and establishing 
pain goals that the patient is most comfortable with, and a brief explanation of importance of 
taking pain medications post procedure.  The patient and family are prepared physically, 
psychosocially and spiritually for his or her experience in the procedural area. 
 
A Charge Nurse is assigned to the each of the units.  During the admission phase the nurse 
patient ratio target is 1:1 and during the post-operative (Stage 2), the nurse patient ratio target 
is 1:3.  All staff members are competent in the admission and discharge process.  Focus of all 
staff members is to ensure safe quality nursing care is delivered to each patient with special 
attention given to patient and family satisfaction. 
 
All nurses are BLS and ACLS certified. 
 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
Admission assessment and reassessment: 
The RN completes the admission assessment within two hours of arrival to the SMAU/SMAT 
and reassesses every two hours thereafter.  Post procedure, assessment is done on 
return/admit, and the patient is reassessed within 30minutes then every hour until discharge.   
 
Patient Satisfaction initiatives:   
The skilled RN advocates for needs of patients, provides care in an ethical and legal manner, 
and refers concerns/issues to appropriate resource.  Specific initiatives are as follows:   
• Every team member will consistently ask before leaving the patient “is there anything 
I can do for you, I have the time.” 
• Timely communication about delays and waiting times before procedures. 
• Improve the patient’s IV start experience. 
• All Surgical Service Staff providing care will sign the “Thinking of You” cards. 
• Patients will be asked prior to leaving for their procedure if they would like the nurse 
to pray with them.  A prayer card is in every room or available at the desk.   
• Contact 95% of patients after discharge with a phone call or note. 
• Ongoing improvement in communication with physicians to facilitate the patient care, 
eliminate patient delays and provide timely information/feedback to patient and 
family/representative 
 
 
SURGICAL MATERIALS MANAGEMENT 
 
Unit Definition 
The Surgical Materials Management Department is responsible for OR Supply Chain .  Supply 
Chain services areas of focus include: Physical Inventory Maintenance, Procurement, Receiving, 
Case Carts and Par Replenishment for Surgical Warehouse (SWARE ), Main OR and Tower OR 
and Heart & Vascular OR.    Page 79 of 186 
 
 
Care Team/Model or Care 
Support for direct patient care in the operating rooms is provided by the Surgical Materials 
Staff.  The staff is trained in the acquisition, preparation, handling and maintenance of sterile 
supplies in a clean environment.  
 
Availability of Surgical Materials Mgmt. Department and Staff 
Supply Chain Services are provided from 6am- 11pm, 7 days a week.   
 
 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
Patient Satisfaction Initiatives: Ensure availability and timely processing of supplies, inventory. 
 
 
 
STERILE PROCESSING & DISTRIBUTION (SPD) 
 
Unit Definition 
The Sterile Processing & Distribution (SPD) department consists of five decontamination and 
sterilization areas; in the Main, Tower and Heart & Vascular buildings.  SPD utilizes steam, and 
H2O2 sterilization processing methods.  SPD functions to provide the Operating Rooms, in 
house departments and the Lake Physician Group with sterile reusable instrumentation for 
operative and invasive procedures.  
 
Care Team/Model or Care 
Support for direct patient care in the operating rooms is provided by SPD Technicians, Surgical 
Technicians, Supervisors and a Nurse Manager.  The technical staff is trained in the disassembly, 
decontamination, and assembly of instrumentation and equipment, and preparation for and 
appropriate sterilization necessary to meet industry standards and regulatory requirements.  
 
Availability of SPD Department and Staff 
SPD is staffed 24 hours a day in the main and tower buildings by SPD technicians.   
 
 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
 
Patient Satisfaction initiatives:   
Availability and timely processing of instrumentations and equipment that meets all standards 
for cleanliness and sterilization are provided to the ORs and procedure areas. 
 
 
 
 Page 80 of 186 
 
Pre-Admission and Registration Center (PARC) 
 
PARC provides pre-admission information/instructions to patients scheduled for elective 
procedures. Nurses in the Pre-Admission and Registration Center begin coordination of care 
prior to a patient’s admission. They provide patient education, conduct pre-admission 
assessments, and coordinate required testing associated with the scheduled procedure.  The 
PARC nurse collaborates with the surgeon and anesthesia to ensure that all elements of surgery 
preparation are completed in a timely manner. An anesthesia representative is available to 
interview in person or by phone, assess and educate patients on the administration of 
anesthesia. This collaborate process provides an efficient transition of care to the hospital 
setting resulting in a reduction in patient anxiety, decreased surgical delays and improved 
patient satisfaction. 
 
Follow-up guidelines regarding complaints/issues for all Surgical Services Areas:   
Unfavorable comments/complaints are handled by the first responder to promote prompt 
attention and then reported Supervisor/Manager/Director/Divisional Director to complete 
attempts of service recovery, trending of noted issues and follow up. Page 81 of 186 
MENTAL & BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES 
Scope of Service 
 
Emergency Mental and Behavioral Health Unit (EMBH) 
EMBH is a specialized unit of the emergency department and behavioral health services 
providing 24 hours per day 7 days per week evaluation and treatment, as appropriate, for 
patients suffering from mental and behavioral health disorders. EMBH receives patients from 
the emergency department. Teams from the emergency department and mental and 
behavioral health collaborate to provide for the patients’ medical needs. In the EMBH patients 
are assessed by a multidisciplinary team of physicians, nurses and mental health professionals. 
Both medical and psychiatric stabilization is provided in the EMBH while appropriate disposition 
is determined. 
The COPE team, comprised of social workers, counselors and mental health professionals, 
function within EMBH and may also perform assessments in the Main Campus ER, Children’s 
Hospital ER, Ascension Campus ER, North Baton Rouge ER, and in the Livingston ER. COPE also 
facilitates the placement and transfers of all MBH patients from OLOL main hospital, Children’s 
hospital, Lake Ascension Hospital, Livingston ER, and North ER to OLOL inpatient MBH units and 
to outside inpatient psychiatric facilities. The COPE team coordinates and manages beds for 
OLOL inpatient MBH units. COPE team reviews and facilitates all MBH transfer requests from 
outside facilities. 
1 North Unit 
The 1 North Unit consists of two distinct and separate programs, Acute and Geriatric. The 
programs are physically separated by locked doors, but have a common nursing station 
allowing staff easy access to both programs. 
The Acute program serves adult patients with severe psychiatric conditions. This locked unit 
provides the highest level of security within the behavioral health service line. All patient rooms 
provide for private accommodations. Sleeping areas are assigned on the basis of individual 
requirements, considering the need for sleep, privacy, independence and support. The right to 
privacy is respected. The program structure minimizes unnecessary stimulation for patients. 
Patients have access to an outdoor courtyard with staff supervision. 
 The program provides medication management, group, individual and family therapy services 
as directed by a patient’s attending psychiatrist. Each patient is also seen by their primary care 
physician, an internist, and/or specialist(s) to address physical needs requiring services. Page 82 of 186 
Program services are delivered by psychiatrists, master’s prepared social workers, licensed 
professional counselors, licensed clinical social workers,  registered nurses, mental health 
technicians and activity therapists.  
The Geriatric program, GBC, occupies the second wing of the 1 North unit. GBC serves older 
adults age 55 and above with exceptions to age based on function, such as an individual’s level 
of completing activities of daily living. Individuals must be able to participate in programming. 
All patient rooms provide for private accommodations. Sleeping areas are assigned on the basis 
of individual requirements, considering the need for sleep, privacy, independence and support. 
The right to privacy is respected. Calendars, daily newspapers, magazines, and clocks are placed 
in appropriate areas throughout the unit to enhance patient orientation. Patients have access 
to an outdoor courtyard with staff supervision. The program includes medication management, 
group, individual and family therapy services as directed by a patient’s attending psychiatrist. 
Each patient is also seen by their primary care physician, internist, and/or specialist(s) to 
address physical needs. Program services are delivered by psychiatrists, masters’ prepared 
social workers, licensed clinical social workers, licensed professional counselors, registered 
nurses, mental health technicians and activity therapists.  
 
St. Clare Unit 
The St. Clare Unit is a general psychiatric unit for adult patients with psychiatric and dual 
diagnosis conditions located on the C-Wing of the TAU Center. Ten of the rooms provide for 
semi-private accommodations with one room single occupancy. Patient rooms are gender 
specific. Male and female patients are not assigned to the same room. The therapeutic 
environment of the unit is designed to enhance a positive self-image so as to preserve each 
patient’s sense of dignity and self-determination. Patients have access to an outdoor courtyard. 
The program includes medication management, group, individual and family therapy services as 
directed by a patient’s attending psychiatrist. Each patient is also seen by their primary care 
physician, an internist, and/or specialist(s) to address physical needs. Program services are 
delivered by psychiatrists, masters’ prepared social workers, licensed clinical social workers, 
licensed professional counselors, registered nurses, mental health technicians and activity 
therapists. 
 
 
 Page 83 of 186 
Adolescent Unit 
The adolescent unit is a locked psychiatric unit located on the B-Wing of the TAU Center. The 
unit provides inpatient services for individuals 12 to 17 years of age who need a highly 
structured setting and are unable to function in a less restrictive milieu. The therapeutic 
environment is designed to be free from distractions that would otherwise allow the adolescent 
not to focus on themselves or issues related to their hospitalization. Healthy behavior is 
promoted. All rooms provide for semi-private accommodations. Each hall of the unit provides 
accommodations for a different gender. Adolescent patients with mental health and/or co-
occuring disorders may be treated on this unit. Patients have access to an outdoor courtyard. 
The program includes medication management, group, individual and family therapy services as 
directed by a patient’s attending psychiatrist. Each patient is also seen by their primary care 
physician, an internist, and/or specialist(s) to address physical needs. Program services are 
delivered by psychiatrists, masters’ prepared social workers, licensed clinical social workers and 
counselors, registered nurses, mental health technicians and activity therapists. 
 
MBH Case Management 
RN Case Managers perform utilization review and collaborate with the treatment team to 
proactively manage our MBH patients. The Case Managers work to ensure that the clinical 
needs of the patient are met in the most appropriate level of care.  Case Managers utilize 
criteria to help manage the level of care, length of stay and utilization of resources.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 84 of 186 
ANCILLARY SERVICES 
Scope of Service 
 
IMAGING SERVICES 
Imaging Services provides diagnostic, therapeutic and interventional services for patients 
throughout the lifespan. Imaging Services is comprised of the following modalities: Diagnostic 
Imaging, Computed Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Special Procedures 
and Ultrasound.    Services are provided twenty-four hours per day/seven days a week with 
some modalities covered through "on call" staffing.  Radiology Services is staffed with 
Registered Radiologic Technologists, Radiologic Technologist Assistants, Schedulers, 
Receptionist and Registered Nurses.  
 Nuclear Medicine 
The Nuclear Medicine Department provides diagnostic and therapeutic services to patients 
throughout the lifespan. The department is composed of three nuclear imaging suites and a 
cardiac stress lab. The department is staffed by Registered Nuclear Technologists and 
Registered Nurses. The Nuclear Medicine Department is staffed from 7:00 A.M. until 5:00 P.M. 
Monday through Friday with services available twenty-four hours a day through "on-call" 
coverage. 
 Interventional Radiology 
The Interventional Radiology (IR) or Special Procedures Department provides diagnostic, 
therapeutic and interventional vascular services to patients throughout the lifespan. Special 
procedures is comprised of three imaging suites. The department is staffed with registered 
radiologic technologist, registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, and certified scrub 
technicians. The department is staffed from 7:00am until 5:00pm Monday thru Friday with 
services available twenty-four hours a day through “on-call” coverage.  
Competencies of the nursing staff include maintaining NIHSS certification.  The nurses receive 
training to manage care for stroke patients receiving interventions such as alteplase and/or 
mechanical clot retrieval (thrombectomy) until transfer to unit. 
PET/CT-SPECT/CT 
Hybrid Imaging is also available within the facility within the Advanced DiagnosticsCenter.  This 
department of the hospital focuses on oncology patient imaging.   Outpatient SPECT/CT imaging 
and inpatient and outpatient PET or PET/CT services are performed at this location.   The area is Page 85 of 186 
staffed with Registered Nuclear Technologists, Registered Radiologic Technologists, Licensed 
Practical Nurse, Scheduler and Patient Financial Councilor.  The area operates Monday through 
Friday from 7am to 5pm. 
LABORATORY  
The laboratory serves as a support service to patients of all age groups in all patient care areas. 
The lab is divided into the following sections: Laboratory Administration, Point of Care, Blood 
Donor Services (which includes Blood Donor Center and Blood Distribution Center), Core Lab 
(which includes Transfusion Services, Chemistry, Hematology, Urinalysis, Coagulation, 
Immunology, Microbiology, Molecular, Venipuncture, Central Processing, and Tissue Bank) and 
Lake Laboratory Services (Outreach). The main laboratory is located on the first floor of the 
main building and is accredited by CAP and AABB and the Transfusion Service is inspected by 
the FDA (Blood Donor Services holds the FDA license).  Services are provided twenty-four hours 
a day, seven days a week by state licensed Medical Technologists, Medical Laboratory 
Technicians, and Medical Laboratory Assistants. 
The laboratory provides STAT services to all areas/age groups. STAT procedures are those 
critical, life-threatening procedures, which are collected, processed and reported within one 
hour of receipt in the department. All procedures are processed and tested upon receipt to 
expedite/support patient care. STAT specimens are prioritized, labeled with a distinctive label 
to denote status, and verified immediately upon completion.  The laboratory has validated auto 
verification, in several areas, to further expedite resulting. 
In addition to STAT requests, there are other types of requests: AM, to be collected by the 
established schedule for each unit and reported within 2 hours; Routine, requests to be 
collected and processed within two hours of collection; TIMED, orders specifying collection at a 
specific time usually coordinated with medication schedules, procedures, or processes;  ASAP:  
As-soon-as-possible orders are the second tier of priority.  ASAP's are collected and reported 
within one hour of order receipt within the department.  All result values which meet 
appropriate criteria are called to appropriate personnel with complete documentation, i.e.- 
Critical values defined by organizational policy, OC-044. 
All lab services are ordered by physicians or advanced practitioners, requesting specific tests 
and schedules.  Said orders are retained for compliance/documentation purposes using 
electronic or paper format.   
Goals of department/service are to enhance patient care via expansion of in-house test menu 
therefore providing timely diagnostic results to the physicians and potentially lowering costs.  
Other objectives are: client satisfaction with diversified test menu, reduced turn-around-times, 
control of POC testing, reduced delays in collection of specimens; growth of the Outreach Page 86 of 186 
Program to support the Mission of our system; and growth of the Blood Donor Program to 
become self-sustaining and purchase fewer products from outside sources. 
CARE MANAGEMENT 
The  Care Management department consists of Registered Nurses, Social Workers, and Support 
Staff. The Case Managers perform utilization review, collaborate with Social Workers and the 
interdisciplinary team to proactively manage the patients that access Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center. The Care Management team works with the patients, physicians, and 
family members to identify and assure that the clinical needs of the patient are met in the most 
appropriate setting and level of care. Case managers utilize criteria to help manage level of 
care, length of stay, and utilization of resources.  The Care Management team also coordinates 
the discharge plan and assures the post discharge needs are met with transitions in care.  Office 
hours of operation are 8 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Monday – Friday.  Staff is available in house on 
weekends and holidays by special assignment. Social Services are available for the patients in 
the Emergency Department  24/7. Clinical Access staff are available 24/7/365 for medical 
necessity review for Emergency Department patients who are scheduled to be placed on an 
inpatient unit. 
NUTRITIONAL SERVICES 
The scope of the inpatient services provided by the Nutritional Services department is to: 
• Provide daily meal plans for patients under the supervision of a Clinical Nutrition 
Manager for all types of diets that meet nutritional requirements established by the 
Recommended Dietary Allowances. 
• Prepare quality food using standardized recipes to assure the highest levels of patient 
and customer satisfaction. 
• Maintain adequate temperatures of foods for patients and Cafeteria guests, meeting 
departmental established criteria ensuring hot food as measured by patient satisfaction 
surveys. 
• Provide for the nutritional care of inpatients by: monitoring, visiting and instructing 
inpatients in all phases of normal and therapeutic nutrition; assessing and monitoring 
patients identified at nutritional risk by nursing upon admission; providing nutritional 
assessment/consultation upon physician referral; and participating in the specialized 
health care teams (Nutritional Support Team, Critical Care Grand Rounds, Rehab). 
• Operate an employee/visitor Cafeteria providing a nutritionally balanced variety of 
foods and beverages.  
• To provide two (2) meals to pediatric parents as requested every day of the week. 
• To operate physicians dining in the Physicians’ Dining Room. 
 Page 87 of 186 
The scope of ambulatory services provided by the Nutritional Services Department is two-fold. 
• To provide nutritional assessment, therapeutic intervention, and/or education upon 
physician referral. 
• To participate in community education programs through OLOL  Wellness Department, 
cardiac rehab and the miracle group.   
 
Nutritional Services is dedicated to providing optimal nutrition for all patients, employees and 
visitors, and is based on the hospital’s mission and goals. Menus are planned and followed to 
meet the nutritional needs of patients and according to physician’s orders and recommended 
dietary allowances of the National Research Council, based on the The Academy of Nutrition 
and Dietetics & Manual of Clinical Dietetics (diet manual). Therapeutic diets are prescribed by 
the physician, planned per CBORD Software, prepared and served as ordered. The nutritional 
services department provides patient meal service from 6:45AM to 6:30 PM. 
All patients in the medical center are screened for nutritional risk upon admission by nursing 
using the Nursing Admission Assessment Profile. This profile creates triggers for screening and 
follow-up which are automatically sent to the Clinical Dietitians. Nutrition counseling/diet 
instructions are also given upon a physician's order or when deemed appropriate by a 
registered dietitian. A clinical dietitian completes nutritional assessments on a patient within 
forty-eight hours of receiving a physician’s order. All outpatient nutritional counseling will be 
referred to the OLOL Diabetes and Nutrition Center.  The Diabetes and Nutrition Center require 
a physician’s referral and an appointment.  
The department of Nutritional Services provides food service to all patients, employees and 
guests with three meals daily, seven days a week. The nutritional services department provides 
patient meal service from 6:45 AM to 6:30 PM. Meal service is provided in the Cafeteria for 
Medical Center personnel and guests at the following times: 
            Breakfast             6:30 AM - 10:00 AM 
            Lunch / Supper      11:00 AM - 8:00 PM 
         
Any patient who has an order from a physician with hospital privileges meets criteria for entry 
to Nutritional Services, including inpatient and outpatient. Additional inclusions are families of 
patients, visitors, physicians and employees.  
The goal of the department is both to provide high-quality nutritional care and to serve 
attractive, well-prepared, and nutritious meals in the most efficient manner to patients and Page 88 of 186 
personnel, within budget limitations, adhering to sanitation and safety standards. It is our goal 
to function effectively in meeting the overall mission of the hospital. 
PATIENT TRANSPORT SERVICES 
Patient Transport services include: 
1. Lifts and transfers of patients to and from bed and mobile transportation equipment for 
transport purposes.   
2. Inpatient transports to and from nursing units and ancillary areas including admissions, 
emergency care department(s), radiology, physical therapy, occupational therapy, 
endoscopy, surgery and preoperative and post operative care departments.  
3. Inpatient discharges and outpatient discharges from Outpatient Surgery.  
4. Cleaning, storing, and maintaining transport equipment.   
  
Patient transportation services are available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
PLAZA OUTPATIENT CENTER 
Pre-admission and Reservation Center (PARC) 
The preadmission and reservation center performs registrations, assessments, diagnostic 
testing, education and chart preparation for patients prior to their surgical procedure. The 
department is staffed with registered nurses and clinical service representatives. The hours of 
operation are Monday through Friday 8:00 am to 5:30 pm. 
The goal of PARC simplifies the surgery experience and enhances recovery. Our Lady of the Lake 
strongly encourages patients to call or visit the Pre-Surgery Center two or three days before the 
scheduled procedure or surgery to coordinate pre-hospitalization needs including: 
1. Arrangements to be made for completing required tests 
2. A review of health history and completion of the anesthesia preoperative record  
3. Individualized teaching  
4. Arrangements for referrals and services  
5. Discussion of discharge needs  
6. An opportunity to discuss questions or concerns patients may have about their surgery or 
procedure 
 
Pre-admission testing can be performed in the Plaza Outpatient Center. Page 89 of 186 
PHARMACY SERVICES 
Pharmacy Services Mission 
In collaboration with other healthcare professionals, we provide evidence -based drug therapy, 
use innovative technology to ensure safe and timely service, and improve the quality of our 
patients’ lives with a healing spirit.  We dedicate ourselves to lifelong learning and to sharing 
this knowledge with patients, healthcare professionals, and the communities we are privileged 
to serve. 
Pharmacy Department Philosophy 
The philosophy of the Department of Pharmacy is to provide quality pharmaceutical care to our 
patients in a safe environment. We proudly serve as a resource for the provision of health care 
within Louisiana and the surrounding region. 
We dedicate ourselves to achieving a philosophy for pharmacy practice at Our Lady of the Lake 
by creating a diverse workplace culture in which pharmacy: 
A. Significantly enhances patients’ health-related quality of life by exercising leadership in 
improving both the use of medication by individuals and the overall process of 
medication use. 
B. Manages patient medication therapy and provide related patient care and public health 
service. 
C. Be the primary department responsible for medication use and drug distribution 
systems. 
D. Ensures the most cost-effective medication regimens are utilized for the treatment of 
Our Lady of the Lake  Baton Rouge Market patients. 
E. Takes a leadership role to continuously improve and redesign the medication-use 
process with the goal of achieving significant advances in (a) patient safety, (b) health-
related outcomes, (c) prudent use of human resources, and (d) efficacy. 
F. Acknowledges our diverse patient population and provides care respectful of patient 
ethnicity, creed, nationality, religion, economic status, and sexual orientation.  
G. Provides and encourages attendance at continuing educational programs that promote 
professional growth, enhance critical thinking, and increase the ability to provide 
excellent patient care.  
H. Supports a climate that values, nurtures, and recognizes clinical expertise, education, 
shared governance, and research.  
I. Supports evidenced-based research and practice with the purpose of improving patient 
care.  
 
We are committed to maintaining and continually improving the safety and quality of 
pharmaceutical care through ongoing monitoring and evaluation of outcomes and resolution of Page 90 of 186 
identified issues. We take seriously our role in educating and are committed to the education 
and mentoring of the medical, pharmacy, nursing, pharmacy technician and allied health 
students of tomorrow. We treat each other, our patients, visitors and colleagues with dignity 
and respect in every interaction.  
 
Pharmacy Care Delivery Model 
Pharmacists work in teams and are assigned to specific units for the provision of care.  
Pharmacists may either rotate between services or may be assigned full -time to those services 
where specialty knowledge may be required.  The functions of pharmaceutical care include the 
following:  identifying potential and actual drug -related problems; resolving actual drug-related 
problems; and preventing drug-related problems. 
Provision of comprehensive pharmaceutical care in an increasingly complex healthcare delivery 
system has increased the need in some therapeutic areas for specialization among pharmacy 
practitioners.  Therefore, pharmacists are entrusted to provide all aspects of pharmaceutical 
care in addition to accepting added educational and research responsibilities. 
Distributive Pharmacist Services: 
1.   Pharmacists functioning in this capacity are responsible for providing leadership and  
        oversight of the medication distribution system 
2. Requirements:  pharmacy licensure 
3. Expectations of basic clinical services including:   
• allergy screening, age and renal function appropriate dosing, drug duplication and 
drug interaction screening 
•  Perform order entry, checking of medications and production of compounded 
mixtures efficiently with a high degree of accuracy  
• Document all clinical interventions 
• Maintain competency training related to area of specialty 
• Providing educational opportunities for pharmacy technicians, interns, residents and 
pharmacists in drug distribution roles 
 
Decentralized Pharmacist Teams 
Critical Care Medicine 
Oncology Pediatrics 
OR/Surgery IV Room 
 Page 91 of 186 
Clinical Pharmacist Services 
1. Requirements:  pharmacy licensure; additional post-graduate training (PGY 1/2 
residencies) or equivalent clinical experience 
2. Expectations: 
• Participation in interdisciplinary rounds 
• Pharmacy student and resident precepting 
• Pharmacy, physician, and nursing education 
• Contributing to the advancement of patient care through research activities and 
publications 
• Leadership of medication use evaluations and developing protocols to enhance 
delivery of safe care 
• Contributing to the advancement of patient care through participation in 
professional organizations 
• Active participation on interdisciplinary committees and task forces 
 
Clinical Pharmacist Specialist Teams 
Pediatrics Infectious Diseases 
Critical Care Oncology 
Investigational Drug Services Medicine 
Emergency Medicine Cardiology 
 
Pharmacy Scope of Service 
The Pharmacy serves hospital inpatients and outpatients as well as the needs of satellite and 
affiliated facilities. The Inpatient Pharmacy is open twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.  
The patient populations served include pediatrics, adolescents  through the OLOL Children’s 
Hospital, and , adults and geriatrics  through the OLOL Main and OLOL Ascension campus ; both 
male and female.  Services include: 
 
Drug procurement, storage, and distribution 
The pharmacy dispenses medications based on orders placed by appropriately credentialed 
providers.  Handwritten and computerized provider order entry (CPOE) orders are reviewed 
and documented in EPIC, the hospital’s electronic medical record system. The Pharmacy also 
utilizes several automated systems to provide pharmaceutical services including automated Page 92 of 186 
dispensing cabinets (Pyxis®), an IV admixture workflow management system (DoseEdge®), an 
Order Imaging System (Pyxis Connect), a nd a Medication Storage & Dispensing System (Talyst) .  
These integrated systems add additional measures that enhance quality and safety in the 
medication process.  Pharmacy is also responsible for monitoring the temperatures of 
refrigerators that store medications throughout the hospital.   
 
To ensure the integrity of our supply chain, OLOL ensures that the primary and secondary 
wholesalers contracted are appropriately licensed.  Procurement outside of licensed 
wholesalers is limited to direct purchases from the manufacturers.  For the outsourcing of 
sterile preparations, sterility and regulatory compliance of secondary compounding companies 
is verified prior to the purchase of compounded products. 
 
Drug Therapy Review 
Drug therapy monitoring is a collaborative assessment by physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and 
other practitioners responsible for the quality and safety of patient care.  The patient’s profile is 
assessed each time a medication order is received.  Pharmacists processing orders review each 
medication for: 
 
• Potential for allergic reactions, adverse events, and drug interactions 
• Appropriate dosing for acute and chronic conditions 
• Appropriate dosing for renal/hepatic dysfunction 
• Appropriate route and frequency 
• Presence of therapeutic duplication 
• Contraindications 
• Drug incompatibilities 
 
Clinical pharmacists are members of patient care teams throughout the organization.  Clinical 
pharmacists attending multidisciplinary rounds participate in the selection and modification of 
drug therapy to ensure the safest and most effective outcome for patients.  Clinical Pharmacists 
attend patient care rounds with the following teams: 
(1) LSU Internal Medicine teams 
(2) Adult Critical Care Medicine Service (CCMS) 
(3) Pediatric Critical Care Medicine Service 
(4) Infectious Diseases Consult Service Page 93 of 186 
(5) LSU Intensive care Unit Teams 
(6) Trauma Intensive Care Unit Teams 
(7) Emergency Department Care Teams 
(8) Cardiovascular Surgery Care Team 
(9) Heart Failure Care Team 
(10) Surgical and Neurocritical Care Teams 
 
Ambulatory Care Pharmacy Services 
The Our Lady of the Lake/LSU MidCity Clinic provides services for some of the most 
underserved populations in our community.  An HIV Certified clinical pharmacist  cares for 
patients in the HIV/Early Intervention Clinic and the Family Practice Clinic, both housed within 
the Midcity Clinic.  These pharmacists participate in medication therapy management, patient 
counseling, student and resident precepting, and assist with the clinic’s patient assistance 
programs.   
Antimicrobial Stewardship 
The goals of the antimicrobial stewardship program are to: 
▪ Ensure optimal use of antimicrobial therapy for the best clinical outcomes for 
treatment of infections with minimal toxicity to patients and minimal impact on 
subsequent development of resistance 
▪ Minimize and monitor antimicrobial resistance throughout Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center 
▪ Improve patient outcomes while minimizing unintended adverse events and/or overuse 
of antimicrobial agents 
▪ Utilize pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic principles to optimize antimicrobial 
dosing 
▪ Reduce adverse drug events and administration errors related to antimicrobial usage 
▪ Reduce healthcare costs associated with antimicrobial therapy 
 
Two infectious diseases -trained clinical pharmacist s attends daily rounds with the infectious 
diseases consult service.  The ID pharmacist s are responsible for the development, 
implementation, and analysis of stewardship initiatives.  All members of the pharmacy 
department support the efforts of the stewardship program through participation in the: 
• Pharmacokinetics consult service  
• Automatic renal dosing 
• Antimicrobial utilization surveillance 
• IV-to-Oral program 
 Page 94 of 186 
Anticoagulation Management 
Clinical team members monitor the safety and efficacy of anticoagulant use.  When consulted, 
pharmacists adjust and monitor warfarin therapy. Additionally, pharmacists review all patients 
with INRs ≥4 receiving concomitant warfarin therapy and contact providers with 
recommendations for drug therapy modification.  Clinical team mem bers also automatically 
adjust and monitor the newer oral anticoagulants and maintain the hospital’s anticoagulation 
reversal protocol.  Clinical team members also automatically dose and adjust morbidly obese 
patients who are ordered enoxaparin for treatment of venous thromboembolisms. 
Nutrition support 
Clinical pharmacists and clinical nutritionists collaborate to ensure safe and appropriate 
parenteral nutrition is delivered to adult & pediatric patients at OLOL.  Adult patients are co -
managed when a TPN management consult is requested.  In the Children’s Hospital, the 
pediatric clinical pharmacist manages all parenteral nutrition.  
   Formulary management 
The Pharmacy & Therapeutics (P&T) Committee is a committee of physicians, pharmacists, and 
other healthcare professionals responsible for evaluating, appraising, and selecting from among 
the numerous available drug entities and products those that are considered clinically 
necessary for use at OLOL.  The committee is also responsible for ensuring the safe and 
effective use of medications at OLOL. The Committee uses the best available information in 
making decisions and adopts best practice guidelines from evidence -based literature and 
research experience with new medications. 
Pharmacists are responsible for carrying out the decisions of the pharmacy and therapeutics 
committee.  Order entry pharmacists, clinical pharmacists, pharmacy administration and the 
P&T Chair partner to ensure that requests for non -formulary medications are reviewed in a 
timely fashion and are procured only when clinically appropriate. A clinical pharmacist and 
pharmacy resident are on-call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to review non -formulary requests, 
complete clinical consults, and answer drug information questions.  Additionally, clinical 
pharmacists manage the formulary by performing the following activities: 
• Drug monograph service 
• Drug utilization evaluation 
• Drug class review 
• Guideline and protocol development 
 
 Page 95 of 186 
Post-graduate education 
The PGY -1 pharmacy practice residency program provides residents with an opportunity to 
deliver cost-effective, evidence-based patient care in unit -based and multidisciplinary settings 
while honing leadership and project management skills. Upon program completion, residents 
are prepared to pursue PGY -2 residency training or attain a position as a general pharmacy 
clinician. 
The program is a 12-month learning experience dedicated to: 
• Improvement of the medication use process  
• Provision of evidence-based patient-centered medication therapy management in 
multidisciplinary settings  
• Leadership and practice management development  
• Enhancement of medication safety and therapeutic outcomes  
• Development of sustainable pharmacy practice and educational models 
 
The PGY-2 Critical Care residency program prepares residents to become competent critical 
care pharmacy specialists through exposure to the multiple critical care sites within OLOL. 
Residents are provided the opportunity to provide high-quality, evidence-based patient care in 
a multidisciplinary setting while also assisting in quality initiatives, longitudinal research 
projects, and medication use evaluations. Residents also build upon their leadership and project 
management skills.  
The program is a 12-month learning experience dedicated to:  
• Improvement of the medication use process 
• Provision of evidence-based patient-centered medication therapy management in 
multidisciplinary critical care settings 
• Leadership and practice management development 
• Enhancement of medication safety and therapeutic outcomes 
Development of sustainable pharmacy practice and educational models 
Pharmacy student education 
Pharmacy students from Xavier University College of Pharmacy, University of Louisiana at 
Monroe, and other colleges of pharmacy rotate within the department and on patient care 
teams throughout the hospital.  The following APPE rotation types are offered: 
▪ Pharmacy Management rotation 
▪ Institutional Pharmacy Practice rotation 
▪ General Internal Medicine rotation Page 96 of 186 
▪ Adult Critical Care rotation 
▪ Pediatric General Internal Medicine rotation 
▪ Infectious Diseases rotation 
▪ Cardiology rotation 
▪ Informatics rotation 
 
 
Clinical research participation 
Under the direction of the Department of Pharmacy and the Office of Research, the 
Department of Pharmacy is responsible for the receipt, dispensing, documentation, and 
disposal of all investigational drugs used for studies conducted at OLOL.   
Outpatient Pharmacy Assistance Program (PAP) service 
The outpatient Pharmacy Assistance Program (PAP) Service at LSU Health Baton Rouge MidCity 
retail pharmacy and North Clinics pharmacy offers various models of medication-related patient 
assistance.  In addition, our infusion sites at LSU Health North and Our Lady of the Lake Cancer 
Institute are able to provide support with free drug for patients treatments.  Pharmacy PAP 
technicians work with patients to determine eligibility to receive medications at minimal to no 
cost, a service vital to meeting the needs of our most vulnerable low -income and indigent 
population.  Pharmacy Assistance Program medications cover orals, injectables, and infusions 
helping to keep both patient and pharmacy costs down.  The MidCity Retail Pharmacy also 
participates in Bulk Replacement contracts with various manufacturers to provide drugs at a 
reduced cost.  There is also an OLOL pharmacy at MOB IV on O’Donovan-4th floor. 
Pharmacy Locations Hours of Operation 
OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy 24 Hours, 7 days a week 
OLOL OR Satellites (Main & Tower) 0600-1430 M-F   
Outpatient Oncology (Essen) 0800-1600 M-F 
 Children’s Hospital  Retail Pharmacy 0800-1730 M-F 
LSU Health BR – Mid City Retail Pharmacy 0730-1645 M-F   
OLOL O’Donovan Pharmacy 0730-1645 M-F   
LSU Health BR – North Baton Rouge Pharmacy & 
Infusion Center 
0700-1530 M-F   
LSU Health BR – Surgical Facility 0630-1500 M-F   
 
 Page 97 of 186 
PHYSICAL MEDICINE SERVICES 
Acute Care Physical Medicine 
The Acute Care Physical Medicine Department provides therapy services (Physical, 
Occupational, and Speech) to inpatients with neuromuscular, musculoskeletal, integumentary, 
sensorimotor, and cardiopulmonary impairments. The Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Department provides skilled therapy services to all age groups and categories of inpatients to 
assist patients in reaching their highest functional potential.  The department provides these 
services from 8:00 a.m. – 4:00 p.m. seven days per week. 
 
Staff includes Physical Therapists, Licensed Physical Therapy Assistants, Physical Therapy Aides, 
Occupational Therapists, and Speech/Language Pathologists who provide an interdisciplinary 
approach to patient care.  Services include: 
• An assessment/evaluation of functional status; 
• Development of a treatment plan with physician and patient/family input; 
• A time frame for achievement; 
• Documentation of progress; 
• Patient/family education; 
• Discharge planning; and 
• Follow-up care 
 
Patients receiving services should meet the following criteria:  referred by a licensed physician, 
experienced a change in functional status, medically able to actively participate in treatment 
activities, and demonstrates potential for improvement. 
 
Goals of the department are to conduct a preliminary assessment of the patient’s functional 
status, which assists in the creation of an interdisciplinary plan of care and facilitates 
appropriate level of service in the continuum of care. 
 
Outpatient Pediatric Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation 
The Outpatient Pediatric Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation Department provides 
comprehensive rehabilitation pediatric outpatient services (Physical, Occupational, and Speech) 
to musculoskeletal and neurologically impaired children. Pediatric Outpatient Physical Medicine Page 98 of 186 
and Rehabilitation provides services from 7:00 a.m. – 5:00 p.m. Monday – Thursday and 7:00 
a.m. – 12 Noon Friday. 
Services are provided for those patients who meet the following criteria: change in functional 
status, medically stable and able to actively participate in treatment, indications of the 
potential for functional gains, and are referred by a licensed physician. 
Goals of the department are to provide comprehensive, multidisciplinary, outpatient pediatric 
rehabilitation, marked by significant functional outcomes and exceptional physician and patient 
satisfaction. We strive to provide this care in a prudent and efficient manner to maximize our 
patients’ recovery with the appropriate amount of allocated resources. 
 
RESPIRATORY SERVICES 
The respiratory care department serves patients across the hospital in all care settings. 
Respiratory services are divided up into the following sections: respiratory care and pulmonary 
function laboratory. All respiratory therapists are credentialed by the National Board of 
Respiratory Care as a certified or registered respiratory therapists and licensed by the Louisiana 
Board of Medical Examiners.   The respiratory therapists are responsible for the therapeutic use 
of medical gases such as oxygen and heliox, humidification and nebulization, medication 
administration, management of mechanical ventilation, bronchial pulmonary hygiene, airway 
clearance therapy, lung volume expansion therapy, breathing exercises and patient education. 
As members of the code team, all respiratory therapists are ACLS and BLS certified and  take 
part in cardiopulmonary resuscitation efforts.  Respiratory Care is responsible for the 
management of the natural, artificial and mechanical airways, and care for these patient in the 
critical care setting and emergency department. Respiratory therapists are responsible for the 
following diagnostic tests:  arterial punctures for blood gas analysis, oxygen desaturation 
studies, and sputum cultures collected from artificial airways or inductions.  The blood gas 
laboratory is accredited by College of American Pathologists (CAP) and managed and operated 
by the respiratory care department. Hours of operation are twenty-four hours a day, 7 days a 
week. 
 
In the pulmonary function laboratory, specific testing techniques are performed by the  
respiratory therapists to assist in the diagnosis, monitoring, treatment, and research of 
cardiopulmonary impairment. Said studies will measure gas volumes, pressures, flows, and 
diffusion of gases to determine the function of the cardiopulmonary system. In addition to 
pulmonary function testing, other responsibilities of the respiratory therapists include arterial 
blood gas sampling and testing, medication administration via nebulization and sputum Page 99 of 186 
collection for analysis to be performed in the pulmonary function laboratory. The hours of 
operation of the pulmonary function laboratory for outpatient and inpatients are 7am-3:30pm 
Monday through Friday, and will be closed on holidays as determined by the hospital policy. 
 
Pulmonary rehabilitation and education for patients with chronic pulmonary disease is within 
the scope of respiratory therapists within the pulmonary function laboratory. This team also 
serves the ALS clinic. This service includes the diagnosis and treatment of lung-related illnesses 
such as asthma, occupational lung exposure, emphysema, bronchitis and others. Respiratory 
assistants and supply clerks are also members of the team to aid in the preparation of 
equipment and supplies for patient care.  
 
Trauma Specialized Program 
Our specialized trauma team includes surgeons, emergency and other specialty physicians, 
nurses, therapists, and social workers. The trauma team at Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center (OLOLRMC) treats more than 3,000 patients each year with traumatic injuries. 
OLOLRMC is the only Level 1 Trauma Center in the region with trauma surgeons available 24/7 
to provide lifesaving care for those in need. 
The OLOLRMC Trauma Specialist Program (TSP) operates a weekly trauma clinic which delivers 
follow up care for trauma patients who are without a primary care physician or specialist upon 
hospital discharge. The Trauma Specialist Clinic staff consists of a trauma surgeon assisted by 
the trauma clinic nurse and the trauma clinic assistant. 
 
Trauma Specialist Program 
Within the General Surgery Service Line, OLOLRMC employs a dedicated trauma team.  Over 
the past 11 years, a core group of professionals were assimilated to develop the infrastructure 
for an ACS Level I Trauma Center accreditation. The core staff consists of a medical director 
(trauma surgeon), five trauma surgeons, six physician assistants, one nurse practitioner, two 
registered nurses, the trauma program manager (registered nurse), three trauma registrars, 
one injury prevention coordinator,  and one trauma social worker.  The TSP provides optimal 
trauma care through prevention, access, acute care hospitalization, and rehabilitation. The TSP 
has the leadership and total care for every aspect of an injury, from prevention through 
rehabilitation. Integral to our success are other service lines such as neurosurgery, emergency 
medicine, general surgery, orthopedic surgery, vascular surgery, cardiothoracic surgery, 
rehabilitation, and pediatric trauma. Page 100 of 186 
 
Trauma Registry 
OLOLRMC supports a commercial electronic trauma registry to capture disease specific 
variables relevant to all trauma cases admitted with the ICD 10 codes S00-S99, T07, T14, and 
T79.A1 - T79.A9.  We employ three full time trauma registrars and two contract registrars 
whose sole purpose is to maintain and query the database.  A registered nurse, functioning as a 
performance improvement coordinator, assures validation and data integrity of the trauma 
registry. 
 
Ongoing Trauma Specialty Programs 
OLOLRMC manages trauma specific programs as part of our service line.  First, Performance 
Improvement and Patient Safety (PIPS) is an interdisciplinary collaborative program that 
provides a continuous quality process for improving the care for injured patients. Based on 
specific quality and safety triggers, practices and processes are reviewed to develop clinical 
guidelines to assure optimal care for the injured patient. On a monthly basis, specific cases are 
discussed in a round table session with multiple physician disciplines to promote quality 
treatment initiatives and policy development. 
Second, the Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) program is 
operated by the trauma program in collaboration with the Mental Behavioral Health (MBH) 
team to identify patients who may have substance misuse disorder.  SBIRT consists of the 
assessment of all injured patients   through a one-session evaluation and brief intervention 
protocol designed to raise awareness of substance use as a risk factor for traumatic injury to 
educate and motivate safer, more responsible behavior.  The goals of the program area:  
• Screening: To systematically screen all qualified, consenting adult OLOLRMC Trauma Service 
patients for recent risky drug and alcohol use patterns. 
• Feedback:   To provide tailored, standardized feedback to each consenting, screened patient 
which includes comparative information on that patient’s drug and alcohol use levels and 
patterns (frequently/quantity drinking or illicit drug use; binge drinking; drinking or drug use in 
conjunction with other high-risk behaviors). 
• Brief Intervention: To provide an appropriate, targeted brief intervention for each consenting, 
qualified patient.   
 Page 101 of 186 
Referral Treatment:  To provide appropriate referrals for additional substance-related 
information, counseling and/or treatment to any screened patient who requests these 
materials.  Finally, supported by the Trauma Service, is the injury prevention and outreach 
program.  Included as part of our injury prevention outreach is the Matter of Balance Program. 
This is and 8-week program which focuses on fall prevention and safety.  Stop the Bleed is also 
a large part of the injury prevention program and is currently being taught to the EBR School 
faculty.  
Lastly, as part of the trauma injury prevention and outreach program, the trauma service has 
partnered with Victim Assistance Services at the East Baton Rouge District Attorney’s Office to 
implement a hospital violence intervention program designed to address domestic violence in 
our community.  With the help of victim assistance coordinators, our center helps link domestic 
violence victims admitted through our trauma services to community resources that address 
the physical, emotional, and spiritual needs of victims.   
 
ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 
 
Grants Department  
The Grants Office coordinates the identification, solicitation and administration of federal, state 
and private grants for the hospital.  Additionally, the Grants Office works to cultivate 
relationships with organizations and businesses for the purposes of advancing the mission of 
the institution. The office is tasked with assisting departments with grants-related documents, 
questions or concerns, and serving as a liaison to local, state and federal agencies to ensure 
grants are in compliance. 
 
OFFICE OF RESEARCH 
The Office of Research (OR) is tasked to analyze the scientific, clinical, and ethical merit as well 
as religious directives of all clinical and non-clinical research conducted at OLOL.  Before a 
research study can be conducted at OLOL, the Office of Research determines the financial 
impact to the hospital; compliance with regulations; and the operational feasibility before 
providing a letter of endorsement to accompany the Principal Investigator’s application to the 
Institutional Review Board. Our Lady of the Lake Hospital (OLOL) is committed to maintaining 
the highest scientific, clinical and ethical standards in all research conducted at its facilities. 
Further, OLOL is committed to compliance with federal regulations, including the Stark Laws 
and the Anti-Kickback statutes. 
GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION 
OLOL’s Graduate Medical Education Office provides support, coordination, and oversight for all 
residents, fellows, and medical students participating in graduate medical education at Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center.  The GME Office is also responsible for the Page 102 of 186 
credentialing and on-boarding of all house officers and medical students rotating at OLOL.  The 
hospital serves as the sponsoring institution of the Pediatric Residency Program, as well as a 
clinical teaching site for several affiliated residency and fellowship programs. 
Resident/Student Lounges and Call Rooms:  These spaces are available throughout the hospital 
for resident and student use ONLY.  Designated call room spaces are only accessible with a 
resident or student ID badge.  The lounge encompasses the following amenities for house 
officers: sleep rooms, shower facilities, lockers, computers, lounge area, kitchen area, and copy 
machine/fax machines. 
 
GME & Patient Safety 
The following options are available to all house officers that need to report a near miss or 
patient safety event: 
• “Speak Up” Patient Safety Hotline….765-1734 
• Physician Hotline….765-4455, to report any issues concerns or compliments related to 
OLOL services 
• RL Datix  Safety Event Manager to file a report, available on Teamlink under the 
Applications Tab 
• FMOL Integrity Link….1-888-400-4517 
 
The following documents are available on the GME Page on Teamlink for team member 
reference: 
• Monthly Resident Rotation Roster, including resident pictures 
• Monthly Teaching Service Call Schedule and phone numbers 
• Lists of Specialty Specific Procedures by Resident Level of Training 
• House Officer Scope of Practice Policies 
 Page 103 of 186 
 
MANAGEMENT / SUPPORT SERVICES  
 
 
ACCESS SERVICES 
The department’s employees work directly with patients and their families in the admission, 
insurance verification and certification, and/or payment collection processes. The Access 
Services Representative is responsible for positively identifying patients and registering each 
patient seeking services at OLOL by accurately collecting demographic and insurance 
information and entering that information into the hospital’s information system. The 
employees are also responsible for verifying benefits, obtaining certification/authorization, and 
determining financial responsibility for all hospital patients. They coordinate the patient 
placement process by communicating with nurses, physicians’ offices, and other hospital 
departments regarding patient needs for a bed in the facility, and assign them as directed by 
Nursing Services according to diagnosis and the appropriate level of care. 
 
The department works closely with Medical Management and Managed Care to make sure that 
health plan information is accurate and updated at all times. They also work together in 
obtaining certification, appealing denials, and working on process (operational) issues. 
 
Hours of Operation 
Main Admissions area- 5:00am - 6:30pm Monday through Friday                                      
Emergency Room area- Open twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week 
 
 
COMMUNITY ADVOCACY SERVICES 
 
The Community Advocacy Department provides education, advocacy, and access to healthcare 
services with a goal of fostering a healthier and more resilient community for all. The 
department is responsible for a wide range of activities aimed at improving the health and 
wellbeing of the community we serve. These activities are designed to address specific health 
care needs and priorities identified through the CHNA to promote overall community health. 
Some of the common activities performed are:   
 
Health education and workshops, screening and testing, administration of immunizations, 
Support groups, participating in community health fairs, mobile clinics, partnerships and 
collaborations with local government and non-profits, and community health promotion 
campaigns. Additionally, the department supports OLOL’s service lines, marketing strategies 
and business development. 
 
The department works in collaboration with other hospitals to create the Community Health 
Needs Assessment every three years and then works on an ongoing basis to develop strategies Page 104 of 186 
and programs to address the identified significant needs. Reporting is ongoing and done via the 
Community Health Implementation Plan. 
 
OLOL like other non-profit hospitals has responsibility to provide community benefit as a 
fundamental part of our mission and commitment to the communities we serve. Key aspects of 
this responsibility include promoting public health, charity care, development of the CHNA, 
community outreach and education, subsidized services, research, community partnerships. 
This commitment ensures that we fulfill our mission of serving the greater good and promoting 
the well-being of the communities we serve. 
 
The department’s office hours are Monday through Friday, 8am – 4:30pm; the team’s work 
regularly extends into Saturday’s and some evenings when community events take place. 
 
TeleHealth/TeleMedicine (THTM) 
  
The Our Lady of the Lake Telehealth/Telemedicine program is focused on the utilization of 
Telehealth technology to improve and expand the opportunity for rural and urban underserved 
populations to receive quality, affordable health care. The main goals of the program are to 1) 
improve the quality of and access to care, 2) to reduce cost without jeopardizing quality of care, 
3) to promote the use of telemedicine as a good option for patient consultations by educating 
healthcare professionals about the benefits of Telehealth/Telemedicine.  
  
The THTM program can provide remote care for stroke patients in critical care hospitals, and 
specialty care consults via audio and video equipment for patients in rural areas. The THTM 
program also plays a vital role in the medical education of residents in the area by connecting 
them with faculty in other locations, thereby providing a more robust educational experience.  
  
Data will be collected and continuously reviewed to identify strengths and weaknesses in the 
delivery of THTM services with appropriate remedial action taken on the basis of the data in an 
effort to ensure continuous attention to the improvement in the quality of care. 
 
Diabetes and Nutrition Center 
The Diabetes & Nutrition Center offers two distinct, yet complementary services: diabetes self-
management training (DSMT) and medical nutrition therapy (MNT).  DSMT is provided to 
inpatients and outpatients with all types of diabetes (Type 1, Type 2, gestational, secondary and 
other forms of glucose abnormalities).  MNT is provided to outpatients, involving intensive 
nutritional counseling and therapy regimen for disease management and nutritional 
counseling/behavior modification for weight management of nutrition related medical 
diagnosis.   
  
The staff of registered nurses, registered dietitians, & certified diabetes educators are available 
Monday – Friday, 7:30 AM – 4:00 PM, for individual and group consults.   
  Page 105 of 186 
The outpatient DSMT program has maintained Recognition from the American Diabetes 
Association (ADA) since 1992, and operates according to the ADA National Standards for 
Diabetes Self-Management Education and Support.  With a physician referral, patients receive a 
needs assessment, knowledge and skill level evaluation and an educational plan with 
measurable learning objectives and participant selected behavioral objectives, over a 6-month 
time period.   
  
The inpatient DSMT program, with a physician referral, provides a needs assessment and 
diabetes survival skills education and appropriate patients are referred to the outpatient 
program. 
  
The Diabetes & Nutrition Center is committed to providing programs that encourage people 
and their families to be active participants in self-care management of their medical conditions.  
Participants gain knowledge, technical and psychosocial skills necessary for maintenance of 
health and prevention of complications, for diabetes and other nutrition related conditions.  
Our commitment extends to promote growth and development of those health care 
professionals involved in the care and education of our patients, families and the general 
public. 
 
WOUND CARE  
The wound/ostomy care team provides holistic, direct nursing care to patients with wound, skin 
and ostomy complications such as pressure ulcers, surgical, arterial, venous, and diabetic 
wounds, fistulas, drains, and tubes. The nurses guide patients in quality-of-life issues while 
providing culturally sensitive and age appropriate care. Care is based on the assessed needs of 
the individual patient, current best practices, and ongoing evaluation of patient outcomes. This 
includes the assessment, management, prevention, and continuing evaluation of patients with 
alterations in skin/tissue integrity or conditions. The wound/ostomy care nurses serve as 
educators, consultants, coordinators of care, and advocates for optimum patient outcomes in 
wound and skin care management.  
The wound/ostomy care team is a resource to the clinical staff. The wound/ostomy nurses 
serve as a clinical partner and collaborate with the clinical staff in planning and initiating the 
plan of care for wound, ostomy, and skin care. The nurses educate the clinical staff on wound 
and ostomy evidence-based practices through hospital nursing and nursing assistant 
orientation programs, on-going education on the unit, and at pressure ulcer workgroup 
meetings  
 The wound/ostomy care team cares for patients across the life span in the inpatient, 
outpatient, and ambulatory settings. Department hours of operation are Monday through 
Friday, 8:00 AM to 4:30 PM. A nurse with the wound/ostomy care team is on call from  7am-Page 106 of 186 
3pm Saturday, Sunday, and holidays for the inpatient setting to assist with complex patient care 
needs.   
 
CARDIOPULMONARY REHABILITATION 
 
Cardiac Rehabilitation consists of inpatient and outpatient programs for individuals requiring 
supervision of exercise and cardiovascular wellness counseling. Inpatient services provided 
include, but are not limited to, supervised ambulation, cardiac education including coronary 
artery bypass surgery, percutaneous coronary intervention, pacemaker/electrophysiology, 
implantable cardiac defibrillator, myocardial infarction, heart failure management, and general 
cardiovascular risk factor assessment and modification. 
 
Cardiac and Pulmonary Outpatient Services are secondary prevention programs encompassing 
monitored exercise and risk factor modification.  Education topics include:  Women and Heart 
Disease, Heart Healthy Nutrition, Smoking Cessation, Sex and Heart Disease, Coronary Artery 
Disease Prevention and Management, Fit Heart, Stress Management, What to Know About Your 
Cardiac and Pulmonary Medications, Pulmonary Disease Management, and Care of the 
Caregiver. 
 
Inpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation is available daily, 7am- 3pm.  Outpatient hours of operation 
are:  Monday, Wednesday, and Thursday 7am-7pm and Tuesday, Friday 7am-3pm. 
The multidisciplinary team includes registered nurses, clinical exercise physiologists, and 
respiratory therapists.  Both the Cardiac and Pulmonary Rehabilitation Programs are certified 
by the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation 
 
CORPORATE COMMUNICATIONS  
Marketing and Communications 
 
The Marketing and Communications Department is responsible for the management of the Our 
Lady of the Lake brand through market research, multi-media advertising, public relations, 
communications, and digital online. The department supports the organization’s strategic 
initiatives and serves the regional medical center and family of services, major service lines and 
departments with events, media relations, informational pieces, printed materials, digital and 
online activities, social media, and communications to internal and external audiences.  
 
LAKELINE DIRECT  
LakeLine Direct is a community service that provides free twenty-four hour nurse advice, health 
information, and physician referral. Services include greeting and communicating with callers in 
a kind, courteous, and respectful manner; obtaining caller identification, demographic, and Page 107 of 186 
insurance information; correctly identifies callers’ health concern and triages caller according to 
set guidelines; providing information to callers, when appropriate, related to community 
resources, referral services, and education classes’ information and registration. Hours of 
operation are twenty-four hours a day, 7 days a week. 
Goals are to ensure the highest quality of customer service by continuing to monitor for PI the 
answer time, abandoned rate, and productivity of all calls. LakeLine Direct strives to provide 
quality, updated information to the public in an efficient manner that is in conjunction with the 
mission of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center. 
 
VOLUNTEERS  
 
OLOL volunteers contribute time to almost all work areas with their responsibilities including 
clerical work, sales, non-medical assistance to medical personnel, and family assistance. 
Volunteers are overseen by the Director of Patient Experience and support team. The 
volunteer’s assignments are based on their individual skills and talents.  
 
It is the goal of this department to improve the patient and family experience by contributing to 
the comfort, care and happiness of patients and their families while freeing the professional 
staff for more direct patient care. It is our goal to increase the capabilities and quality of 
programs that serve our customers. It is also our goal that the volunteers' caring attention to 
patients and their families designate volunteers as a liaison between the medical center and the 
community to which the patient or their family will return. 
 
EDUCATION 
Team member professional development is provided by Human Resources’ Leading and 
Learning and the Clinical Education Center (CEC). Human Resources’ Leading and Learning, 
provides Team member education which includes, but is not limited to General Orientation and 
other organizational education. The CEC conducts , Multidisciplinary Orientation (MDO) for all 
new clinical team members and  conducts Nursing Orientation. Nursing Orientation includes, 
but is not limited to Electronic Medical Record, Medication Dispensing System, General Nursing 
Care Practice Standards, Computer Based Learning (CBL) Modules, and Capillary blood glucose 
monitoring education. Electronic Medical Record training is coordinated for all clinical team 
members by the CEC. 
 
 
The CEC Nursing Professional Development Generalist/Specialist and Allied Health Educator 
provide a variety of on-going clinical professional development programs that provide clinical 
staff an opportunity to stay current with evidence-based practice, enhance professional 
competence, learn new technology and treatment regimens, and update clinical skills. The CEC 
serves as a liaison between the local nursing programs and the hospital. Page 108 of 186 
 
 
The department is  approved as a provider of nursing continuing-professional development  by 
the Louisiana State Nurses Association Approver, an accredited approver by the American 
Nurses Credentialing Center’s Commission on Accreditation. LSNA Provider No. 4002644.   As 
an American Heart Association Training Center, the CEC provides BLS, ACLS, and PALS for team 
and community members.  
 
Hours of operation are from 7:00AM to 4:00PM, Monday through Thursday and 7:00AM to 
12:00PM on Friday.  
 
 
FACILITY OPERATIONS 
 
Security  
The Security Department consists of armed and unarmed internal officers off-duty Law 
Enforcement officers and contract security, who are  responsible for the following on the 
hospital campus: protection of life and property; prevention, detection and investigation of 
criminal activity; maintenance of public order; twenty-four hour escort service for employees; 
incident reporting and response; violence in the workplace follow-up; Code white and Code 
Pink response. Hours of Operation: twenty-four hours a day, 7 days a week. 
 
 
Safety Management 
Safety Management coordinates the Safety Management activities for all departments in the 
organization to provide a safe environment for patients, guests and team members. The main 
functions include coordinating Environment of Care Committee activities and document record-
keeping; conducting environmental rounds; organizational collection of information about 
deficiencies and opportunities for improvement in the environment of care, and providing 
education to employees. The goals of the department include continuing to identifying and  
reducing hazards and safety risks in the environment of care, and to improve employee 
knowledge of Environment of Care Program. 
 
Plant Services 
 
Plant Services is responsible for overseeing, managing, and upkeeping the physical 
infrastructure, utility systems, grounds, and medical equipment within the facilities. Our 
operations run round the clock, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The key objectives of Plant 
Services encompass the establishment and preservation of performance benchmarks for staff 
expertise and competence, promoting active engagement, monitoring and conducting 
inspection activities, devising protocols for emergency and incident reporting, as well as 
supervising preventative maintenance and testing of vital operational components. Page 109 of 186 
 
FINANCIAL OPERATIONS 
 
Financial Operations generates external and internal reports from various databases, maintains 
and processes data from the cost accounting/decision support system, prepares and monitors 
budget reports, develops pro-forma reports for strategic planning, produces 
benchmarking/target reports, and monitors and provides impact analyses due to changes in 
regulations and payments methods.  
 
Hours of operation are 7:30 AM to 4:30 PM, Monday through Friday. No holiday operation is 
required. 
 
HEALTH INFORMATION MANAGEMENT 
 
The Health Information Management Department provides services for the hospital five days a 
week, Monday–Friday 5 a.m. to 51 p.m. Services for the public are provided Monday – Friday, 
8:00 AM until 4:30 PM. HIM department services include deficiency analysis, coding, 
abstracting, clinical documentation improvement (CDI), transcription, release of information, 
and imaging/scanning of documentation.  
 
The HIM department handles and coordinates requests by outside agencies/persons for copies 
of medical records through a contract service.  Policies on confidentiality of medical records are 
established and maintained by the department. Coding of diagnosis and procedures is 
performed to provide up-to-date information for physicians and those involved in resource 
management, to gather statistical data and to submit compliant claims to payers for 
reimbursement for hospital services. 
 
HOUSEKEEPING SERVICES 
A contract Housekeeping Department provides a clean environment for the hospital, medical 
office buildings, and certain associated off-campus buildings. This service includes: 
• Cleaning of the floors, walls, ceilings and many of the attached fixtures and furniture, 
removal of both regular and medical waste, recyclable material and confidential 
material bins.  
• Meeting setups and internal moves are also provided during normal business hours 
Monday through Friday.   
• Heavy moves may require hiring a subcontractor.    
• Internal and external window cleaning.  Internal window cleaning is handled by 
housekeeping as regular routine cleaning, but external window cleaning is done by a 
subcontractor annually, or upon request.   
• Removal of disposable sharps containers is handled by housekeeping during regular 
routine cleaning, but removal of reusable sharps containers is done by a subcontractor 5 
days a week in the hospital and Medical Plaza’s, or upon request. 
 Page 110 of 186 
The Housekeeping Department operates twenty-four hours a day, 7 day a week in the Main 
Hospital, 5 days a week in the Plaza’s and outside facilities. Staffing is based on cleanable 
square footage, type and complexity of cleaning tasks and the frequency of need for cleaning.  
 
The goal of the Housekeeping Department is to constantly assess the effectiveness of the 
service, understand the results of the assessment and redesign the program to address the 
weaknesses identified by the assessment.  
 
HUMAN RESOURCES  
 
The mission of Human Resources is to enable Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center to 
become and remain an employer of choice by acting as a strategic partner to the hospital’s 
operations in the following areas: 
 
1. Talent Acquisition: Screen and recommend qualified candidates based on job 
description and need of individual position and department. Extend job offers to and 
calculates salary for selected candidates. 
2. Performance Management: Develop and implement a system of performance 
accountability: create standards for each position, ensure accurate maintenance of 
applicable licensure and certification for each position, address behavioral 
discrepancies, and ensure the successful completion of evaluations. 
3. Advocacy: Utilize programs designed to foster open communication, feedback, and 
suggestions from all team members. 
1. Diversity: Embrace, value, and empower the uniqueness and talents all team 
members contribute to our hospital’s success. 
2. Support: Through the Team Member Assistance Center (TMAC), act as a source of 
knowledge and guidance for all team members to utilize. 
 
EMPLOYEE HEALTH 
The Employee Health department coordinates and administers employee health activities for 
the organization. Employee Health services include pre-employment health screening, review 
and follow-up of on the job-accidents and injuries, annual Tuberculin (TB) screening, Hepatitis B 
vaccination program, influenza vaccination program, assessment for communicable disease, 
return to work clearance and documentation of latex glove allergy. Hours of operation are from 
7:00a.m. to 4:00 p.m. weekdays. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 111 of 186 
CENTRAL SUPPLY / SUPPLY CHAIN SERVICES 
 
Central Supply / Supply 
Chain Services Brief 
Description of Area: 
 
 
 
Support of overall hospital goals of providing quality 
supplies at competitive prices. Balance consumption of 
supply resources with appropriate inventory levels and par 
levels to meet user needs. Maximize the facility's utilization 
of supplies by: a) utilizing National agreements (supplies 
and equipment), and b) capturing patient charges 
effectively. Provide the right product at the right time, in 
the right quantity, at the right cost, to the right place.  
Extend these services to outlying Physician Groups and 
other OLOL subsidiaries and they come on board within our 
sphere of service as determined by FMOL Corporate office. 
 
Hours of availability of 
support and how back up 
is provided: 
 
 
Central Supply is a 24 hour, 7 day per week operation and 
outlying areas are serviced based on hours of operations as 
determined by FMOL Corporate office. After normal 
business hours contact the House Manager if 
Director/Manager/Leads are not available to assist. In case 
of emergency or disaster, follow the disaster call out plan 
and flow sheet.  
How support area/service 
helps meet the patient 
care needs: 
 
 
Supply Chain Services insures that appropriate supplies and 
equipment are available to end users providing patient 
care. Patient care managers and Supply Chain management 
work in collaborative effort to establish appropriate supply 
levels. Usage reports are provided to the end-user 
managers to adjust par levels based on actual usage. This 
report insures that appropriate levels are maintained to 
meet the end users need and remain cost effective. 
 
Example of integration 
with patient care areas: 
 
 
 
Par Locations are established in each unit and this acts as 
their supply station. In conjunction with Supply Chain, PI 
teams complete a review of par quantities quarterly 
(anticipated) and reviewed with the customer. 
 
 
 
 
 
LINEN SERVICES 
 
The washing, drying, and finishing of all soiled linen from the hospital and affiliated locations is 
being managed by a contracted vendor. OLOLRMC Linen Services include the retrieval of soiled 
linen, loading and unloading from transport vehicle loading carts per department par levels, Page 112 of 186 
and the delivery of clean linen to departments. Goals are to continue to fulfill Service Excellence 
to our patients and customers. 
 
MISSION INTEGRATION 
 
Pastoral Care 
As a Catholic hospital, Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center strives to minister to the 
spiritual needs of its patients as an element of offering quality medical care. The staff of 
interdenominational chaplains in Pastoral Care are trained to assist all patients and their 
families with the emotional and spiritual concerns related to illness.   Chaplains serve as a 
visible reminder of our mission, which is rooted in the healing ministry of Jesus Christ. Two 
priests are on staff to assist with sacramental needs and to say daily. Mass.  The Pastoral Care 
Department is open from 8:00am. – 4:30 p.m. Monday – Friday. Chaplains are in-house from 
7:30am until 11:30pm Monday-Saturday and from 7:30am-4:00pm on Sundays.  A chaplain is 
available for emergencies twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week by contacting Guest 
Services.   
 A chaplain has the education and credentials of Board Certified Chaplain (BCC) or has received 
other appropriate pastoral education to minister to the human spirit.  The chaplain's ministry 
consists of, but is not limited to, providing a safe spiritual and emotional environment for 
patients, families and staff who are experiencing the impact of illness and crisis.  The chaplain 
facilitates the processing of spiritual and emotional concerns/questions, providing a supportive 
presence in difficult times.  The chaplain identifies the patient’s or family’s needs, hopes and 
resources and conducts interventions such as prayer, that will help in the healing process.  
When necessary, the chaplain advocates on the patient’s behalf.  Following the spiritual 
assessment, where indicated, a plan of care is developed and shared with the healthcare team 
as another resource to providing holistic care. Chaplains attend interdisciplinary team meetings 
and serve as liaisons to faith communities. They provide worship services, memorial services, 
rituals and sacraments, engage in educational presentations for staff, and are involved in 
healthcare ethics. 
 
Palliative Care 
Palliative Care is specialized medical care for people with serious illness or injury.  This type of 
care is focused on providing patients with relief from the symptoms, pain, and stress of a 
serious illness – whatever the diagnosis. The goal is to improve the quality of life for both the 
patient and family.   Palliative care is appropriate for at any age and at any stage in a serious 
illness and can be provided together with curative treatment.  Palliative Care is provided by a 
team of doctors, nurse practitioners, nurses and other specialist who works in conjunction with 
the patient’s physicians, nurses, and other caregivers to ensure the best care possible.   
The services provided by Palliative Care include:  Page 113 of 186 
• Symptom relief from pain and other distressing symptoms Providing support during 
complex decision-making 
• Coordination of care 
• Patient Advocacy 
• Assistance with end of life issues, ensuring comfort on all levels (physical, psychosocial, 
spiritual) 
The Palliative Care office is open daily from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. with assessment and 
consultative services available 24 hours a day 7 days a week. 
 
Parish Nurse Program 
In partnership with identified congregations, the parish nurse as an employee of the hospital 
develops a health ministry within the congregation s/he serves. The parish nurse provides 
primary holistic nursing care, by ministering to the physical, emotional and spiritual needs of 
the members of the congregation. The parish nurse does not provide direct hands-on patient 
care, (i.e., dispense medications, administer injections, and perform blood testing or other 
medical procedures).  
 
The parish nurse identifies and addresses the unmet needs of the congregation with a focus on 
health promotion, risk reduction, and disease prevention. The parish nurse is guided and 
supported in this ministry by the congregation. Service hours vary and are based on the needs 
of the congregation. The parish nurse can serve all age groups by providing education on 
health-related topics; counseling; referral to hospital, community, and congregational 
resources; serving as a facilitator of support groups; and coordination of volunteers.  
 
Through parish nursing the hospital can extend the healing ministry of Jesus Christ to the 
communities we are privileged to serve. 
 
QUALITY AND PATIENT SAFETY 
 
The Quality and Patient Safety Department is responsible for the coordination and facilitation 
of organizational performance improvement, data analytics support monitoring of the patient 
safety program, and publicly reported quality data. The Quality Leadership Team oversees 
performance improvement activities of the organization and reports them to the Board of 
Directors via the Performance Excellence Committee of the Board. 
 
 
Infection Control 
 
The Infection Control Department coordinates the Infection Control activities for all 
departments organization-wide and serves as consultant to enterprise entities. Infection 
Control identifies and evaluates healthcare associated infections, monitors isolation 
precautions and handwashing, reports communicable diseases to the Office of Public Health, Page 114 of 186 
compiles surveillance statistics, and analyzes results to identify trends.  Infection Control 
conducts an annual risk assessment which drives the surveillance plan.  Using computerized 
technology, the department can identify those lab-based results that warrant additional review.  
In addition, Infection Control complies with all required reporting to the CDC and CMS.    
Infection Control assists with education of, and consultation with, hospital staff in effective 
infection control practices. Policies and procedures are written based on guidelines published 
by the CDC and APIC (Association for Professionals in Infection Control).  Infection 
Control works with Employee Health to manage employee exposures and employee 
communicable diseases.  
 
REGULATORY SERVICES (Licensing, Accreditations, and Certifications) 
 
Regulatory Management 
 
Regulatory Management Department is responsible for monitoring compliance with 
accrediting, certifying, and regulatory agency standards and facilitating building licensure, both 
organization-wide and enterprise. The department leads tracer activities, mock surveys, and 
communicates revisions in regulations, laws, and standards to leadership. Regulatory 
Management coordinates on-site and virtual regulatory agency surveys as well as 
administrative desk reviews and quality of care responses. Tracer and survey reports are 
compiled and provided to departmental leadership. Regulatory Management works with 
applicable departments in formulating corrective action plans and submission. In addition, 
Regulatory Management facilitates all required self-reporting of internal abuse / neglect 
allegations to LDH. The department consults with affiliated Nursing Home facilities and other 
enterprise holdings as requested. The department consults with Risk Management and Legal on 
clinical aspects of regulatory standards when effects areas of Risk or litigation.  
 
 
 Page 115 of 186 
 Our Lady of the Lake Ascension 
Our Lady of the Lake Ascension Campus is located at 1125 West Hwy 30 I Gonzales, Louisiana.  
The Campus functions as a full offsite hospital facility.  Within the main facility, the first floor 
houses an Emergency Department, Medical/Surgical Intensive Care Unit, Surgical Services 
Department, Imaging, Respiratory and Laboratory Services, Plant Operations, Environmental 
Services, Materials Management, Food and Nutritional Services, as well as Administrative 
offices, Guest services, Admissions, Pastoral care and conference rooms.  The second-floor 
houses Medical, and Telemetry inpatient units, Cardiac Cath Lab, Pharmacy, Wound Care, Sleep 
Lab, Physical Therapy, as well as Case Management and Social Services. 
On the same Campus is Medical Plaza II that is connected to the main facility that houses a 
Woman’s Center which provides Imaging and Diagnostic Services on the first floor and an 
Ambulatory Surgical Center on the second floor. 
Emergency Department: 
The Emergency Department is a campus-based ED with 18 beds and provides 24-hour services 
to patients of all ages.  (2) large trauma/cardiac monitored rooms, Orthopedic room, OB/Gyn 
room, Isolation room, (16) cardiac monitored rooms, (1) safer room for mental behavioral 
health monitoring.   
This department provides a wide range of care from emergent, to intermediate, to low acuity 
patients who arrive with a variety of presentations to include acute illnesses, chronic illnesses, 
or traumatic injuries.  The average daily census is 104 patients per day but has gone as high as 
160 with approximately 10 admissions per day.  The Department is staffed with Registered 
Nurses, ER Techs, Nurse Techs, CSR’s, along with MD’s, Nurse Practitioners & Physician 
Assistants.  The department works closely with both onsite hospital units, as well as the main 
campus for continuity of care and smooth transfer processes for patients needing 
extended/higher levels of care. 
All patients treated in the ED are triaged by a Registered Nurse with medical screening 
completed by an ED Physician/Mid-Level.  The triage process begins with the nursing 
assessment upon arrival.  Patients are triaged according to the ESI level, complexity and 
duration chief complaint. The triage assessment serves as the foundation for implementation of 
the plan of care with treatment protocols as directed by the ED physician.  In addition, triage 
serves as a mechanism to streamline patients based upon the various acuity levels. Patients are 
continually assessed for appropriateness of interventions through physician and nursing 
documentation in the electronic health record.   Changes in the plan of care are initiated based 
upon reassessment and evaluation of outcomes during the ED stay. 
Special Services within Ascension’s Emergency Department 
Telehealth stroke consults are available to provide 24/7 emergent stroke care coverage. 
Patients are seen remotely by neurologists for assessment and evaluation of stroke treatments. Page 116 of 186 
Pharmacologic interventions can be administered at OLOL Ascension and then transferred to 
OLOLRMC . 
The Imaging Department offers a comprehensive suite of leading-edge imaging services.  These 
include MRI, CT, Digital X-ray, Fluoroscopy, Mammography, Bone Densitometry and Ultrasound.  
Appropriate imaging services support the 24-hour ED operations.  Outpatient imaging services 
are available through centralized scheduling.  Interpretation of exam results is performed by 
Radiologists.  The same guidelines/process are implemented as in the Imaging Department 
located at the main campus.  Staffing of the department consists of technologists and imaging 
assistants to facilitate efficient patient throughput. 
Laboratory Services are available and offer a specific menu of lab testing, including pediatric-
focused Phlebotomy.  24-hour lab services are available to support the ED.  Outpatient lab 
services are utilized on a walk-in basis.  In addition, courier services are utilized for transport of 
specimens to main campus lab for additional testing.  Staffing of the department consists of 
outpatient and ED phlebotomists, medical laboratory technicians, and medical technologists.  A 
small supply of blood is available on site for emergent blood needs. 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
From the time the patient arrives to the departments for service, processes are date/time 
stamped  to ensure all are completed for each patient.  Patient complaints/issues are followed 
up by the Director of Nursing, Department Managers, Medical Director, Supervisors, and 
Charge Nurses as appropriate.   
Scope of Planned New Services 
The Ascension Campus was designed to include flexible and adaptable space for future growth. 
Intensive Care Unit (ICU): 
ICU is an intensive care nursing unit designed and equipped to provide and maintain a clinical 
area for both medical and surgical patients requiring intensive nursing care, treatment, and 
observation.  ICU team members specialize in providing care for patients experiencing multiple 
system failures.  Patients may receive continuous cardiac and respiratory monitoring.  The 
nursing staff consists of all RNs trained in Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS), experienced in 
the usage of advanced and specialized equipment utilized in the care of critically ill patients.   
ICU consists of 7 private beds and is located on the 1st floor of the Ascension Campus. The unit 
operates on a 24-hour basis and has an average daily census of 4.  Age range of patients is 
adolescent (17 years of age or older) through senior geriatric. MICU is staffed with Registered  
Nurses, Nursing Assistants, Nurse Techs, and CSR’s and Physicians.  The nursing process begins 
with the assessment/screening of each patient’s physical, psychological and social status by the 
Registered Nurse. The nursing assessment serves as a foundation for the development and 
implementation of the nursing care plan and is available to personnel of all disciplines who are 
involved in the care of the patient.  Assessments are initiated upon admit to the unit.  Re-Page 117 of 186 
assessment shall be performed by a RN according to the patient condition, to determine 
patient response to treatment, or whenever a significant change occurs in the patient condition 
or diagnosis.  Re-assessment will be completed at a minimum of every 4 hours for stable 
patients and more often for unstable patients. 
The unit is staffed with a minimum of two nurses.  Staff is added according to volume and 
acuity of patients.  The nurse-to-patient ratio will be 1:1, 1:2, or 1:3 depending on the patient 
acuity.  If patients are in ICU but are not ICU acuity the nurse patient ratio may change. The ICU 
Director of Nursing is present 5 days per week and is available by cell phone 24 hours per day if 
additional assistance is needed. 
 
Special Services particular to ICU include, but are not limited to:  
• Evidence-based practices in the delivery of care to critically ill patients are incorporated 
into the care delivery and order sets   
• Interdisciplinary Rounding on critically ill patients including Physicians, Dieticians, 
Nurses, Medical Management, Pharmacists, Pastoral Care, and Respiratory Therapists 
with the goal to optimize the patient outcome through strategic, individualized care 
planning.   
• IV pumps, oxygen monitors, ECG monitors, and BP machines can download directly into 
the electronic medical record.   
 
Special procedures performed in MICU include, but are not limited to:  
• Chest tubes 
• Diuretic therapy 
• Endoscopic procedures 
• Hemodynamic support and monitoring 
• Hypothermia treatment for cardiac arrests 
• Other therapies requiring intensive care as determined by patient needs  
• Vasoactive and inotropic drugs 
• Ventilator management 
• Ventriculostomies 
 
 
Medicine Service Line: 
 
Medicine Unit is a medical, surgical, and telemetry nursing unit.  The nursing staff specializes in 
the care of medical surgical patients. Remote telemetry monitoring is available for patients on 
the medicine unit.  The unit provide care to those requiring acute level of care for both 
inpatient and observational needs through discharge, no IV drugs requiring titration are 
provided in this level of care.  Age range of patients is adolescent (age 15 or older) through 
geriatric.  Page 118 of 186 
 
Medicine consists of 33 private care beds and is located on the 2nd floor of the Ascension 
Campus.  The unit operates on a 24-hour basis and has an average daily census of 16.   
Telemetry consists of 17 private care beds and has an average daily census of 14.   The ability to 
provide telemetry monitoring to all patients is available. All medicine units are staffed with 
Registered Nurses, Licensed Practical Nurses, Nursing Assistants, Clinical Service 
Representative, Medical Management and a Social Workers.   
 
Interdisciplinary approach utilizing an interdisciplinary admission assessment tool; the Nursing 
Process; Standards of Care; Assessment/Reassessment Policy and Procedure; Advanced 
Directives and Living Wills.  
 
The assessment is initiated within 8 hours of admission. Staffing is flexed according to census 
utilizing flex staff.  Staffing is adjusted to reflect workload demands, acuity, and patient care 
needs. 
 
Readily available hospital-based support services include Respiratory, Pharmacy, Nutritional 
Services, Lab, Surgery and Anesthesia, Radiology, MRI, Physical Therapy, Speech Therapy, 
Occupational Therapy, Pastoral Care, Pulmonary Rehab and Social Services.  Administrative 
policy is in place for granting emergency privileges to consulting physicians as needed. Patients 
experiencing unforeseen cardiovascular, neurosurgical or obstetrical complications may be 
transferred to another facility as is appropriate and per physician's order. 
 
The providing of support services is determined by collaborative effort of the health care team 
directed by the physician and the effectiveness of the service is determined by available 
feedback mechanisms.  The timeliness of requested support services is based on the acuity of 
the patient as determined by the members of the health care team. 
Unit-specific competencies include but are not limited to the following: All nurses are BLS 
certified. Annual competencies include blood administration, restraints, falls, chest tubes, and 
defibrillator. Nurses caring for telemetry patients have passed an EKG course. 
 
All medicine units are specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients 
with, anticipating, or recovering from but not limited to: 
• Atrial Arrhythmia 
• Cellulitis 
• Chest Pain 
• Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
• Congestive Heart Failure 
• Dementia 
• Diabetes Mellitus 
• Digestive Disorders 
• Infectious Diseases 
• Kidney and Urinary Tract Infections  Page 119 of 186 
• Other procedures and medical conditions requiring acute care as determined by patient 
needs  
• Pneumonia 
• Post-operative surgeries 
• Renal Failure 
• Septicemia 
• Sickle Cell Anemia 
• Syncope 
 
Special Services particular to Medicine units include but are not limited to: 
• Blood transfusions 
• Dressing changes 
• Foley catheters 
• Glucometer monitoring 
• IV Therapy 
• Management of feeding tubes 
• Nasogastric suctioning 
• Nutrition 
• Trach Care 
• Wound VAC management 
 
 
CARDIOVASCULAR PROCEDURAL AREA – Ascension Campus 
 
Scope of Service 
 
Unit Definition 
The Cardiovascular Labs are utilized to diagnose and treat coronary artery disease, peripheral 
vascular disease, and congenital anomalies in adults through geriatric population.  Patients 
receiving MAC or moderate sedation. Includes but is not limited to the following types of Cath 
Lab Procedures:  Electrical cardioversion, coronary angiography, transesophageal 
echocardiography, permanent pacemakers, and coronary interventions.  
Interdisciplinary approach involving nursing staff, anesthesia, Medical Staff, Pharmacy, 
Radiology, Laboratory, utilizing the Nursing Standards of Care, patient interview and 
assessment and pre/intra/post-operative assessment.  Initial assessment done upon admit to 
Cath Lab room and post assessment completed prior to leaving the Cath Lab Department. 
 
Hours of operation: 
Monday, Tuesday, & Thursday 0600 to1430 for all scheduled and add on procedures. 
The staffing mix in the Cardiovascular Labs consist of Registered Nurses (RN’s), Radiology 
Technologists (RT’s), Cardiovascular Technologists (CVT’s), and Radiology Technologist 
Assistants (RTA’s). 
 Page 120 of 186 
Unit-Specific Methods Used to Meet Needs of Patient Population 
Patient needs are assessed holistically, and staffing is based upon patient acuity.  There are at 
least 3 team members on each case assisting the physician.  There is at least 1 RN and 1 RT on 
every case.   
 
Staff competency evaluated annually on age specific care for patient served, CPR, Aseptic 
technique, Sterilization, Electrical Safety, Time-Out process, IVCS, Circulating and Scrubbing, 
Equipment Utilization Review, Conscious Sedation. Registered Nurses are ACLS certified.  
 
Unit competencies include, but are not limited to the following: 
• 02 / C02 tank maintenance 
• ACT testing (RN’s only) 
• Age specific 
• Arterial sheath & groin management 
• Aseptic technique 
• BLS / ACLS certification 
• Co-ox Rapid point (RN’s only) 
• Defibrillators 
• EKG recognition 
• Heart Alert / Dual Heart Alerts 
• Infection Control 
• Initial competency for each specialty (RN, RT, CVT, and RTA) 
• Moderate sedation 
• Procedural competencies 
• Sheath removal 
 Page 121 of 186 
SURGICAL SERVICES DIVISION – Ascension Campus 
 
Scope of Service 
 
 
The Surgical Services Division coordinates and provides nursing care for the preoperative, 
intraoperative and postoperative phases of care for inpatient and ambulatory patients.  This 
also involves clinical support areas that ensure inventory resource management and 
preparation of surgical instrumentation.  Surgical administration oversees the operations of the 
division with support from a Director and Managers.  
 
Operating Rooms (OR): 
 
Unit Definition 
The Operating Rooms consists of 8 operating/procedure rooms in two locations (Main OR and 
Ambulatory Surgery Center -ASC) that are available to patients of all ages (infants to geriatrics) 
needing operative procedures, requiring sedation, general, regional or local anesthesia. This 
includes elective, urgent and emergency procedures. Procedures include, but are not limited to, 
cardiovascular/thoracic, urological, orthopedic, general surgery, laparoscopic, bariatric, oral, 
dental, and, ear, nose, and throat (EENT). Coverage is provided in all specialties except 
obstetrics, robotics, neurosurgery, and organ transplant.  
 
Availability of Operating Rooms and Staff 
Operative services are provided 6am to 11pm, 5 days a week with on-call specialty teams 
beyond normal operating hours and/or dedicated blocks.  Emergent/Urgent procedures that 
are required to be completed after hours are transferred to Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center. There are 8 rooms available in the Main OR the Ambulatory Surgery Center.  
Procedures are performed in designated areas based on the specialty, but flexibility is 
maintained for multispecialty cases. 
 
Hours of Service 
Monday-Friday 
6am-4:30pm staff are available and on call for all unscheduled hours to include weekends and 
holidays. Staff are expected to respond within 30 minutes of call-back.  Block scheduling is 
utilized but times are available for “add-ons” daily. 
 
Saturday & Sunday 
All rooms are available for emergent cases 
 
 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
 
Assessment/Reassessment:  
Patients are initially assessed by the Pre-Operative RN and Anesthesia Provider in the pre-op Page 122 of 186 
area.  Patient is re-assessed by Circulating RN upon admission to the operating or procedure 
room, during positioning and with the placement of equipment and supplies on the patient. An 
Anesthesiologist and/or CRNA re-assesses the patient throughout the procedure. The Circulator 
is responsible for monitoring the environment to assure that sterility of the operating field and 
team is maintained from setup and throughout the procedure. 
 
Patient Experience initiatives:   
Actions to support patient and family satisfaction begin with the Pre-Op Nurses initial 
interaction.  The RN reviews the patient record, assures that all documentation and patient 
statements  agree for the procedure and appropriate laterality, all pre-op assessments and 
results are complete and within expected or acceptable ranges.  Prior to patient being brought 
to the OR, patient and family/representative are given opportunities to ask questions and 
receive clarification from the RN, Anesthesia provider and Surgeon.  The Circulating RN will 
explain the process of taking the patient to the OR, preparation prior to administration of 
medication/anesthesia and plan for recovery in PACU or Critical Care Unit.  The RN will 
communicate to patient’s family/representative, via the surgical waiting room reception staff, 
when the procedure starts and, at least hourly, on the progress of surgery. Special focuses for 
the staff, meeting the patient’s needs for prayer, special needs, positioning, appropriate 
equipment, instrument and supplies are improvement efforts to provide quality care and 
exceed patient and family/representative expectation for service. 
 
Support Services 
 
Surgery Billing 
Surgical billing is responsible for charge capture services, Vendor Invoice Payment Processing 
and the capture of minute and supply/implant charges for all operating rooms, Anesthesia, 
Lithotripsy and PACU areas.  The Charge Capture Representatives are trained to navigate 
through the various systems to ensure charges are applied to the patient bills accurately and 
timely. 
 
SPECIAL SERVICES 
Anesthesiology Service 
Anesthesia Providers are available for difficult airway management, anesthesia machine 
support, and for the operation of the blood salvage/recovery system during surgical procedures 
for all ages of patients. Contract Anesthesia (Zephyr Anesthesia) for all ages except neonates, 
on call basis with a response time of 30 minutes. 
 
Lithotripsy 
Lithotripsy is a non-invasive procedure for the treatment of kidney stones. The procedure is 
typically performed on an outpatient basis but may serve inpatients, as well. A contract 
company, provides staffing, equipment and services, including scheduling, training, quality 
assurance, maintenance, and regulatory compliance. Medical care is rendered by the Urologist 
utilizing the lithotripter.  
 Page 123 of 186 
 
ENDOSCOPY 
 
Unit Definition 
The Endoscopy Unit consists of four (4) procedure rooms performing noninvasive/diagnostic 
gastroenterology procedures.  This unit receives adult patients for elective, urgent and 
emergency procedures utilizing sedation or anesthesia services.  Bedside procedure coverage 
can be provided by the endoscopic team in a critical care environment.   
 
Availability of Endoscopy Rooms and Staff  
Endoscopic services are provided 24 hours a day, 7 days a week with on-call teams responding 
in 30 minutes, beyond normal operating hours.  Endoscopic teams include Registered Nurses 
and Case Technicians. Procedures performed include but are not limited to EGD, colonoscopy, 
EGD w/dilation, ERCP, Bronchoscopy, EUS, Ph Monitoring, and pain management. 
 
Hours of Service 
Monday-Friday 
• 7am-3pm – all endoscopic procedure rooms are available for routine scheduling 
• 3pm-7am – 1 room is available for inpatient, urgent and emergent cases via on call 
services 
Saturday-Sunday 
• 1 room is available for inpatient, urgent and emergent case  
 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
 
Assessment/Reassessment:  
Patients are initially assessed by the RN and Anesthesia Provider in the pre-op holding area.  
Patient is re-assessed upon admission to the procedure room, during positioning and with the 
placement of equipment and supplies on the patient. A Registered Nurse or Anesthesia 
provider re-assesses the patient throughout the procedure according to the sedation being 
administered.  
 
Patient Experience initiatives:   
Actions to support patient and family satisfaction begin with the RNs initial interaction.  The RN 
reviews the patient record, assures that all documentation and patient statements agree for 
the procedure, all pre-op assessments and results are complete and within expected or 
acceptable ranges.  Prior to patient being brought to the procedure room, patient and 
family/representative are given opportunities to ask questions and receive clarification from 
the RN, Anesthesia provider and Physician.  The RN will explain the process of taking the patient 
to the procedure room, preparation prior to administration of medication/anesthesia and plan 
for recovery according to the sedation administered.  The RN will communicate to patient’s 
family/representative prior to the procedure and place them in a consultation room to be 
immediately available for the physician following the procedure. Special focuses for the staff, 
meeting the patient’s needs for prayer, special needs, appropriate equipment and supplies are Page 124 of 186 
improvement efforts to provide quality care and exceed patient and family/representative 
expectation for service. 
 
 
 
POST ANESTHESIA CARE (PACU) 
 
Unit Definition 
Post Anesthesia Care Unit (PACU) is comprised of Main PACU and the ASC PACU.  The two PACU 
areas consist of 32 monitored cubicles.  The PACU Units are part of a multidisciplinary team 
caring for Phase I post anesthesia patients.  Scope of practice includes Adolescents through 
Geriatric levels of care.   The PACU units utilize a multidisciplinary caring team of nurses, 
physicians, anesthesia providers and support staff to meet the needs of patients.  The scope of 
peri-anesthesia nursing practice involves the assessment for, diagnosis of, intervention of, 
sedation/analgesia or anesthetic agents and techniques.  The practice in PACU is systemic in 
nature and includes the nursing process, decision making, analytical and scientific thinking and 
inquiry.  The PACU nurses’ role during Phase I focuses on providing post anesthesia nursing care 
to the patient in the immediate post anesthesia period and transitioning them to Phase II level 
of care in the inpatient, intensive care or ambulatory setting for continued care. PACU primarily 
cares for patients who have received anesthetic agents (local, IV sedation, regional and general) 
for surgical or diagnostic procedures or anesthesia interventions. The services include airway 
management, assessment and intervention, invasive and non-invasive monitoring, prevention, 
recognition of post anesthetic complications, medication administration, pain and nausea 
control, and patient safety.  Procedures recovered in the PACU include, but are not limited to, 
cardiovascular/thoracic, urological, orthopedic, general surgery, laparoscopic, bariatric, oral, 
dental, and ear, nose, and throat (EENT), endoscopy and ECT procedures. This includes elective, 
urgent, or emergency procedures. Coverage is provided to all specialty areas except obstetrics, 
neurology, gynecology, and organ transplant.  Anesthesiologist in constant contact upon arrival 
to PACU then immediately available. Quality nursing care is provided in the PACU’s twenty-four 
hours a day, 7 days a week, and additional on-call staff is available Saturday – Sunday inpatient, 
urgent and emergent procedures.   
 
In the event of high patient census, post-operative patients requiring inpatient or critical care 
nursing or inpatients who require cardio/respiratory resuscitation may remain beyond phase 1 
recovery or be admitted to PACU.  The inpatient plan of care will be initiated, and the 
nurse/patient ratio will adjust to match inpatient and critical care unit standards.   
 
Hours of operation: 
Monday through Friday 0600 to 1630. Staff are available “on call” for the remainder of the 
unscheduled hours, to include weekends and holidays. On-call team will respond within 30 
minutes of callback. 
 
Availability of Staff 
Phase I Level of Care and Nurse to Patient Ratio (based on 2012-2014 Standards of Page 125 of 186 
Perianesthesia Nursing Practice: 
 
One nurse to two patients who are: 
4. One unconscious, stable, without artificial airway, and over the age of 8 years; and one 
conscious, stable and free of complications. 
5. Two conscious, stable, and free of complications. 
6. Two conscious, stable 8 years of age and under, with family or competent support staff 
present. 
 
One nurse to one patient: 
• At the time of admission, until the critical elements** are met. 
• Requiring mechanical life support and/or artificial airway.   
• Any unconscious patient 8 years of age and under. 
• A second nurse must be available to assist as necessary. 
 
Two nurses to one patient: 
• One critically ill, unstable, complicated patient. 
 
Two Registered Nurses, one of whom is a RN competent in Phase I post-anesthesia nursing, are 
in the same room where the patient is receiving Phase I level of care.  A RN from OR can serve 
as a second RN for the PACU as needed. 
 
**Critical elements can be defined as:  
• Initial assessment is complete. 
• Patient has a patent airway without assistance. 
• Patient is hemodynamically stable. 
• Report has been received from the anesthesia care provider, questions answered, and 
the transfer of care has taken place. 
 
Hours of Service 
Monday-Friday 
• All cubicles are staffed with RNs with a nurse patient ratio of 1:2. After 3pm, nurse ratios 
remain 1:2, but available cubicles are determined by the OR schedule.  On call staff 
coverage is provided for urgent/emergent cases from 7pm-7am in the Main PACU. 
Saturday & Sunday 
• On call staffing is provided in the PACU to accommodate OR schedules in the Main PACU 
areas, with additional on-call staff as needed based on number of patients to be 
recovered. 
 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
 
Assessment/Reassessment:  
The RN conducts the initial patient assessment upon admission to the PACU unit and provides Page 126 of 186 
ongoing assessment and intervention throughout the stay.  The RN and support staff integrates 
safety and protection for patients and staff when implementing the policies and procedures 
and using equipment. The RN communicates with patients and families, team members and 
management in an accurate, timely manner.    
 
Patient Experience initiatives:   
The RN reports pertinent, concise information accomplishes complete, timely charting and 
effectively uses the electronic medical record system.  The PACU RN also protects 
confidentiality of patients and colleagues and develops and maintains human care 
relationships. The RN integrates the influence of the individual’s human experience of health, 
illness, and healing into the nursing care plan.  The skilled RN advocates for the needs of 
patients, provides care in an ethical and legal manner, and refers concerns/issues to 
appropriate resources.   
 
STERILE PROCESSING & DISTRIBUTION (SPD) 
 
Unit Definition 
The Sterile Processing & Distribution (SPD) department consists of two decontamination and 
sterilization areas; in the Main facility and ASC area of Plaza 2.  SPD utilizes steam, and H2O2 
sterilization processing methods.  SPD functions to provide the Operating Rooms, in house 
departments and the Lake Physician Group with sterile reusable instrumentation for operative 
and invasive procedures.  
 
Care Team/Model or Care 
Support for direct patient care in the operating rooms is provided by SPD Technicians, Surgical 
Technicians, Supervisors and a Nurse Manager.  The technical staff is trained in the disassembly, 
decontamination, and assembly of instrumentation and equipment, and preparation for and 
appropriate sterilization necessary to meet industry standards and regulatory requirements.  
 
Availability of SPD Department and Staff 
SPD is staffed according to service department demands by in-house ORT/CORTs and CSPD 
tech. Monday through Friday 0600 to 1630. 
 
 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
 
Patient Experience initiatives:   
Availability and timely processing of instrumentations and equipment that meets all standards 
for cleanliness and sterilization are provided to the ORs and procedure areas. 
 
Pre-Admission  
 
Pre-Admission provides pre-admission care to patients scheduled for elective procedures. 
Nurses in the Pre-Admission begin coordination of care prior to a patient’s admission. They Page 127 of 186 
provide patient education, conduct pre-admission assessments, and coordinate required 
testing associated with the scheduled procedure.  The nurse collaborates with the surgeon and 
anesthesia to ensure that all elements of surgery preparation are completed in a timely 
manner.  
 
 
Follow-up guidelines regarding complaints/issues for all Surgical Services Areas:   
Unfavorable comments/complaints are handled by the first responder to promote prompt 
attention and then reported Supervisor/Manager/Director to complete attempts of service 
recovery, trending of noted issues and follow up. 
 
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT/Social Service 
 
The Medical Management department consists of Registered Nurses, Social Workers, Senior 
services, and informatics. Case Management provides an essential part of the patient care 
needs by coordinating care from doctor and approval from payers to make sure that care is 
covered and appropriate from admit through discharge. The Case Managers perform utilization 
review, collaborate with Social Workers and the interdisciplinary team to proactively manage 
the patients. The Medical Management team works with the patients, physicians, and family 
members to identify and assure that the clinical needs of the patient are met in the most 
appropriate setting and level of care. Case managers utilize criteria to help manage level of 
care, length of stay, and utilization of resources.  The medical management team also 
coordinates the discharge plan and assures the post discharge needs are met with transitions in 
care.   
 
Hours of operation are 7:30 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Monday – Friday. A medical management team 
member is in house Saturday 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. Direct referrals from any source (MD, care plan 
triggers, staff, family request) are communicated to the SW provider verbally and through 
Order Entry. SW assessments are made for patients with discharge planning needs and/or those 
who have psychosocial issues affecting health care. Staff are to be licensed Clinical Social 
Workers in the State of Louisiana. The Social Workers are trained in grief counseling, 
developmental screening, child abuse and neglect, adult abuse, domestic violence, crisis 
intervention, supportive counseling, biopsychosocial assessments, community resource 
knowledge, discharge planning, utilization review, and third-party reimbursement. Knowledge 
of growth and development as age appropriate for developmental stages of each age is 
necessary. Staff/physicians can call the medical management manager after hours and/or 
weekends/holidays for questions or concerns regarding patient cases.   Page 128 of 186 
 
ANCILLARY SERVICES – Ascension Campus  
Scope of Service 
 
IMAGING SERVICES 
Imaging Services provides diagnostic, therapeutic and interventional services for patients 
throughout the lifespan. Imaging Services is comprised of the following modalities: Diagnostic 
Imaging, Computed Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Special Procedures, 
Mammography, and Ultrasound.  Mammography is certified through the American College of 
Radiology.  Services are provided during 7:30am-5pm Monday thru Friday with some modalities 
covered through "on call" staffing.  Radiology Services is staffed with Registered Radiologic 
Technologists, Radiologic Technologist Assistants, Sonographers, Nuclear Technologists, and 
when required RN House Manager.   
 
Our Lady of the Lake Prairieville / Imaging Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Prairieville is located at 17609 Old Jefferson Highway in Prairieville, 
Louisiana. This department is housed on the first floor of a non-licensed physician clinic. 
Imaging Services are available and provide diagnostic imaging services for patients throughout 
the lifespan and is comprised of diagnostic x-ray modalities only. Services are provided 
Monday-Friday from 8am-4:30pm. This location is staffed with Registered Radiologic 
Technologists and registration personnel.  
 
 Nuclear Medicine 
The Nuclear Medicine Department provides diagnostic and therapeutic services to patients 
throughout the lifespan. The department is composed of one Nuclear Imaging suite and a 
cardiac stress lab. The department is staffed by Registered Nuclear Technologists. The Nuclear 
Medicine Department is staffed from 7:00 A.M. until 5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday with 
services available twenty-four hours a day through "on-call" coverage. 
 
LABORATORY  
The laboratory serves as a support service to patients of all age groups in all patient care areas. 
The lab is divided into the following sections: Laboratory Administration, Point of Care, Blood 
Donor Services (which includes Blood Donor Center and Blood Distribution Center), Core Lab 
(which includes Transfusion Services, Chemistry, Hematology, Urinalysis, Coagulation, 
Immunology, Microbiology, Molecular, Venipuncture, Central Processing, and Tissue Bank) and 
Lake Laboratory Services (Outreach). The main laboratory is located on the first floor of the 
main building and is accredited by CAP and the Transfusion Service is inspected by the FDA 
(Blood Donor Services holds the FDA license).  Services are provided twenty-four hours a day, 
seven days a week by state licensed Medical Technologists, Medical Laboratory Technicians, 
and Medical Laboratory Assistants. 
 
The laboratory provides STAT services to all areas/age groups. STAT procedures are those 
critical, life-threatening procedures, which are collected, processed and reported within one 
hour of receipt in the department. All procedures are processed and tested upon receipt to Page 129 of 186 
expedite/support patient care. STAT specimens are prioritized, labeled with a distinctive label 
to denote status, and verified immediately upon completion.  The laboratory has validated auto 
verification, in several areas, to further expedite resulting. 
 
In addition to STAT requests, there are other types of requests: AM, to be collected by the 
established schedule for each unit and reported within 2 hours; Routine, requests to be 
collected and processed within two hours of collection; TIMED, orders specifying collection at a 
specific time usually coordinated with medication schedules, procedures, or processes;  ASAP:  
As-soon-as-possible orders are the second tier of priority.  ASAP's are collected and reported 
within one hour of order receipt within the department.  All result values which meet 
appropriate criteria are called to appropriate personnel with complete documentation, i.e.- 
Critical values defined by organizational policy, OC-044. 
 
All lab services are ordered by physicians or advanced practitioners, requesting specific tests 
and schedules.  Said orders are retained for compliance/documentation purposes using 
electronic or paper format.   
 
Goals of department/service are to enhance patient care via expansion of in-house test menu 
therefore providing timely diagnostic results to the physicians and potentially lowering costs.  
Other objectives are: client satisfaction with diversified test menu, reduced turn-around-times, 
control of POC testing, reduced delays in collection of specimens; growth of the Outreach 
Program to support the Mission of our system; and growth of the Blood Donor Program to 
become self-sustaining and purchase fewer products from outside sources. 
 
NUTRITIONAL SERVICES 
The scope of the inpatient services provided by the Nutritional Services department is to: 
• Provide daily meal plans for patients under the supervision of a Clinical Nutrition 
Manager for all types of diets that meet nutritional requirements established by the 
Recommended Dietary Allowances. 
• Prepare quality food using standardized recipes to assure the highest levels of patient 
and customer satisfaction. 
• Maintain adequate temperatures of foods for patients and Cafeteria guests, meeting 
departmental established criteria ensuring hot food as measured by patient satisfaction 
surveys. 
• Provide for the nutritional care of inpatients by: monitoring, visiting and instructing 
inpatients in all phases of normal and therapeutic nutrition; assessing and monitoring 
patients identified at nutritional risk by nursing upon admission; providing nutritional 
assessment/consultation upon physician referral; and participating in the specialized 
health care teams (Nutritional Support Team, Critical Care Grand Rounds, Rehab). 
• Operate an employee/visitor Cafeteria providing a nutritionally balanced variety of 
foods and beverages.  
• To operate physicians dining in the Physicians’ Dining Room. 
 Page 130 of 186 
The scope of ambulatory services provided by the Nutritional Services Department is two-fold. 
• To provide nutritional assessment, therapeutic intervention, and/or education upon 
physician referral. 
• To participate in community education programs through OLOL Education and Wellness 
Department, cardiac rehab and the miracle group.   
 
Nutritional Services provides optimal nutrition for all patients, employees and visitors, and is 
based on the hospital’s mission and goals. Menus are planned and followed to meet the 
nutritional needs of patients and according to physician’s orders and recommended dietary 
allowances of the National Research Council, based on the The Academy of Nutrition and 
Dietetics & Manual of Clinical Dietetics (diet manual). Therapeutic diets are prescribed by the 
physician, planned per CBORD Software, prepared and served as ordered. The nutritional 
services department provides patient meal service from 6:6:45AM to 6:30 PM. 
All patients in the medical center are screened for nutritional risk upon admission by nursing 
using the Nursing Admission Assessment Profile. This profile creates triggers for screening and 
follow-up which are automatically sent to the Clinical Dietitians. Nutrition counseling/diet 
instructions are also given upon a physician's order or when deemed appropriate by a 
registered dietitian. A clinical dietitian completes nutritional assessments on a patient within 
forty-eight hours of receiving a physician’s order. All outpatient nutritional counseling will be 
referred to the OLOL Diabetes and Nutrition Center.  The Diabetes and Nutrition Center require 
a physician’s referral and an appointment.  
 
The department of Nutritional Services provides food service to all patients, employees and 
guests with three meals daily, seven days a week. The nutritional services department provides 
patient meal service from 6:45 AM to 6:30 PM. Meal service is provided in the Cafeteria for 
Medical Center personnel and guests at the following times: 
Monday – Friday: 
   Breakfast 7 AM – 9:30 AM 
             Lunch   11 AM – 1:30 PM   
                           Supper     6 PM – 7:30 PM 
 
Saturday & Sunday: 
             Breakfast 7 AM – 8:30 AM 
             Lunch   11 AM – 1 PM 
Holidays: 
                           Lunch   11 AM – 1 PM 
 
Any patient who has an order from a physician with hospital privileges meets criteria for entry 
to Nutritional Services, including inpatient and outpatient. Additional inclusions are families of 
patients, visitors, physicians and employees.  
 
The goal of the department is both to provide high-quality nutritional care and to serve 
attractive, well-prepared, and nutritious meals in the most efficient manner to patients and 
personnel, within budget limitations, adhering to sanitation and safety standards. It is our goal Page 131 of 186 
to function effectively in meeting the overall mission of the hospital. 
 
PHARMACY SERVICES 
 
Pharmacy Services Mission 
The Department of Pharmacy aims to provide compassionate, safe, cost-effective, 
collaborative, evidence-based pharmacotherapy. Our department’s mission aligns with that of 
the health system in focusing on serving the community, especially those most in need of our 
care. Our pharmacists participate in the selection, preparation and distribution of medications, 
patient education, and providing drug information to assist in the care of our patients. 
 
Pharmacy Department Philosophy 
The philosophy of the Department of Pharmacy is to provide quality pharmaceutical care to our 
patients in a safe environment. We proudly serve as a resource for the provision of health care 
within Louisiana and the surrounding region. 
We dedicate ourselves to achieving a philosophy for pharmacy practice at Our Lady of the Lake 
by creating a diverse workplace culture in which pharmacy: 
J. Significantly enhances patients’ health-related quality of life by exercising leadership in 
improving both the use of medication by individuals and the overall process of 
medication use. 
K. Manages patient medication therapy and provide related patient care and public health 
service. 
L. Be the primary department responsible for medication use and drug distribution 
systems. 
M. Ensure the most cost-effective medication regimens are utilized for the treatment of 
Our Lady of the Lake Ascension patients. 
N. Takes a leadership role to continuously improve and redesign the medication-use 
process with the goal of achieving significant advances in (a) patient safety, (b) health-
related outcomes, (c) prudent use of human resources, and (d) efficacy. 
O. Acknowledges our diverse patient population and provides care respectful of patient 
ethnicity, creed, nationality, religion, economic status, and sexual orientation.  
P. Provides and encourages attendance at continuing educational programs that promote 
professional growth, enhance critical thinking, and increase the ability to provide 
excellent patient care.  
Q. Supports a climate that values, nurtures, and recognizes clinical expertise, education, 
shared governance, and research.  
R. Supports evidenced-based research and practice with the purpose of improving patient 
care.  
We are committed to maintaining and continually improving the safety and quality of 
pharmaceutical care through ongoing monitoring and evaluation of outcomes and resolution of 
identified issues. We take seriously our role in educating and are committed to the education 
and mentoring of the medical, pharmacy, nursing, pharmacy technician and allied health 
students of tomorrow. We treat each other, our patients, visitors and colleagues with dignity 
and respect in every interaction.  Page 132 of 186 
 
Pharmacy Care Delivery Model 
Pharmacists work as a team to provide quality care in both the inpatient and outpatient areas.  
Pharmacists may either rotate between services or may be assigned full-time to those services 
where specialty knowledge may be required.  The functions of pharmaceutical care include the 
following:  identifying potential and actual drug-related problems; resolving actual drug-related 
problems; and preventing drug-related problems. 
Provision of comprehensive pharmaceutical care in an increasingly complex healthcare delivery 
system has increased the need in some therapeutic areas for specialization among pharmacy 
practitioners.  Therefore, pharmacists are entrusted to provide all aspects of pharmaceutical 
care in addition to accepting added educational and research responsibilities. 
 
Distributive pharmacist services: 
• Pharmacists functioning in this capacity are responsible for providing leadership and 
oversight of the medication distribution system 
• Requirements:   
▪ Active pharmacy licensure by the Louisiana Board of Pharmacy 
3. Expectations: 
▪ Basic clinical services, including allergy screening, age and renal function 
appropriate dosing, drug duplication and drug interaction screening 
▪ Perform order entry, checking of medications and production of 
compounded mixtures efficiently with a high degree of accuracy  
▪ Document all clinical interventions 
▪ Maintain competency training related to area of specialty 
▪ Providing educational opportunities for pharmacy technicians, interns, 
residents and pharmacists in drug distribution roles 
 
Pharmacy Scope of Service 
The Pharmacy serves the hospital inpatients & outpatients areas. The Inpatient Pharmacy is 
open twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.  The patient populations served include 
mainly adults but also serves some pediatrics, adolescents and geriatrics; both male and 
female.  Services include: 
Drug procurement, storage, and distribution 
The pharmacy dispenses medications based on orders placed by appropriately credentialed 
providers.  Handwritten and computerized provider order entry (CPOE) orders are reviewed 
and documented in Epic, the hospital’s electronic medical record system. The Pharmacy also 
utilizes several automated systems to provide pharmaceutical services including automated 
dispensing cabinets (OmniCell®) and a medication tracking system (Epic’s Dispense Track).  
These integrated systems add additional measures that enhance quality and safety in the 
medication process.  Pharmacy is also responsible for monitoring the temperatures of 
refrigerators that store medications throughout the hospital which is done through continuous 
temperature monitoring by the Trane temperature monitoring system.   
 
To ensure the integrity of our supply chain, OLOL ensures that the primary and secondary Page 133 of 186 
wholesalers contracted are appropriately licensed.  Procurement outside of licensed 
wholesalers is limited to direct purchases from the manufacturers.  For the outsourcing of 
sterile preparations, sterility and regulatory compliance of secondary compounding companies 
is verified prior to the purchase of compounded products. 
 
Drug Therapy Review 
Drug therapy monitoring is a collaborative assessment by physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and 
other practitioners responsible for the quality and safety of patient care.  The patient’s profile is 
assessed each time a medication order is received.  Pharmacists processing orders review each 
medication for: 
• Potential for allergic reactions, adverse events, and drug interactions 
• Appropriate dosing for acute and chronic conditions 
• Appropriate dosing for renal/hepatic dysfunction 
• Appropriate route and frequency 
• Presence of therapeutic duplication 
• Contraindications 
• Drug incompatibilities 
 
Team members of the pharmacy will serve the organization through various clinical activities 
and attend multidisciplinary rounds to assist clinicians in the selection and modification of drug 
therapy to ensure the safest and most effective outcome for patients 
 
 
Antimicrobial stewardship 
The goals of the antimicrobial stewardship program are to: 
▪ Ensure optimal use of antimicrobial therapy for the best clinical outcomes for treatment 
of infections with minimal toxicity to patients and minimal impact on subsequent 
development of resistance 
▪ Minimize and monitor antimicrobial resistance throughout Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center 
▪ Improve patient outcomes while minimizing unintended adverse events and/or overuse 
of antimicrobial agents 
▪ Utilize pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic principles to optimize antimicrobial 
dosing 
▪ Reduce adverse drug events and administration errors related to antimicrobial usage 
▪ Reduce healthcare costs associated with antimicrobial therapy 
 
All members of the pharmacy department support the efforts of the stewardship program 
through participation in the: 
▪ Pharmacokinetics consult service  
▪ Automatic renal dosing 
▪ Antimicrobial utilization surveillance 
▪ IV-to-Oral program Page 134 of 186 
 
Pharmacokinetic consult services 
▪ Optimize dosing of Aminoglycosides and Vancomycin to ensure the most effective dose 
is being utilized while minimizing adverse events associated with super therapeutic 
levels 
 
 
Automatic renal dosing 
▪ Pharmacy will adjust the dose of a set of defined renally eliminated medications based 
on the patient current renal state 
▪ Reduce the cost of healthcare based on potential adverse events from too high a dose 
or decrease hospitalization time due to too low a dose  
 
Antimicrobial utilization surveillance 
▪ Optimize the duration of antibiotic use for patients receiving therapy to combat 
antimicrobial resistance to antibiotics 
▪ Perform de-escalation whenever warranted 
▪ Decrease the usage of broad-spectrum antibiotics in order to optimize to narrow 
spectrum antibiotics based on culture and sensitivity results  
▪ Drive down DOT/1000PD as a measure to determine use throughout the facility thus 
decreasing the overuse of antibiotics throughout the hospital stay 
IV-to-Oral program 
▪ Utilize a protocol that will allow the pharmacist to substitute IV therapy to Oral therapy 
whenever warranted  
▪ Increase the use oral medications whenever possible in order to decrease LOS and 
encourage the functioning GI tract 
▪ Decrease the need for IV lines for use of IV medications potentiating the reduction of IV 
line infection rates 
 
Formulary management 
The Pharmacy & Therapeutics (P&T) Committee is a committee of physicians, pharmacists, and 
other healthcare professionals responsible for evaluating, appraising, and selecting from among 
the numerous available drug entities and products those that are considered clinically 
necessary for use at OLOL.  The committee is also responsible for ensuring the safe and 
effective use of medications at OLOL. The Committee uses the best available information in 
making decisions and adopts best practice guidelines from evidence-based literature and 
research experience with new medications. 
Pharmacists are responsible for carrying out the decisions of the pharmacy and therapeutics 
committee.  Order entry pharmacists, pharmacy administration and the P&T Chair partner to 
ensure that requests for non-formulary medications are reviewed in a timely fashion and are 
procured only when clinically appropriate. The inpatient pharmacy is open 24 hours a day, 7 
days a week to review non-formulary requests, complete clinical consults, and answer drug 
information questions.   
 Page 135 of 186 
Pharmacy student education 
Pharmacy students from Xavier University College of Pharmacy, University of Louisiana at 
Monroe, and other colleges of pharmacy rotate within the department and on patient care 
teams throughout the hospital.   
 
 
 
RESPIRATORY SERVICES 
 
The respiratory care department serves patients across the hospital in all care settings. 
Respiratory services are divided up into the following sections: respiratory care and pulmonary 
function laboratory. All respiratory therapists are credentialed by the National Board of 
Respiratory Care as a certified or registered respiratory therapists and licensed by the Louisiana 
Board of Medical Examiners.   The respiratory therapists are responsible for the therapeutic use 
of medical gases such as oxygen and heliox, humidification and nebulization, medication 
administration, management of mechanical ventilation, bronchial pulmonary hygiene, airway 
clearance therapy, lung volume expansion therapy, breathing exercises and patient education. 
As members of the code team, all respiratory therapists are ACLS and BLS certified and take 
part in cardiopulmonary resuscitation efforts.  Respiratory Care is responsible for the 
management of the natural, artificial and mechanical airways, and care for these patients in the 
critical care setting and emergency department. Respiratory therapists are   responsible for the 
following diagnostic tests:  arterial punctures for blood gas analysis, oxygen desaturation 
studies, and sputum cultures collected from artificial airways or inductions.  The blood gas 
laboratory is accredited by College of American Pathologists (CAP) and managed and operated 
by the respiratory care department. Hours of operation are twenty-four hours a day, 7 days a 
week. 
 
In the pulmonary function laboratory, specific testing techniques are performed by the  
respiratory therapists to assist in the diagnosis, monitoring, treatment, and research of 
cardiopulmonary impairment. Said studies will measure gas volumes, pressures, flows, and 
diffusion of gases to determine the function of the cardiopulmonary system. In addition to 
pulmonary function testing, other responsibilities of the respiratory therapists include arterial 
blood gas sampling and testing, medication administration via nebulization and sputum 
collection for analysis to be performed in the pulmonary function laboratory. The hours of 
operation of the pulmonary function laboratory for outpatient and inpatients are 7am-3:30pm 
Monday through Friday and will be closed on holidays as determined by the hospital policy. 
 
Pulmonary rehabilitation and education for patients with chronic pulmonary disease is within 
the scope of respiratory therapists within the pulmonary function laboratory. This service Page 136 of 186 
includes the diagnosis and treatment of lung-related illnesses such as asthma, occupational 
lung exposure, emphysema, bronchitis and others.  
 
Additionally, the Respiratory Care Department has a Stress Lab.  This service provides Cardiac 
Treadmill Stress Tests, Nuclear Stress Tests, Stress Echo Tests along with Electrocardiogram 
Tests for both inpatients and outpatients throughout the hospital.   
 
MANAGEMENT / SUPPORT SERVICES  
 
Administration 
 
The administrative office is routinely open from 8:00am to 4:30pm, but the administrative staff 
is always available.  Back up is provided by the administrative staff via administrator on-call, as 
well as the administrative supervisors in house.  There is always an administrator on call. 
 
 
Integration with patient care areas is achieved through constant communication, department 
director meetings, open forums, and both written and verbal communications. 
 
 
Nurse Administration 
 
Consists of four full time House Supervisors, one full time House Manager as well as Job 2 RN’s 
that function as house supervisors and one full time Vice President of Patient Care Services  
who reports directly to the Baton Rouge Market CNO. Nursing Administration is responsible for 
the management of nursing practice and supervision of all hospital personnel which includes 
after hours, weekends and holidays. Providing centralized, 24-hour scheduling for all nursing 
departments. 
 
 
Guest Services 
Guest Services is a support department of the hospital that provides needed assistance to 
patients, families, and guests.  Such services include acting as a welcoming presence, assisting 
with visitor badging, information sharing, surgical updates, wayfinding, service recovery and 
visitor escorts to various destinations.  The department also operates PBX, an inhospitable 
telephone system that assists with transfer of incoming and outgoing calls as well as life safety 
support directing various teams during codes to the proper locations for intervention.   
 
 
 Page 137 of 186 
ACCESS SERVICES 
 
The department’s employees work directly with patients and their families in the admission, 
insurance verification and certification, and/or payment collection processes. The Access 
Services Representative is responsible for positively identifying patients and registering each 
patient seeking services at OLOL Ascension by accurately collecting demographic and insurance 
information and entering that information into the hospital’s information system. The 
employees are also responsible for verifying benefits, obtaining certification/authorization, and 
determining financial responsibility for all hospital patients. They coordinate the patient 
placement process by communicating with nursing supervisor regarding patient needs for a bed 
in the facility and assign them as directed by Nursing Supervisor. 
 
The department works closely with Medical Management and Managed Care to make sure that 
health plan information is accurate and always updated. They also work together in obtaining 
certification, appealing denials, and working on process (operational) issues. 
 
Hours of Operation 
Entrance B area- 5:30am - 5:00pm Monday through Friday   
Ambulatory Surgery Center in Plaza 2 6:00am – 2:30pm* times adjusted for actual cases posted 
for the day 
Medical Plaza 1 Lab and Imaging 7:30am – 4:30pm 
Woman’s Center 7:30am -4:00pm 
Prairieville Lab and Imaging 7:30am – 4:00pm            
Emergency Room area- Open twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week 
 
 
WOUND CARE  
Outpatient wound care is offered from a contract company who provide inpatient consults as 
well as outpatient scheduled appointments between 8a and 3p Tuesdays and Wednesdays. 
 
 
Facility Operations: 
 
Security  
The Security Department consists of security guard ones, security response officers  and off-
duty Law Enforcement Officers and is responsible for the following on the hospital campus: 
protection of life and property; prevention, detection and investigation of criminal activity; 
maintenance of public order; twenty-four hour escort service for employees; incident reporting 
and response; violence in the workplace follow-up; Code white and Code Pink response. Hours 
of Operation: twenty-four hours a day, 7 days a week. 
 
 
 
 Page 138 of 186 
Plant Services 
 
Plant Services is responsible for overseeing, managing, and upkeeping the physical 
infrastructure, utility systems, grounds, and medical equipment within the facilities. Our 
operations run round the clock, 6:00am – 5:30pm Monday thru Thursday “on-call 5:30pm-
6:00am and 6:00am-4:30 pm Fridays, Services available twenty-four hours a day through “on-
call” coverage during after-hours and on Saturdays and Sundays. The key objectives of Plant 
Services encompass the establishment and preservation of performance benchmarks for staff 
expertise and competence, promoting active engagement, monitoring and conducting 
inspection activities, devising protocols for emergency and incident reporting, as well as 
supervising preventative maintenance and testing of vital operational components. 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital is located at 8300 Constantin Boulevard, Baton Rouge, 
LA 70809. Descriptions of patient care bed types provided at Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) are listed below. The types described are not all 
inclusive of care provided nor exclusive of special needs accommodations.  
 
Pediatric Medicine Unit     Nurse/Patient Ratio Target 1:4-1:5 
The medicine unit is a General Pediatric Unit providing family centered care on the 5th floor of 
the OLOLCH, specializing in the care of children, operating on a 24-hour basis. Its focus is on the 
patients requiring medical management and non-critical cardiac monitoring but will also care 
for patients requiring surgical management. The unit provides care to children and their 
families requiring acute levels of care for both inpatient and observational needs through 
discharge. Patients requiring cardiac monitoring can be provided with access to an antennae 
system and with telemetry transmitter availability as ordered by a physician. Care is provided 
by Registered Nurses supported by Certified Nurse Assistants, Clinical Service Representatives 
and Nurse Technicians all of whom aid in the accomplishment of the physician’s plan of care 
and treatment. A network of ancillary care team members is also included in daily management 
of the patients and their environment. The Medicine unit consists of 20 private care rooms, 21 
beds one of which is reserved as a sibling room. Average occupancy of the Medicine unit ranges 
between 67-100% capacity. Age ranges of patients is neonate through young adult. The 
Collaborative Care Model is utilized to support a team approach for care provisions with team 
communication accomplished in team member meetings, change of shift report and daily 
multidisciplinary huddles.  Page 139 of 186 
This unit is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients (children 
and young adults) with or recovering from but not limited to: 
• Pneumonia 
• Asthma 
• Bronchiolitis 
• Fever 
• Dehydration 
• Viral enteritis 
• Cellulitis abscesses 
• Infectious diseases 
• Post-operative surgery 
• Trauma 
• Seizures 
• Acute life-threatening events 
• Diabetes 
Special services particular to Medicine unit included but are not limited to: 
• Cardiac monitoring 
 
Special Procedures performed on the Medicine unit include but are not limited to: 
• Lumbar puncture 
• Ph Probe monitoring 
• Nasogastric and transpyloric tube insertions 
Unit-specific methods used to meet needs of patient population 
Patient needs are assessed as noted above with a plan of care developed to provide patient, 
family and physician satisfaction. Daily rounds are accomplished by the unit Nursing Director to 
support priority rounding by staff throughout the 24 hours. Follow up is initiated immediately 
upon identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for process 
improvement. There is a special focus on meeting patient needs through prayer, special needs, 
positioning, and pain control which continue as improvement efforts to provide quality care 
and exceed patient/family expectations for service.  
 
Pediatric Surgical Unit     Nurse/Patient Ratio Target 1:4-1:5 
The Surgical unit is a General Pediatric Unit providing family centered care on the 5th floor of 
the OLOLCH, specializing in the care of children, operating on a 24-hour basis. Its focus is on the 
patients requiring surgical management and non-critical cardiac monitoring but will also care 
for patients requiring medical management. The unit provides care to children and their Page 140 of 186 
families requiring acute levels of care for both inpatient and observational needs through 
discharge. Patients requiring cardiac monitoring can be provided with access to an antennae 
system and with telemetry transmitter availability as ordered by a physician. Care is provided 
by Registered Nurses supported by Certified Nurse Assistants, Clinical Service Representatives 
and Nurse Technicians all of whom aid in the accomplishment of the physician’s plan of care 
and treatment. A network of ancillary care team members is also included in daily management 
of the patients and their environment. The Medicine unit consists of 20 private care rooms, 21 
beds one of which is reserved as a sibling room. Average occupancy of the Medicine unit ranges 
between 67-100% capacity. Age ranges of patients is neonate through young adult. The 
Collaborative Care Model is utilized to support a team approach for care provisions with team 
communication accomplished in team member meetings, change of shift report and daily 
multidisciplinary huddles.  
This unit is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients (children 
and young adults) with or recovering from but not limited to: 
• Post-operative surgeries 
• Orthopedic diagnoses 
• Trauma 
• Appendicitis 
• Acute gastroenteritis and dehydration 
• Asthma 
• Bronchiolitis 
• Pneumonias 
• Impaired skin integrity- skin abscessed 
• Infectious disease 
• Abuse 
• Cystic fibrosis 
• Diabetes 
• Failure to thrive 
• Sepsis 
• Meningitis 
• Acute life-threatening events 
 
Special services particular to Surgical unit included but are not limited to: 
• Cardiac monitoring 
Special Procedures performed on the Surgical unit include but are not limited to: 
• Lumbar puncture 
• Ph Probe monitoring 
• Nasogastric and transpyloric tube insertions Page 141 of 186 
 
Unit-specific methods used to meet needs of patient population 
Patient needs are assessed as noted above with a plan of care developed to provide patient, 
family and physician satisfaction. Daily rounds are accomplished by the unit Nursing Director to 
support priority rounding by staff throughout the 24 hours. Follow up is initiated immediately 
upon identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for process 
improvement. There is a special focus on meeting patient needs through prayer, special needs, 
positioning, and pain control which continue as improvement efforts to provide quality care 
and exceed patient/family expectations for service.  
 
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Unit   Nurse/Patient Ratio Target 1:3 – 1:4 
The Hematology/Oncology unit is a General Pediatric Unit providing family centered care on the 
3rd floor of the OLOLCH, specializing in the non-critical care of children with 
hematology/oncology diagnosis, operating on a 24-hour basis. The unit provides care to 
children and their families requiring acute levels of care for both inpatient and observational 
needs through discharge. Patients requiring cardiac monitoring can be provided with access to 
an antennae system and with telemetry transmitter availability as ordered by a physician. Care 
is provided by Registered Nurses supported by Certified Nurse Assistants, Clinical Service 
Representatives and Nurse Technicians all of whom aid in the accomplishment of the 
physician’s plan of care and treatment. A network of ancillary care team members is also 
included in daily management of the patients and their environment. The pediatric 
hematology/oncology unit consists of 16 private care rooms. Average occupancy of the 
hematology/oncology unit ranges between 75-100% capacity. Age ranges of patients is neonate 
through young adult. The Collaborative Care Model is utilized to support a team approach for 
care provisions with team communication accomplished in team member meetings, change of 
shift report and daily multidisciplinary huddles.  
The unit is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipatory, or recovering from: 
• Sickle Cell Anemia 
• Acute/Chronic Idiopathic Thrombocytopenia 
• Various Childhood Cancers 
• Various other blood/platelet disorders 
• Pneumonia 
• Septicemia 
• Pain Crisis 
• Post-operative surgeries 
• Other medical conditions as required in overflow situations Page 142 of 186 
Special services particular to Pediatric Hematology/Oncology unit included but are not limited 
to: 
• Chemotherapy administration 
• Palliative Care 
• Cardiac monitoring 
Special procedures performed on the Pediatric Hematology/Oncology unit patients include but 
are not limited to:  
• Lumbar puncture 
• Bone marrow aspiration 
• Intrathecal chemotherapy administration 
 
Unit-specific methods used to meet needs of patient population 
Patient needs are assessed as noted above with a plan of care developed to provide patient, 
family and physician satisfaction. Daily rounds are accomplished by the unit Nursing Director to 
support priority rounding by staff throughout the 24 hours. Follow up is initiated immediately 
upon identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for process 
improvement. There is a special focus on meeting patient needs through prayer, special needs, 
positioning, and pain control which continue as improvement efforts to provide quality care 
and exceed patient/family expectations for service.  
 
 
Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU)    Nurse/Patient Ratio Target 1:2 
The Pediatric intensive Care Unit is an inpatient nursing providing family centered care on the 
4th floor of the OLOLCH, specializing in the critical care of children, operating on a 24-hour basis. 
The unit provides specialized care to critically ill infants, children and their families. We offer 
close and accurate observation and monitoring with state-of-the-art technology. Skilled and 
specialized surgical treatment is provided as needed, as well as management of complex 
medical problems. Care is provided by Registered Nurses supported by Certified Nurse 
Assistants, Clinical Service Representatives and Nurse Technicians all of whom aid in the 
accomplishment of the physician’s plan of care and treatment. A network of multidisciplinary 
team members consisting of physicians, nurses, clinical pharmacists, respiratory therapists, 
dieticians and therapists is also included in daily management of the patients and their 
environment to achieve the optimal plan of care for the patient’s physical and mental well-
being. In addition, social needs are addressed in conjunction with medical management and 
social worker. Spiritual needs are met daily by all personnel and supported by our pastoral care 
personnel. The PICU consists of 20 private care rooms. Average occupancy of the PICU ranges 
between 50-100% capacity. Age ranges of patients is neonate through young adult. The Page 143 of 186 
Collaborative Care Model is utilized to support a team approach for care provisions with team 
communication accomplished in team member meetings, change of shift report and daily 
multidisciplinary huddles.  
The unit is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipatory, or recovering from: 
• Acute respiratory conditions 
• Neurological emergent events 
• Acute infectious events 
• Congestive heart failure 
• Sepsis 
• Congenital defects 
• Trauma 
• Diabetics 
 
Special services particular to PICU included but are not limited to: 
• Hemodialysis 
• CRRT 
• Palliative Care 
Special procedures performed on the PICU patients include but are not limited to:  
• Chest tube placement 
• Central line placement 
• Arterial lines 
• Lumbar puncture 
 
 
Unit-specific methods used to meet needs of patient population 
Patient needs are assessed as noted above with a plan of care developed to provide patient, 
family and physician satisfaction. Daily rounds are accomplished by the unit Nursing Director to 
support priority rounding by staff throughout the 24 hours. Follow up is initiated immediately 
upon identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for process 
improvement. There is a special focus on meeting patient needs through prayer, special needs, 
positioning, and pain control which continue as improvement efforts to provide quality care 
and exceed patient/family expectations for service.  
 Page 144 of 186 
Pediatric Universal Care Unit (UCU)    Nurse/Patient ratio target 1:3 
The Pediatric Universal Care Unit is an inpatient nursing providing family centered care on the 
4th floor of the OLOLCH, specializing in the critical and intermediate care of children, operating 
on a 24-hour basis. The unit provides specialized care to critical and seriously ill infants, children 
and their families. We offer close and accurate observation and monitoring with state-of-the-
art technology. Care is provided by Registered Nurses supported by Certified Nurse Assistants, 
Clinical Service Representatives and Nurse Technicians all of whom aid in the accomplishment 
of the physician’s plan of care and treatment. A network of multidisciplinary team members 
consisting of physicians, nurses, clinical pharmacists, respiratory therapists, dieticians and 
therapists is also included in daily management of the patients and their environment to 
achieve the optimal plan of care for the patient’s physical and mental well-being. In addition, 
social needs are addressed in conjunction with medical management and social worker. 
Spiritual needs are met daily by all personnel and supported by our pastoral care personnel. 
The UCU consists of 10 private care rooms. Average occupancy of the UCU ranges between 50-
100% capacity. Age ranges of patients is neonate through young adult. The Collaborative Care 
Model is utilized to support a team approach for care provisions with team communication 
accomplished in team member meetings, change of shift report and daily multidisciplinary 
huddles.  
The unit is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipatory, or recovering from: 
• Heliox therapy 
• Captopril and Milrinone inductions 
• Home ventilator management 
• Post-Tracheostomy insertion and initial tracheostomy change 
• Post Liver biopsy 
• Post cardiac catheterization 
• Bipap 
• Vapotherm 
 
 
Special services particular to UCU included but are not limited to: 
• Cardiac monitoring 
• Home ventilator management 
• Palliative care 
 
 
Special procedures performed on the UCU patients include but are not limited to:  
• Chest tube placement Page 145 of 186 
• Lumbar puncture 
• Nasogastric tube placement 
 
 
Unit-specific methods used to meet needs of patient population 
Patient needs are assessed as noted above with a plan of care developed to provide patient, 
family and physician satisfaction. Daily rounds are accomplished by the unit Nursing Director to 
support priority rounding by staff throughout the 24 hours. Follow up is initiated immediately 
upon identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for process 
improvement. There is a special focus on meeting patient needs through prayer, special needs, 
positioning, and pain control which continue as improvement efforts to provide quality care 
and exceed patient/family expectations for service.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 146 of 186 
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU)                                                     Nurse/Patient ratio target 1:2 
 
The Neonatal Intensive Care Unit is an inpatient nursing unit providing family centered care on 
the 4th floor of the OLOLCH, specializing in the critical care of neonates and infants, operating 
on a 24-hour basis. The unit provides specialized care to critically ill neonates, infants and their 
families. We offer close and accurate observation and monitoring with the state-of-the art 
technology. Skilled and specialized surgical treatment is provided as needed, as well as 
management of complex medical problems. Care is provided by Registered Nurses supported 
by Clinical Service Representatives and Nurse Technicians all of whom aid in the 
accomplishment of the physician’s plan of care and treatment. A network of multidisciplinary 
team members consisting of physicians, neonatal nurse practitioners, nurses, clinical 
pharmacists, respiratory therapists, dieticians and therapists is also included in daily 
management of the patients and their environment to achieve the optimal plan of care for the 
patient’s physical and mental well-being. In addition, social needs are addressed in conjunction 
with medical management and social worker. Spiritual needs are met daily by all personnel and 
supported by our pastoral care personnel. The NICU consists of 10 private care rooms. Average 
occupancy of the NICU ranges between 50-100% capacity. Age ranges of patients is neonate up 
to 1 year . The Collaborative Care Model is utilized to support a team approach for care 
provisions with team communication accomplished in team member meetings, change of shift 
report and daily multidisciplinary huddles. 
 
The unit is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients with, 
anticipatory, or recovering from: 
• Neurological 
• Respiratory 
• Gastro-intestinal 
• Nephrology 
• Endocrine 
• Genetic 
• Surgical diagnosis 
Special services particular to NICU included but are not limited to: 
• Hemodialysis Page 147 of 186 
• CRRT 
• Palliative Care 
 
Special procedures performed on the NICU patients include but are not limited to:  
• Chest tube placement 
• Central line placement 
• Arterial lines 
• Lumbar puncture 
 
Unit-specific methods used to meet needs of patient population 
Patient needs are assessed as noted above with a plan of care developed to provide patient, 
family and physician satisfaction. Daily rounds are accomplished by the unit Nursing Director to 
support priority rounding by staff throughout the 24 hours. Follow up is initiated immediately 
upon identification of service recovery needs with appropriate trending for process 
improvement. There is a special focus on meeting patient needs through prayer, special needs, 
positioning, and pain control which continue as improvement efforts to provide quality care 
and exceed patient/family expectations for service.  Page 148 of 186 
Pediatric Emergency Care Unit (PECU)   Nurse/Patient target ratio 1:4 
The Pediatric Emergency Care Unit is an emergent care unit providing family centered care on 
the 1st  floor of the OLOLCH, specializing in the care of children, operating on a 24-hour basis. 
Care is provided by Registered Nurses supported by ER technicians, Clinical Service 
Representatives and Nurse Technicians all of whom aid in the accomplishment of the 
physician’s plan of care and treatment. A network of ancillary care team members is also 
included in daily management of the patients and their environment. The PECU consists of 4 
triage rooms, 28 private care rooms, 2 critical care rooms and 2 trauma rooms. Annual visits to 
the PECU average 30,000. The age range of patients is neonate to 17 years of age, although we 
do see special needs patients into their twenties if their care is managed by their pediatrician or 
pediatric specialist. Patient’s older than 17, and not in the specialized group, will be provided a 
medical screening. Treatment will be provided based on services available or will transferred to 
another facility if services are not available. The Collaborative Care Model is utilized to support 
a team approach for care provisions with team communication accomplished in team member 
meetings, change of shift report and daily multidisciplinary huddles. 
This unit is specifically designed, equipped, and staffed to meet the needs of patients (children 
and Young adults) with emergent diagnosis from but not limited to: 
• Pneumonia 
• Asthma 
• Bronchiolitis 
• Fever 
•  Dehydration 
• Viral enteritis 
• Cellulitis/abscesses 
• Infectious diseases 
• Major trauma 
• Minor trauma 
• Seizures 
• Acute life-threatening events 
• Diabetes 
• Lacerations 
• Fractures 
Special procedures performed in the PECU include but are not limited to: 
• Lumbar puncture 
• Moderate sedations 
• Sexual assault examinations 
• Orthopedic reduction Page 149 of 186 
SURGICAL SERVICES DIVISION – Children’s Hospital 
 
 Scope of Service 
 
The Surgical Services Division coordinates and provides nursing care for the preoperative, 
intraoperative and postoperative phases of care for inpatient and ambulatory patients.  This 
also involves clinical support areas that ensure inventory resource management and 
preparation of surgical instrumentation.  Surgical administration oversees the operations of the 
division with support from a Director and Supervisors.  
 
Operating Rooms (OR): 
 
Unit Definition 
The Operating Rooms consists of 7 operating/procedure rooms in two locations  that are 
available to pediatric patients of all ages (infants to 17 years of age with occasional special 
needs patients over the age of 17) needing operative procedures, requiring sedation, general, 
regional or local anesthesia. This includes elective, urgent and emergency procedures. 
Procedures include, but are not limited to, thoracic, urological, orthopedic, general surgery, 
laparoscopic, oral, dental, vascular, gynecological, plastic,  neurosurgical, eye, ear, nose, and 
throat (EENT), and pediatric endoscopy. Coverage is provided in all specialties except obstetrics, 
robotics, cardiovascular, and organ transplant.  
 
Availability of Operating Rooms and Staff 
Operative services are provided 24 hours a day, 7 days a week with on-call specialty teams 
beyond normal operating hours and/or dedicated blocks.  After hours procedures and surgeries 
are performed in one of the 5 ORs available in the Main OR or one of the 2 Procedure Rooms 
immediately adjacent to the Main OR.  Procedures are performed in designated areas based on 
the specialty, but flexibility is maintained for multispecialty cases. 
 
Hours of Service 
Monday-Friday 
7am-3pm – All operative and procedure areas are available for routine elective scheduling, 
unless a predetermined physician, group or service specific block has been granted.   
3pm – 7pm – 2 rooms are available for inpatient, urgent, and emergent cases. 
7pm-7am – 1 room is available for emergent cases  
Saturday & Sunday 
1 room is available for urgent or emergent cases 24 hours per day 
 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
 
Assessment/Reassessment:  
Patients are initially assessed by the Pre-Operative RN and Anesthesia Provider in the pre-op 
area.  Patient is re-assessed by Circulating RN prior to admission to the operating or procedure 
room, and continues during positioning and placement of equipment and supplies on the Page 150 of 186 
patient. An Anesthesiologist and/or CRNA re-assesses the patient throughout the procedure. 
The Circulator is responsible for monitoring the environment to assure that sterility of the 
operating field and team is maintained from setup and throughout the procedure. 
 
Patient Satisfaction initiatives:   
Actions to support patient and family satisfaction begin with the Pre-Op Nurse’s initial 
interaction.  The RN reviews the patient record, assures that all documentation and patient 
statements are in agreement for the procedure and appropriate laterality, all pre-op 
assessments and results are complete and within expected or acceptable ranges.  Prior to 
patient being brought to the OR, patient and family/representative are given opportunities to 
ask questions and receive clarification from the RN, Anesthesia provider and Surgeon.  The 
Circulating RN will explain the process of taking the patient to the OR, preparation prior to 
administration of medication/anesthesia and plan for recovery in PACU or Critical Care Unit.  
The RN will communicate to patient’s family/representative, via the surgical waiting room 
reception staff, when the procedure starts and, at least hourly, on the progress of surgery. 
Special focuses for the staff, meeting the patient’s needs for prayer, special needs, positioning, 
appropriate equipment, instrument and supplies are improvement efforts to provide quality 
care and exceed patient and family/representative expectation for service. 
 
Support Services 
 
Surgery Billing 
Surgical billing is responsible for charge capture services, Vendor Invoice Payment Processing 
and the capture of minute and supply/implant charges for all operating rooms, Anesthesia, and 
PACU areas.   
 
SPECIAL SERVICES 
Anesthesiology Service 
Anesthesia Providers are available for difficult airway management, anesthesia machine 
support, and for the operation of the blood salvage/recovery system during surgical procedures 
for all ages of patients. Contract Anesthesia (LSA) for all ages, on a 24-hour call basis with a 
response time of 30 minutes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Page 151 of 186 
POST ANESTHESIA CARE (PACU) 
 
Unit Definition 
Post Anesthesia Care Unit (PACU) consists of 10 monitored cubicles.  The PACU Unit is part of a 
multidisciplinary team caring for Phase I post anesthesia patients.  Scope of practice includes 
Neonates through Adult levels of care.   The PACU unit utilizes a multidisciplinary caring team of 
nurses, physicians, anesthesia providers and support staff to meet the needs of patients.  The 
scope of peri-anesthesia nursing practice involves the assessment for, diagnosis of, intervention 
of, sedation/analgesia or anesthetic agents and techniques.  The practice in PACU is systemic in 
nature and includes the nursing process, decision making, analytical and scientific thinking and 
inquiry.  The PACU nurses’ role during Phase I focuses on providing post anesthesia nursing care 
to the patient in the immediate post anesthesia period and transitioning them to Phase II level 
of care in the inpatient, intensive care or ambulatory setting for continued care. PACU primarily 
cares for patients who have received anesthetic agents (local, IV sedation, regional and general) 
for surgical or diagnostic procedures or anesthesia interventions. The services include airway 
management, assessment and intervention, invasive and non-invasive monitoring, prevention, 
recognition of post anesthetic complications, medication administration, pain and nausea 
control, and patient safety.  Procedures recovered in the PACU include, but are not limited to, 
thoracic, urological, orthopedic, general surgery, laparoscopic, neurology, oral, dental, eyes, 
ear, nose, and throat (EENT), vascular, plastic, gynocological, and endoscopy procedures. This 
includes elective, urgent, or emergency procedures. Coverage is provided to all specialty areas 
except obstetrics and organ transplant.  Anesthesiologist in constant contact upon arrival to 
PACU then immediately available. Quality nursing care is provided in the PACU twenty-four 
hours a day, 7 days a week with on-call staff available after 7pm Monday-Friday and 24 hours 
on Saturday & Sunday for urgent and emergent procedures.     
 
In the event of high patient census, post-operative patients requiring inpatient or critical care 
nursing may remain beyond phase 1 recovery.  The inpatient plan of care will be initiated, and 
the nurse/patient ratio will adjust to match inpatient and critical care unit standards.   
Hours of operation: 
Monday through Friday 0700 to 1900.  Staff are available “on call” for the remainder of the 
unscheduled hours, to include weekends and holidays. On-call team will respond within 30 
minutes of callback. 
 
Availability of Staff 
Phase I Level of Care and Nurse to Patient Ratio (based on 2023-2024 Standards of 
Perianesthesia Nursing Practice: 
 
One nurse to two patients who are: 
• One unconscious, stable, without artificial airway, and over the age of 8 years; and one 
conscious, stable and free of complications. 
• Two conscious, stable, and free of complications. 
• Two conscious, stable 8 years of age and under, with family or competent support staff 
present. Page 152 of 186 
One nurse to one patient: 
• At the time of admission, until the critical elements** are met 
• Requiring mechanical life support and/or artificial airway.   
• Any unconscious patient 8 years of age and under. 
• A second nurse must be available to assist as necessary 
 
Two nurses to one patient: 
• One critically ill, unstable, complicated patient. 
 
Two Registered Nurses, one of whom is a RN competent in Phase I post-anesthesia nursing, are 
in the same room where the patient is receiving Phase I level of care.  A RN from OR can serve 
as a second RN for the PACU as needed. 
 
**Critical elements can be defined as:  
• Patient has a patent airway without assistance. 
• Initial assessment is complete. 
• Patient is hemodynamically stable. 
• Report has been received from the anesthesia care provider, questions answered, and 
the transfer of care has taken place. 
Hours of Service 
Monday-Friday 
• All cubicles are staffed with RNs with a nurse patient ratio of 1:2 from 7am – 7pm.  On 
call staff coverage is provided for urgent/emergent cases from 7pm-7am.  
Saturday & Sunday 
• On call staffing is provided in the PACU to accommodate OR schedules beginning at 7pm 
Friday through 7am Monday.  
 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
Assessment/Reassessment:  
The RN conducts the initial patient assessment upon admission to the PACU unit and provides 
ongoing assessment and intervention throughout the stay.  The RN and support staff integrates 
safety and protection for patients and staff when implementing the policies and procedures 
and using equipment. The RN communicates with patients and families, team members and 
management in an accurate, timely manner.    
 
Patient Satisfaction initiatives:   
The RN reports pertinent, concise information accomplishes complete, timely charting and 
effectively uses the electronic medical record system.  The PACU RN also protects 
confidentiality of patients and colleagues and develops and maintains human care 
relationships. The RN integrates the influence of the individual’s human experience of health, 
illness, and healing into the nursing care plan.  The skilled RN advocates for the needs of 
patients, provides care in an ethical and legal manner, and refers concerns/issues to 
appropriate resources.   Page 153 of 186 
Pre Op/Post Op Unit 
Unit Definition: 
The Pre Op/Post Op unit is an 18 room unit where preoperative care is provided in rooms 1-5 and 12-18 
and post operative care is provided in rooms 6-11.  The Pre Op area admits patients ranging from 
neonates to adults needing operative and diagnostic procedures requiring sedation, general, regional or 
local anesthesia.  The patient status may be elective, urgent or emergent.  Procedures include, but are 
not limited to, neurosurgical, orthopedic, general surgery, laparoscopic, plastic, oral, dental, eye, ear, 
nose, throat, gastrointestinal, MRI, CT, invasive diagnostic procedures.  Coverage is provided in all 
specialty areas except obstetrics and organ transplant.  The Pre Op hours are Monday-Friday 0500-1500.  
The Post Op area receives patients from the PACU area who have met criteria to enter in to Phase II and 
discharge home.  They will also hold inpatients awaiting a room in the hospital once the PACU criteria 
has been met.  The Post Op hours are Monday-Friday 0800-1600.  Any patient that would be discharged 
after 1600 is Phase II and discharged from PACU.  The team in Pre Op and Post Op consists of RNs and 
Certified Nursing Assistants. 
 
Care Team/Model of Care: 
Utilizing a Primary Care Nursing model, the Pre Op nursing staff completes a head to toe admission 
assessment.  An admit profile, plan of care, falls Risk and Braden Scale is completed on every patient.  
Vital signs and NPO status are assessed, allergies are reviewed, and home medications area listed with 
dosage, frequency and last dose taken.  Special notation of education is made and who will be 
transporting the patient home as well as who will be staying with the patient.  A pain assessment and 
establishing pain goals is noted.  The patient and family are prepared physically, psychosocially and 
spiritually for his or her experience in procedural area.  The Post Op nursing staff focus on preparing the 
patient/family for discharge from the facility.  
A charge nurse is assigned to each of the units.  During the admission phase, the nurse to patient ratio 
target is 1:1 and during the post-operative (Phase II) nurse to patient ratio is 1:3.  All staff members are 
competent in the admission and discharge process.  Focus of all staff members is to ensure safe quality 
nursing care is delivered to each patient with special attention given to patient and family satisfaction. 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs: 
Assessment and Reassessment: 
The Pre Op RN completes and admission assessment upon patient arrival to the Pre Op unit and reassess 
every two hours as needed.  The Post Op RN completes assessment upon admit to the Post Op unit and 
reassesses withing 30 minutes then every hour until discharge.   
Patient Satisfaction Initiatives: 
The skilled RN advocates for needs of patients, provides care in an ethical and legal manner, and refers 
concerns/issues to appropriate resource.  Specific initiatives are as follows: 
• Every team member will consistently ask before leaving the patient “is there anything I can do 
for you” 
• Timely communication about delays and waiting times before procedures 
• Improve the patient’s IV start experience 
• Ongoing improvement in communication with the OR and physicians to facilitate the patient 
care, eliminate patient delays and provide timely information/feedback to the patient and 
family. Page 154 of 186 
STERILE PROCESSING & DISTRIBUTION (SPD) 
 
Unit Definition 
The Sterile Processing & Distribution (SPD) department consists of one decontamination and 
sterilization area at Children’s Hospital.  SPD utilizes steam, and H2O2 sterilization processing 
methods.  SPD functions to provide the Operating Room and in house departments with sterile 
reusable instrumentation for operative and invasive procedures.  
 
Care Team/Model or Care 
Support for direct patient care in the operating rooms is provided by SPD Technicians, a Surgical 
Technician, a Supervisor, and a Director of Nursing.  The technical staff is trained in the 
disassembly, decontamination, and assembly of instrumentation and equipment, and 
preparation for and appropriate sterilization necessary to meet industry standards and 
regulatory requirements.  
 
Availability of SPD Department and Staff 
SPD is staffed 7am-11pm Monday-Friday.  An on-call SPD Technician is available 11pm-7am 
weekdays, and 24 hours a day on Saturday, Sunday and holidays.      
 
 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
 
Patient Satisfaction initiatives:   
Availability and timely processing of instrumentations and equipment that meets all standards 
for cleanliness and sterilization are provided to the ORs and procedure areas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 155 of 186 
IMAGING SERVICES 
Imaging Services provides diagnostic, therapeutic and interventional services for patients 
pediatric patients. Imaging Services is comprised of the following modalities: Diagnostic 
Imaging, Computed Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Special Procedures 
and Ultrasound.  Services are provided twenty-four hours per day/seven days a week with 
some modalities covered through "on call" staffing.  Radiology Services is staffed with 
Registered Radiologic Technologists, Radiologic Technologist Assistants, Schedulers, 
Receptionist and Registered Nurses.  
Nuclear Medicine 
The Nuclear Medicine Department provides diagnostic and therapeutic services to patients. The 
department is composed of one nuclear imaging suite. The department is staffed by Registered 
Nuclear Technologists that floats over from the main campus. The Nuclear Medicine 
Department is staffed from 7:00 A.M. until 5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday with services 
available twenty-four hours a day through "on-call" coverage. 
Interventional Radiology 
The Interventional Radiology (IR) or Special Procedures Department provides diagnostic, 
therapeutic and interventional vascular services to patients. The department is staffed with 
registered radiologic technologist, registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, and certified 
scrub technicians. The department is staffed from 7:00am until 5:00pm Monday thru Friday 
with services available twenty-four hours a day through “on-call” coverage. Staff floats over 
from main campus when needed at Childrens.  Competencies of the nursing staff include 
maintaining NIHSS certification.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 156 of 186 
Guest Services 
Guest Services is a support department of the hospital that provides needed assistance to 
patients, families, and guests.  Such services include acting as a welcoming presence, assisting 
with visitor badging, information sharing, surgical updates, wayfinding, service recovery and 
visitor escorts to various destinations.  The department also operates PBX, an inhospitable 
telephone system that assists with transfer of incoming and outgoing calls as well as life safety 
support directing various teams during codes to the proper locations for intervention.   
 
 
CARE MANAGEMENT 
 
The Care Management department consists of Registered Nurses, Social Workers, and Support 
Staff. The Case Managers perform utilization review, collaborate with Social Workers and the 
interdisciplinary team to proactively manage the patients that access Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center Children’s Hospital. The Care  Management team works with the 
patients, physicians, and family members to identify and assure that the clinical needs of the 
patient are met in the most appropriate setting and level of care. Case managers utilize criteria 
to help manage level of care, length of stay, and utilization of resources.  The Care medical 
management team also coordinates the discharge plan and assures the post discharge needs 
are met with transitions in care.  Office hours of operation are 8 a.m. -4:30 p.m. Monday – 
Friday.  
 
Plant Services 
Plant Services is responsible for overseeing, managing, and upkeeping the physical 
infrastructure, utility systems, grounds, and medical equipment within the facilities. Our 
operations run round the clock, 5:00am – 9:30pm Monday thru Friday “, Services available 
twenty-four hours a day through “on-call” coverage during after-hours and on Saturdays and 
Sundays.. The key objectives of Plant Services encompass the establishment and preservation 
of performance benchmarks for staff expertise and competence, promoting active engagement, 
monitoring and conducting inspection activities, devising protocols for emergency and incident 
reporting, as well as supervising preventative maintenance and testing of vital operational 
components. 
 
 
 Page 157 of 186 
Our Lady of the Lake Livingston 
Our Lady of the Lake Livingston Complex is located at 5000 O’Donovan Boulevard in Walker, 
Louisiana.  The Complex houses Emergency Department, Imaging, and Laboratory Services on 
the first floor.  The second floor houses administrative offices and community room for 
educational purposes.  The third-fifth floors are utilized for tenant physician offices.  No 
inpatient beds are licensed for this facility. 
The Emergency Department is a freestanding ED with 19 beds and provides 24 hour services to 
adult and pediatric populations.  This department provides a wide range of care from 
emergent, to intermediate, to low acuity patients who arrive with a variety of presentations to 
include acute illnesses, chronic illnesses, or traumatic injuries.  The average daily census is 80 
patients per day, but has gone as high as 120 with approximately 8 admissions per day.  The 
Department is staffed with Registered Nurses, ER Techs, Nurse Techs, CSR’s, along with MD’s,  
Nurse Practitioners & Physician Assistants.  The department works closely with the RMC 
regional  campus for continuity of care and smooth transfer processes for patients needing 
extended/higher levels of care. 
Special Services 
Telehealth stroke consults are available to provide 24/7 emergent stroke care coverage. 
Patients are seen remotely by neurologists for assessment and evaluation of stroke treatments. 
Pharmacologic interventions can be administered at OLOL Livingston and then transferred to 
OLOL regional campus. 
The Imaging Department offers a comprehensive suite of leading=-edge imaging services.  
These include MRI, CT, Digital X-ray, Fluoroscopy, Mammography, Bone Densitometry and 
Ultrasound.  Appropriate imaging services support the 24 hour ED operations.  Outpatient 
imaging services are available through centralized scheduling.  Interpretation of exam results is 
performed by Radiologists.  The same guidelines/process are implemented as in the Imaging 
Department located at the regional campus.  Staffing of the department consists of registered 
radiologic technologists  to facilitate efficient patient throughput. 
Laboratory Services are available and offer a specific menu of lab testing, including pediatric-
focused Phlebotomy through contracted outpatient services and available on a walk in basis.  
24 hour lab services are available to support the ED.  Ccourier services are utilized for transport 
of specimens to main campus lab for additional testing if required.  Staffing of the acute 
laboratory medical technologists.  A small supply of blood is available on site for emergent 
blood needs. 
 Page 158 of 186 
 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
From the time the patient arrives to the departments for service, processes are date/time 
stamped in order to ensure all are completed for each patient.  Patient complaints/issues are 
followed up by the Directors,  Medical Director, Supervisors, and Charge Nurses as appropriate.  
The Complaint Tracker is used as a method of tracking complaints and follow-up. 
Scope of Planned New Services 
The Livingston facility was designed to include flexible and adaptable space for future growth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 159 of 186 
 
North Baton Rouge 
Our Lady of the Lake North Baton Rouge Campus is located at 5439 Airline Hwy Baton Rouge, 
Louisiana.  The campus houses Our Lady of the Lake North Emergency Department, Imaging, 
LSU Health Baton Rouge Urgent Care, Primary Care Clinics, Oncolocy Clinic, Infusion Center, and 
community room on the first floor.  Outpatient Imaging,  Laboratory Services, Centralized 
scheduling, administrative offices, and LSU prior authorization is located on the second floor.  
No inpatient beds are licensed for this facility. 
The Emergency Department is a freestanding ED with 8 beds and provides 24 hour services to 
adult and pediatric populations.  This department provides a wide range of care from 
emergent, to intermediate, to low acuity patients who arrive with a variety of presentations to 
include acute illnesses, chronic illnesses, or traumatic injuries.  The average daily census is 65 
patients per day, but has gone as high as 85 with approximately 8 to 10 admissions per day.  
The Department is staffed with Registered Nurses, ER Techs,   along with MD’s,  Nurse 
Practitioners & Physician Assistants.  The department works closely with the regional  campus 
for continuity of care and smooth transfer processes for patients needing extended/higher 
levels of care. 
 
Special Services 
Telehealth stroke consults are available to provide 24/7 emergent stroke care coverage. 
Patients are seen remotely by neurologists for assessment and evaluation of stroke treatments. 
Pharmacologic interventions can be administered at OLOL North ED and then transferred to 
OLOL regional. 
The Imaging Department offers a comprehensive suite of leading=-edge imaging services.  
These include  CT, Digital X-ray, Fluoroscopy, Mammography, Bone Densitometry and 
Ultrasound.  Appropriate imaging services support the 24 hour ED operations.  Outpatient 
imaging services are available through centralized scheduling.  Interpretation of exam results is 
performed by Radiologists.  The same guidelines/process are implemented as in the Imaging 
Department located at the regional campus.  Staffing of the department consists of registered 
radiologic technologists  to facilitate efficient patient throughput. 
Laboratory Services are available and offer a specific menu of lab testing, including pediatric-
focused Phlebotomy through outpatient contracted services on a walk in basis.  24 hour lab 
services are available to support the ED.    In addition, courier services are utilized for transport Page 160 of 186 
of specimens to regional campus lab for additional testing if required.  Staffing of the acute care 
lab department consists of medical technologists.  A small supply of blood is available on site 
for emergent blood needs. 
Methods Used to Meet Patient/Family Care Needs 
From the time the patient arrives to the departments for service, processes are date/time 
stamped in order to ensure all are completed for each patient.  Patient complaints/issues are 
followed up by the Directors, Medical Director, Supervisors, and Charge Nurses as appropriate.  
The Complaint Tracker is used as a method of tracking complaints and follow-up. 
Scope of Planned New Services 
The North Baton Rouge campus was designed to include flexible and adaptable space for future 
growth. 
 
 Page 161 of 186 
LSU HEALTH BATON ROUGE 
 
NORTH CLINIC 
The North Clinic located at 5439 Airline Highway houses the Primary Care Clinic, Oncology and 
Hematology (sickle cell) Clinic, Oncology Infusion Center, Urgent Care Center, Outreach Lab and 
Financial Counselors. Imaging Services include x-ray, , CT and PET CT, mammography and 
ultrasound and bone density.  A pharmacy to support the infusion center is located at this site.  
Clinical services are available Monday through Friday except Urgent Care Center which is open 
7a-12midnight 7 days per week and a 24 hour ED. 
 
MID CITY CLINIC 
The Mid City site located at 1401 North Foster houses the Family Practice Clinic,  Primary Care 
Clinic 2, Dermatology Clinic, Wound Clinic,  Diabetic Foot Clinic, Diabetes Education, and 
Financial Counselors.  An outpatient retail pharmacy provides limited prescription services and 
Patient Assistance Program applications.  An Outreach Lab is available. 
 
PERKINS SURGICAL CENTER 
The Ambulatory Surgery Services, Oral Surgery Clinic, Ophthalmology Clinic, Surgery Clinic and 
Imaging Services are located at the Perkins Surgical Center at 9032 Perkins Road.  Clinical 
services are provided Monday through Friday with times varied.  Surgery Clinic services include 
General Surgery, Orthopedic, ENT, Oncology, and Financial Counselors.  Clinical services are 
provided by physicians, resident physicians and nursing services.  A limited pharmacy to 
support the OR and clinics is available.   
The patient population is primarily lower acuity with ASA scores of one to two.  Applicable 
standards of practices set forth by AORN and AAMI are adhered to with oversight by the main 
hospital surgical services. 
 
 
 
 Page 162 of 186 
MEDICINE AND MEDICINE SPECIALTY CLINICS 
Clinics provided at 5131 O’Donovan Drive include Internal Medicine, Allergy, Cardiology, 
Coumadin, Endocrine, Renal, Hepatitis, Infectious Disease, and Gastroenterology.  An Outreach 
Lab, EKG, Echocardiogram, and Holter studies are available. 
 
OVERVIEW ALL SITES 
There are a total of approximately 137 clinic examination rooms, four operating rooms, two 
Endoscopy Rooms, and 17 infusion chairs.  Scheduling is primarily completed through the 
Central Scheduling Department located at the North Clinic.  Patients may obtain appointments 
by phone from the Central Scheduling Department.  Patients may obtain appointments in 
person or by phone from clinic personnel.  Patients may self-refer in order to receive 
appointments in primary care clinics.  Physician referral and physician approval may be 
required, depending on length of wait until next available appointment, in order for patients to 
book appointments in specialty clinics.  Clinic capacities, available services, and medical 
condition of the patient determine whether clinic appointments are available to be booked 
when requested.   Page 163 of 186 
 
LSU Health Baton Rouge Scope of Services   
Mid City Clinic 
  (225) 385-4853 
1401 North Foster Drive, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70806 
Service Name Type of Program 
Hours of 
Operation 
Age Group/Type of Patient 
Seen Staffing 
Family 
Practice 
Family 
Practice/Primary Care 
M-Thurs  7A 
- 5:30P; 
Friday 
7A-12P 
Adults needing primary care, 
disease management, mental 
health integration, and follow 
up care 
MD, RN, LPN, NP, 
CNA, PSR, CAR, Case 
Manager, RN 
Manager, Social 
Workers 
Early 
Intervention 
Clinic 
HIV Clinic/Primary Care 
for patients with HIV 
diagnosis and/or 
infants with HIV 
exposure 
M-Thurs  8A-
4:30P, Friday 
8-12noon 
Pediatric, Adult, and Geriatric 
patients with HIV and infants 
born to mothers with know 
HIV diagnosis 
MD, RN, LPN, NP, 
CNA, CAR,  Case 
Manager, RN 
Manager, Social 
Worker, Health 
Educators, 
Pyscology, Peer 
Navigator, Data 
Analyst, Grant 
Coordinator 
Diabetes and 
Nutrition 
Center 
Diabetes and 
Nutritional education.  
1:1 and group 
conseling 
M-F 7:30A-
4:30P; Friday 
7:30A-12P  
Adults and Geriatric patients 
needing any type of diabetes 
and nutritional education 
RN Manager-CDE, 
RN Educator, 
Nutritonist, CAR 
Wound Care 
Clinic 
Wound Care M-Thurs  7A-
4:30P; Friday 
7A-12noon 
Adults and Geriatric patients 
needing any type of wound 
care  
RN, CAR,MD 
Diabetic Foot 
and Wound 
Clinic 
Diabetic Foot Clinic M-Thurs  7A-
4:30P; Friday 
7:30A-
11:30A 
Adults & Geriatric needing 
diabetic foot care, off loading, 
and treatment for protective 
loss of sensation 
 NP, PT, Pedorthist, 
RN Manager, MA, 
CAR 
Dermatology 
Clinic 
Dermatology M-Thurs 7A-
4:30P; Friday 
7A-2:00P 
Infants, Peds, Adults, Geriatric 
patients with needs for 
treatment of 
skin/Dermological conditions 
MD, Residents, RN 
Manager, RN, LPN, 
MA, CAR 
Central 
Scheduling 
Main Scheduling 
Department LSU 
Health Clinical Areas 
M-F  Infant, Pediatric, Adult, and 
Geriatric needing specific 
services within LSU clinics can 
call and schedule 
appointments here 
RN Manager, CAR,  
 
 Page 164 of 186 
Perkins Surgical Center 
  
 
9032 Perkins Road, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, 70810 
Service 
Name Services Provided 
Hours of 
Operation 
Age Group/Type of Patient 
Seen Staffing 
Oral Surgery 
Clinic 
Oral Maxillorary   
Wednesdays 
12:00 – 4:30 
P 
Adults  and limited pediatric 
patients needing specialized 
treatment of conditions, 
defects, injuries, and esthetic 
aspects of the mouth, teeth, 
jaw, and face 
MD, Residents, RN 
Supervisor, RN, LPN, 
C.N.A., PAR, Case 
Manager, Social 
Worker 
Surgery Clinic General Surgery, ENT, 
and  Orthopedics, 
Vascular, and Surgical 
Oncology 
M-Thursday 
7A-4:30P  
Adult  and limited pediatric 
patients needing specialized 
treatment and/or surgery for 
the following conditions: Ear, 
Nose,& throat, General 
Surgical conditions, and 
Orthopedic conditions 
MD, Residents, RN 
Manager, RN, LPN, 
C.N.A., CAR, Case 
Manager, Social 
Worker 
Surgery 
Center 
OR Admin, Operating 
Rooms, Surgery PARC, 
Endoscopy, PACU, 
Same Day-Pre and 
Post, Sterile 
Processing 
 
 
  
M-Thursday  
7A-3:30P 
Pediatric, Adult, and Geriatric  
patients needing Outpatient 
surgical and endoscopy 
procedures 
Manager 
Ambulatory 
Services, RN 
Supervisor, RN, LPN, 
CRNA, 
Anesthesiologist, 
Anesthesia Tech, 
Respiratory 
Therapist, Cast 
Tech, Surgical Tech, 
OR Scheduler, 
C.N.A., Sup of 
Admin Offices, 
Admin. Asst, Sterile 
Processing 
Supervisor, SP Tech,  
PAR, MD, Residents 
Perkins 
Surgical 
Center 
Imaging 
CT, MRI, X-ray, 
Mammography, 
Ultrasound, Vascular 
ultrasound, Nuclear 
Medicine 
 
 
  
M-F 8A-
4:30P 
Infants, Peds, Adults, Geriatric 
patients needing  outpatient 
imaging studies 
Radiology 
Technologist, PSR, 
mammography 
Technologist, 
Ultrasound 
Technologist, CT 
Technologist, MRI 
Technologist, 
Vascular US 
Technologist, IS 
Clinical AC, ASR, RN Page 165 of 186 
Ophthalmology 
Clinic 
(Administration 
Building) 
Ophthalmology, 
Retina, Glaucoma, 
Corner, and Neuro-
opthomology 
M-Th 7A-
4:30; Friday 
7a-2P 
Adults and limited pediatric 
patients needing specialized 
treatment of the eye 
MD, Residents, 
Fellows, RN, LPN, 
CAR, Case Manager, 
Social Worker, 
Ophthalmology 
Tech 
North Clinic 
  
(225)-358-2280 
5439 Airline Hwy, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70805 
Service Name Services Provided 
Hours of 
Operation 
Age Group/Type of Patient 
Seen Staffing 
Infusion Clinic Chemo Infusion/non-
chemo infusions 
/sickle cell pain 
management and 
hydration/blood 
transfusions 
M-Thurs 
7:30-5P, 
Friday 7:30-
2:30P 
Adults needing chemo 
infusions and follow up 
RN Manager, RN, 
NP, C.N.A. 
Hematology 
and Oncology 
Clinic 
Oncology Provider 
Clinic 
M-Thursday 
7:30-4:30P 
Friday 7:30 
– 12noon 
Adult oncology patients need 
care and follow up; 
hematology patients and 
sickle cell patients 
RN Manager, LPN, 
C.N.A., Patient 
Navigator (SW), 
CAR , MAP 
representative, MD, 
Residents, NP 
NBR Primary 
Care 
Primary Care M-Thurs 7A-
4:30P; 
Friday 7A - 
Noon  
Adult patients needing 
primary care, disease 
management, mental health 
integration,  and follow up 
care 
MD, NP, RN 
Manger, RN, LPN, 
C.N.A., CAR, Case 
Manager,  Social 
Worker 
North Clinic 
Imaging 
PET/CT, CT, MRI, X-
ray, Mammography, 
Ultrasound, Bone 
Density 
M-Thursday 
8A-4:30P 
Friday 7:00 
– 12noon 
Infants, Peds, Adults, Geriatric 
patients needing outpatient 
imaging studies 
PET/RAD 
Technologist, CT 
Technologist, 
Ultrasound 
Technologist, 
Mammography 
Technologist 
Urgent Care Day and Night walk-
in care for non-life-
threatening illnesses 
and injuries 
 7am to 
12am 7 
days per 
week 
Infant, Pediatric, Adult, and 
Geriatric needing non-life-
threatening care for 
illnesses and injuries 
Radiology 
Technologist, PSR, 
ASR, Medical 
Assistant, RN, RN 
Manager, LPN, 
MD, NP, PA 
 Page 166 of 186 
 
Specialty Clinic MOB IV, Suite 400 
  
225-374-0110 
5131 O’Donovan Drive, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70808 
Service 
Name Services Provided 
Hours of 
Operation 
Age Group/Type of Patient 
Seen Staffing 
Specialty 
Clinic 
 Hepatitis, 
Cardiology, CHF, 
Pacemaker clinic,  
G.I., IBD, and Allergy 
 
  
M-Thurs 
7:30-4:30P; 
Friday 7:30-
Noon 
Adults needing speciality care 
in  Hepatitis, Cardiology, 
CHF/Cath, and  Pace Maker 
check/maintenance 
MD, NP, RN 
Manger, RN, LPN, 
C.N.A., CAR,  Case 
Manager, 
Residents, 
Echo/Stress 
Technician, Social 
Worker 
 
Medicine Clinic MOB IV, Suite 500 
  
225-374-0120 
5131 O’Donovan Drive, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70808 
Service 
Name Services Provided 
Hours of 
Operation 
Age Group/Type of Patient 
Seen Staffing 
Medicine 
Clinic 
Primary Care M-Thurs 
7:30-4:30P; 
Friday 7:30-
Noon  
Adult patients needing Primary 
care, mental health 
integration, and post hospital 
discharge care 
MD, NP, RN 
Manger, RN, LPN, 
C.N.A., CAR, Case 
Manager, Social 
Worker, Residents 
Endocrine, Renal, 
Diabetes, Pre-op 
Adult Patient need specialty 
care in Endocrine, Renal, 
Diabetes, and Pre-op clearance  
MD, NP, RN 
Manger, RN, LPN, 
C.N.A., CAR, Case 
Manager, 
Residents 
MOB IV 
Cardio 
Pacemaker clinic, 
Echo, Holter monitor, 
Stress EKG 
M-Thurs 7A-
530P, Friday 
8-12noon 
Adult Patients needing 
outpatient Pacemaker Checks, 
Echo, Holter Monitor, Stress 
and EKG testing 
Echo Technician, 
EKG Technician, 
EKG/Treadmill 
Technician 
 
 Page 167 of 186 
 
After Care Clinic 
(225) 374-0500 
7777 Hennessy Blvd Baton Rouge, LA 70808 
Service Name Services Provided 
Hours of 
Operation 
Age Group/Type of Patient 
Seen Staffing 
Urology Clinic Urological Services  Monday-Friday Adults needing 
Urologyspeciality RN, LPN, CSR, 
MA, C.N.A., 
MD, PA 
 
 
Wound and Hyperbaric Center 
 
7301 Hennessy Blvd, Suite 103 Baton Rouge, LA 70808 
Service Name Services Provided 
Hours of 
Operation 
Age Group/Type of Patient 
Seen Staffing 
Wound Center Wound treatments 
and HBO Therapy 
M-F 8a – 4:30 p Adults needing wound  and 
hyperbaric therapy care 
MD, NP, RN, 
MA HBO Tech, 
Program 
Director, 
Clinical 
Manager, 
Wound Tech, 
CAR Page 168 of 186 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE DEPARTMENTS MANAGED BY  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE PHYSICIAN GROUP 
 
Scope of Services 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Physician Group (OLOLPG) 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Physician Group Physicians are Board Certified in the fields of Pediatrics, 
Family Practice, Internal Medicine, Geriatrics, Rheumatology, and Specialty services. Support 
staff includes allied health professionals comprised of physician assistants, nurse practitioners 
and healthcare professionals. Clinic hours of operation are included in their respective sections 
of this document. Operations Directors and Senior Directors provide backup staffing to the 
Office Manager or supervisor as needed. Clinical staffing is supported by an internal float pool 
as needs arise.  
 
Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) and Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Health (OLOLCH) 
Departments Managed by Our Lady of the Lake Physician Group (OLOLPG) include the 
following: 
• OLOL Head and Neck Center  
• OLOL Voice Center 
• OLOL Hearing and Balance 
• OLOL Rheumatology 
• OLOL Sleep Lab 
• OLOL Heart Imaging Center - Cardiology 
• OLOLCH Physical Medicine  
• OLOLCH St. Jude Affiliate Clinic 
• OLOLCH Adolescent Medicine 
• OLOLCH Allergy and Immunology 
• OLOLCH Ear, Nose & Throat 
• OLOLCH Endocrinology 
• OLOLCH Gastroenterology 
• OLOLCH Infectious Disease 
• OLOLCH Nephrology 
• OLOLCH Neurology 
• OLOLCH Neurosurgery 
• OLOL Genetics 
• OLOLCH Orthopedics and Sports Medicine 
• OLOLCH Pulmonology Page 169 of 186 
 
OLOL Head and Neck Center  
 
Our otolaryngologists, or head and neck physicians, are trained in the medical and surgical 
management and treatment of patients with diseases and disorders of the ear, nose, throat and 
related structures of the head and neck. They treat benign and malignant tumors, infectious 
diseases, deformities, and facial trauma. The Head and Neck Center specializes in a variety of 
services not available in most communities, including: 
 
• Apnea surgery of the nose, palate, and tongue 
• Head and neck cancer surgical oncology 
• Complex microvascular plastic and reconstructive surgery of the head and neck 
• Functional, reconstructive, and cosmetic rhinoplasty 
• Complex endoscopic sinus surgery (primary and revision) 
• Dacryocystorhinostomy or DCR (tear duct surgery) 
• Eustachian tube surgery 
• Excision of sinus and skull base neoplasms, including inverted papilloma and malignancies 
• Full spectrum of upper airway surgery, including Inspire sleep apnea implant, nasal 
surgery, pharyngoplasty, partial glossectomy, hyoid and tongue suspension, injection 
snoreplasty and palatal implants 
• Function-sparing modified radical neck dissection 
• Glossectomy 
• Highly sophisticated craniofacial tumor treatment for tumors originating in the sinuses, 
nasopharynx, upper neck, and orbits 
• Laryngectomy 
• Mandibulectomy 
• Maxillectomy 
• Microvascular Reconstruction 
• Minimally invasive robotic resection of head and neck tumors 
• Pharyngectomy 
• Parotidectomy with facial nerve preservation 
• Reconstructive problems of the craniofacial region and skull base 
• Rehabilitation of head and neck cancer patients 
• Sialendoscopy 
• Thyroid surgery 
 
Location: 
4950 Essen Lane, Suite 400  
(4th Floor, Mary Bird Perkins Cancer Center) 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phone: (225) 765-1765 
Fax: (225) 765-1768 
Hours:  
Monday - Friday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m.  
Page 170 of 186 
 
 
 
OLOL Voice Center 
 
The Our Lady of the Lake Voice Center is dedicated to the evaluation and management of voice, 
swallowing, and breathing disorders. The Center is a collaborative effort of Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center, the LSU Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, and 
the LSU Department of Communication Disorders. Our team of voice and swallowing 
professionals uses state of the art equipment and techniques to provide patients with a wide 
range of medical, surgical, and behavioral treatments for the range of upper airway disorders. 
In addition, our team is engaged in research within the institution and in collaboration with 
other centers to continue to advance care. 
 
The Voice Center includes a team of fellowship-trained laryngologists and speech-language 
pathologists.  
 
Location: 
4950 Essen Lane, Suite 401  
(4th Floor, Mary Bird Perkins Cancer Center) 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phone: (225) 765-5335 
Fax: (225) 765-5339 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 8:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m. 
Friday, 8:00 a.m. - 1:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
OLOL Hearing and Balance 
 
The Hearing and Balance Center, a joint venture of Our Lady of the Lake and the LSU 
Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, offers comprehensive services devoted 
specifically to restoring and maintaining the function of hearing, balance, and equilibrium 
(vestibular) systems. Equipped with the latest diagnostic tests, treatments and research, our 
number-one priority is to improve our patients' hearing. 
 
Location: 
7777 Hennessy Boulevard 
Medical Plaza 1, Suite 709 
Baton Rouge, LA 70808: 
Phone: (225) 765-7735 
Fax: (225) 765-1023 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 7:30 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
Friday, 7:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
  
Page 171 of 186 
 
 
OLOL Rheumatology 
 
Patients with rheumatic diseases will need to see a rheumatologist over an extended period in 
addition to their primary care doctor. Patients should visit their rheumatologist at least once a 
year for a regular check-up since rheumatic diseases often change or evolve over time. 
Examples of rheumatic diseases include: 
 
• Lupus 
• Rheumatoid Arthritis 
• Scleroderma 
• Sarcoidosis 
• Vasculitis 
• Osteoarthritis 
• Osteoporosis 
• Fibromyalgia 
• Gout 
  
Location: 
7777 Hennessy Boulevard 
Medical Plaza 1, Suite 501A 
Baton Rouge, LA 70808 
Phone: (225) 765-6505 
Fax: (225) 765-1223 
Hours:  
Monday - Friday, 8:00 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
 
 
 
OLOL Sleep Lab 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Sleep Lab’s coordinated and comprehensive services are devoted 
specifically to offer sleep disorder studies and treatments for patients who are unable to sleep 
or who are chronically sleepy. 
 
Our experienced professionals take a comprehensive approach to sleep disorders, providing 
consultation, evaluation, treatment, and thorough follow-up care. 
 
Location: 
7777 Hennessy Boulevard 
Medical Plaza 1, Suite 216 
Baton Rouge, LA 70808: 
Phone: (225) 765-8938 
Fax: (225) 765-9724 
Hours: 
Monday - Friday, 8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. 
Sleep Testing Hours: 
Sunday - Saturday, 7:45 p.m. to 5:30 a.m. 
  
Page 172 of 186 
 
 
OLOL Heart Imaging Center – Cardiology 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Physician Group’s Board-Certified cardiologists offer comprehensive 
cardiovascular services and are dedicated to ensuring that each patient receives the highest 
quality of care. Our goal is to not only treat existing cardiovascular disease, but also to practice 
preventive medicine and promote a heart-healthy lifestyle for all patients. 
 
Locations: 
7777 Hennessy Blvd., Suite 1000 
Baton Rouge, LA 70808 
Phone: (225) 767-3900 
Fax: (225) 766-2226 
 
5000 O’Donovan Blvd., Suite 307 
Walker, LA  70785 
Phone: (225) 271-4195 
Fax: (225) 271-8175 
Hours:  
Monday - Friday, 8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page 173 of 186 
 
OLOLCH Physical Medicine 
 
Our team of physical therapists, occupational therapists and speech language pathologists 
specialize in the evaluation and therapy of children with special needs, including those 
diagnosed with: 
 
• Brachial Plexus Injury 
• Congenital Malformations 
• Developmental Delays 
• Feeding and Swallowing Disorders 
• Head Injuries 
• Neurological/Muscular Disorders 
• Sensory Integrative Dysfunction 
• Speech and Language Disorders 
• Torticollis 
• Sensorineural hearing loss 
• Autism 
 
Location: 
8514 Goodwood Blvd., Suite 200 
Baton Rouge, LA 70806 
Phone: (225) 765-8743  
Fax: (225) 765-3442 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 7:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.  
Friday, 7:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m.  
 
 
 
 
OLOLCH St. Jude Affiliate Clinic 
 
The St. Jude Baton Rouge Affiliate Clinic at Our Lady of the Lake Children's Health extends the 
innovative power and compassionate care of the world-renowned St. Jude Children’s Research 
Hospital to the people of Louisiana and beyond. We apply the advances in pediatric 
hematology-oncology earned through cooperative study in an environment that is familiar and 
convenient to our patients. The marriage of uncompromising care with the warmth of a small 
community deeply attached to each young patient make this clinic a wonderful place. The St. 
Jude Baton Rouge Affiliate Clinic is located alongside OLOLCH’s inpatient hematology / oncology 
unit, dedicated to the treatment of pediatric patients with hematologic and oncologic 
disorders.  
 
Our Physicians, Nurse Practitioners and Physician Assistants provide pediatric services to 
diagnose and treat blood disorders, including sickle cell anemia and hemophilia. They are also 
experienced in the diagnosis and treatment of child leukemia, lymphoma, and brain and bone 
tumors. 
  
Page 174 of 186 
 
Location: 
8300 Constantin Blvd, Suite 300 
(3rd Floor of Children’s Hospital) 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phone: (225) 374-1485 
Fax: (225) 374-1661 
Hours:  
Monday - Friday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
 
 
 
OLOLCH Adolescent Medicine 
 
The Adolescent Medicine Clinic specializes in helping adolescents and young adults, ages 12 - 
21, navigate their complex physical, behavioral, and emotional healthcare needs. The clinic 
assists primary care and specialty providers in ensuring their patients have the best 
comprehensive care available. Teenagers experience a storm of problems and conditions that 
are difficult to navigate alone. An adolescent medicine specialist has special training to help 
teens cope with conditions and pressures. They can even help teens transition to adulthood 
and manage their own healthcare. We provide consultation on a variety of development, 
psychosocial, and health issues facing adolescents and young adults, including: 
 
• ADHD/ADD 
• Adolescent Male Health 
• Mild to Moderate Acne 
• Depression and Anxiety 
• Counseling, Testing and Treatment for Sexually Transmitted Infections (STI) 
• STI Partner Treatment 
• Substance Abuse 
• The pressure to take drugs, drink or use tobacco 
• Pubescent development 
• Reproductive health 
• Menstrual Problems including Irregular periods 
• Questions about sexual identity 
• Comprehensive Risk Assessments 
• In-clinic STI and pregnancy testing 
 
Location: 
8200 Constantin Blvd, 4th Floor 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phone: (225) 765-5500 
Fax: (225) 374-1675 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
Friday, 8 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. 
 
  
Page 175 of 186 
 
 
OLOLCH Allergy and Immunology 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Children's Health Allergy and Immunology comprises a specially trained 
team of physicians and healthcare professionals who care for the children and adults with 
asthma, common food and environmental allergies, sinusitis, hay fever or food allergies, skin 
rashes, frequent ear infections, disorders of the immune system, and more. Diagnoses, 
conditions, and treatments provided by this specialty include: 
 
• Allergic asthma 
• Allergies 
• Dermatitis 
• Eosinophilic gastrointestinal conditions 
• Food allergies 
• Insect sting reactions 
• Rhinitis 
• Urticaria 
• Evaluation of patients with recurrent infections such as sinusitis, pneumonia, and 
certain skin infections 
• Allergy testing: 
o Skin Test – A very small amount of allergens are put under the skin by making a 
small indentation on the surface of the skin. This is the most common type of 
allergy testing. 
o Challenge Tests – A very small amount of an allergen is inhaled or taken by 
mouth. This type of testing is supervised by an allergist and usually performed 
with potential food or medication allergies. 
o Blood Tests – A blood test is ordered when skin tests are unsafe or will not work. 
This can happen if you have a skin condition or if the patient is taking certain 
medications. 
• Immunotherapy – After allergy testing is completed and allergens are identified, 
patients are offered immunotherapy which consists of routine injections or oral doses of 
identified allergens that are gradually increased to help the patient build up immunity to 
the allergens.  
 
Location: 
8200 Constantin Blvd, 3rd Floor 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phone: (225) 765-5500 
Fax: (225) 374-1675 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
Friday, 8 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
  
Page 176 of 186 
 
 
OLOLCH Ear, Nose & Throat 
 
The pediatric otolaryngology team treats children from birth through adolescence with head 
and neck disorders ranging from conditions such as ear infections to rare and complex disorders 
including airway anomalies and tumors. The providers support primary care physicians and 
specialists to ensure patients receive the most comprehensive care available. The pediatric 
otolaryngology team specializes in a variety of services including: 
 
General Otolaryngology 
• Otitis media 
• Sinusitis 
• Sleep disordered breathing 
• Tonsil and adenoid disorders 
• In-clinic Strep and Flu testing 
 
Complex Head and Neck 
• Congenital cervical masses 
• Lymphatic and vascular malformations 
• Salivary gland disease 
• Surgical disorders of the thyroid and parathyroid glands 
• Tumors of the head and neck 
 
Complex Otology – Clinics held twice per month 
• Brainstem lesions 
• Cochlear implantation 
• Congenital hearing loss 
• Facial paralysis 
• Sensory neural hearing loss 
• Temporal bone tumors 
• Temporal bone trauma 
 
The OLOLCH ENT Clinic also hosts two multidisciplinary teams which include a network of 
experienced and qualified physicians and healthcare professionals at Our Lady of the Lake 
Children’s Hospital. The teams work together to coordinate the care of children with complex 
medical needs to thoroughly evaluate and support patients both physically, emotionally, and 
socially. The multidisciplinary team of specialists devises a comprehensive, individualized plan 
of treatment for each child. These experts will meet on a regular basis to organize the specific 
follow up interventions each child will need. All recommendations made by the team are 
discussed with the parents as well as the child’s pediatrician and other specialists involved in 
the child’s care.  
 
  
Page 177 of 186 
 
Aerodigestive Multidisciplinary Team – Clinics held three times per month 
• Airway stenosis 
• Aspiration 
• Laryngomalacia and tracheomalacia 
• Stridor 
• Swallowing dysfunction 
• Vocal cord dysfunction 
 
Cleft and Craniofacial Multidisciplinary Team – Clinics held twice per month 
• Cleft Lip and Palate 
• Craniosynostosis 
• Positional Plagiocephaly 
• Apert Syndrome 
• Crouzon Syndrome 
• Facial Paralysis/Moebius Syndrome 
• Hemifacial Microsomia / Goldenhar Syndrome 
• Microtia 
• Pierre-Robin Syndrome 
• Pfeiffer Syndrome 
• Saethre-Chotzen Syndrome 
• Treacher-Collins Syndrome 
 
Location: 
8200 Constantin Blvd, 3rd Floor 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phone: (225) 765-5500 
Fax: (225) 374-1675 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
Friday, 8 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
OLOLCH Endocrinology 
 
Pediatric Endocrinologists with Our Lady of the Lake's statewide Children's Health Network are 
specially trained, and board certified to understand, identify, and treat complications that may 
arise from hormone irregularity, like juvenile diabetes or thyroid disorders. Diabetes Educators 
and Licensed Dieticians are available on site to provide comprehensive education and support 
to patients and their caregivers. Diagnoses and treatment include:  
 
• Diabetes Mellitus 
o Type I, Type II, monogenic diabetes, CFRD and others 
o Insulin pump therapy and continuous glucose monitors 
• Diabetes Insipidus 
• Hypoglycemia  
Page 178 of 186 
 
• Thyroid Disorders 
• Adrenal Disorders 
o Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia 
o Addison’s Disease 
o Cushing’s Syndrome 
• Pubertal Disorders 
• Disorders of Sex Development 
• Calcium metabolic disorders 
o Parathyroid disorders 
o Rickets and other bone fragility disorders 
• Growth Disorders 
• Pituitary Disorders 
• Turner and Klinefelter syndrome 
• Growth Hormone Testing 
• Gonadal Response Testing 
• Thyroid Function Testing 
• Adrenal Gland Testing 
• Glucose and Lipid Metabolism Testing 
• In-clinic Hemoglobin A1C, and glucose testing 
 
Location: 
8200 Constantin Blvd, 4th Floor 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phone: (225) 765-5500 
Fax: (225) 374-1678 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
Friday, 8 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
OLOLCH Gastroenterology 
 
Our Lake of the Lake's statewide Children's Health Network includes pediatric 
gastroenterologists, doctors with extensive education and special training to diagnose, treat 
and manage gastrointestinal disorders in children from birth to age 19. The pediatric 
gastroenterologist work with families to better understand the symptoms and develop a diet or 
treatment plan crafted for your child's specific needs. Licensed Dieticians are available on site 
to provide comprehensive education and support to patients and their caregivers. Diagnoses 
and treatment include: 
 
• Abdominal pain 
• Anorectal manometry 
• Constipation 
• Crohn's Disease 
• Diarrhea  
Page 179 of 186 
 
• Encopresis 
• Eosinophilic esophagitis 
• Esophageal manometry 
• Food allergies 
• Gastroesophageal reflux disease 
• Liver disease 
• Malnutrition and Obesity 
• Pancreatic disease 
• Poor weight gain 
• Ulcerative Colitis 
• Vomiting 
 
Procedures Performed at OLOL Children’s Hospital: 
• Upper endoscopy 
• Lower endoscopy 
• Dilation 
• Hydrogen methane breath test 
• Liver biopsy 
• Argon plasma coagulation 
• Hemostasis 
• Polypectomy PH/Impedance studies 
 
OLOLCH Weight and Nutrition Center Multidisciplinary Clinic is held once a week in the 
OLOLCH Gastroenterology Clinic. At our center, patients meet with a pediatrician certified in 
pediatric obesity medicine, a dietitian and other specialists as needed. Patients receive 
specialized care and support for childhood obesity. In clinic testing includes Hemoglobin A1C, 
Lipids, and genetic testing for hereditary obesity.  
 
Location: 
8200 Constantin Blvd, 4th Floor 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phone: (225) 765-5500 
Fax: (225) 374-1678 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
Friday, 8 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
OLOLCH Infectious Disease 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Health Infectious Disease specialists manage infections of all 
kinds, including common infections affecting the skin, ears, respiratory tract, intestines, bones, 
and joints, as well as more uncommon infections involving the central nervous system (brain 
and spine) and sepsis. Our infectious disease specialists also manage infections in the 
newborns, like hepatitis and other autoimmune disorders. Diagnoses and treatment include:  
Page 180 of 186 
 
 
• Congenital Infections 
• Infections in Immunocompromised Hosts 
• Invasive Fungal Diseases 
• Meningitis 
• Osteomyelitis and Septic Arthritis 
• Periodic Fever Evaluations 
• Recurrent Skin and Soft Tissue Infections 
• Sepsis 
• Tuberculosis  
• HIV/AIDS  
  
The OLOLCH Early Intervention Clinic has dedicated clinic time twice a week for the care and 
treatment of pediatric patients with HIV/AIDS. In this clinic there is a focus on social needs and 
ensuring access to needed care and services. This multidisciplinary team includes the Pediatric 
Infectious Disease Specialists, Licensed Clinical Psychologist, Licensed Social Worker, Clinical 
Pharmacy, and Registered Nurse.  
 
The OLOLCH S.A.F.E. Clinic is our Suspected Abuse Follow-up and Education Clinic which focuses 
on care to pediatric patients and their families after suspected physical or sexual abuse. Our 
highly trained, board certified, Emergency Medicine Physician sees patients twice a month in 
this clinic. The clinic team also consists of a Licensed Social Worker and Child Life Specialist. Our 
clinicians closely collaborate with the Baton Rouge Children’s Advocacy Center, Coroner’s 
office, law enforcement, Department of Children and Family Services, Louisiana Crime Victims 
Reparations Board, and OLOL Children’s Hospital Emergency Department to ensure each child 
has the follow-up care and resources needed. Services include forensic medical exams, social 
needs assessments, in house diagnostic testing and medication for sexually transmitted 
infections, and education on follow-up services including counseling services and community 
resources.  
 
Location: 
8200 Constantin Blvd, 4th Floor 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phone: (225) 765-5500 
Fax: (225) 374-1678 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
Friday, 8 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
OLOLCH Nephrology 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Health Nephrology provides comprehensive diagnosis and 
treatment of diseases of the kidney. As the region’s only pediatric nephrologists, our board- 
Page 181 of 186 
 
certified physicians understand the importance of individualized treatment for each child. 
Conditions treated by these specialists include: 
 
• Acute and Chronic Kidney Failure 
• Congenital Anomaly of Kidney & Urinary Tract (CAKUT) 
• Cystic Kidney Disease 
• Enuresis 
• Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances 
• Glomerulonephritis 
• Hematuria 
• Henoch Schonlein Purpura (HSP) 
• Hydronephrosis 
• Hypertension 
• Kidney Stones 
• Lupus Nephritis 
• Nephrotic Syndrome 
• Prenatal Counseling for Kidney Urinary Tract Abnormalities 
• Proteinuria 
• Recurrent Urinary Tract Infections 
• Reflux Nephropathy 
• Rickets 
• Spina Bifida with Neurogenic Bladder 
• Voiding Dysfunction 
• In-clinic urinalysis testing 
 
Location: 
8200 Constantin Blvd, 4th Floor 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phone: (225) 765-5500 
Fax: (225) 374-1675 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
Friday, 8 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
OLOLCH Pediatric Neurology 
 
OLOLCH Pediatric neurologists deal exclusively with the nervous system of newborns, infants, 
children, and adolescents. They diagnose, treat, and consult with caregivers for neurological 
disorders, including developmental delays and disabilities such as: 
 
• Autism 
• Headaches 
• Epilepsy and seizures 
• Brain tumors  
Page 182 of 186 
 
• Cerebral palsy 
• Neuromuscular and neurodegenerative conditions 
• Movement disorders 
• Disorders, trauma, or malformations of the brain and/or spinal cord 
• Electroencephalogram or EEG are performed on campus at OLOL Children’s Hospital. 
 
Location: 
8200 Constantin Blvd, Suite 210 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phone: (225) 765-5500 
Fax: (225) 374-1670 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
Friday, 8 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
OLOLCH Neurosurgery 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Health Neurosurgery boasts some of the top neurosurgical 
specialists in Louisiana providing trusted, safe, and state-of-the-art care. These physicians care 
for children with various neurologic disorders and include scheduled procedures as well as 
trauma cases referred from the emergency department. Conditions treated by these specialists 
include: 
 
• Hydrocephalus 
• Brain Tumors 
• Chiari Malformation 
• Epilepsy Surgery 
• Spine Trauma 
• Traumatic Brain Injury 
• Congenital Vascular Malformation 
• Craniosynostosis 
 
OLOLCH Spina Bifida Multidisciplinary Clinic is held once a month. This team includes 
specialists from Pediatric Neurosurgery, Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery, Urology, Pediatric 
Development, Social Work, Orthotics, Physical Therapy, and Occupational Therapy. These 
caregivers provide a team approach to comprehensive care for the pediatric patient with spina 
bifida.  
 
Location: 
8200 Constantin Blvd, 3rd Floor 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phone: (225) 765-5500 
Fax: (225) 374-1670 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
Friday, 8 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. 
  
Page 183 of 186 
 
OLOL Genetics 
 
OLOL Genetics Specialists Genetic disorders can be difficult to diagnose and manage.  OLOL 
genetic services providers  
 
OLOL Genetic Services provides genetic evaluation, testing and counseling for patients and 
families with a wide variety of concerns.  They work to identify genetic disorders in children as 
early as possible to make sure parents have the information and support they need. Our 
genetic specialists have extensive clinical experience with how diseases, birth defects and other 
health problems can be inherited through genes.These genetic services are available for adults 
in the same office, providing exceptionally convenient care for the entire family. Common 
reasons for evaluation by genetic services for children or adults include personal or family 
history of the following: 
 
• Hereditary conditions, such as cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy 
• Metabolic disorders, such as phenylketonuria 
• Hemoglobin disorders, such as sickle cell disease and thalassemia 
• Tissue disorders, such as Marfan syndrome and neurofibromatosis 
• Birth defects, such as cleft lip/palate and limb deformities 
• Disorders of developmental delay or autism 
• Chromosome abnormalities, such as Down syndrome 
• Multiple miscarriages 
• Early-onset of specific cancers, including breast, ovarian and colon cancers 
• Adult-onset genetic conditions, such as Huntington disease 
 
 
Location: 
8200 Constantin Blvd,  3rd floor 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phone: (225) 765-5500 
Fax: (225) 374-1670 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
Friday, 8 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. 
 
 
OLOLCH Orthopedics and Sports Medicine 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Health Orthopedics and Sports Medicine provides excellent, 
comprehensive, and compassionate care to patients with musculoskeletal conditions. This team 
includes some of the most highly regarded orthopedic surgeons in Louisiana, and they 
collaborate with other specialists as needed to create a tailored care plan for their patients. 
Whether the patient needs fracture care or a consult on other orthopedic conditions, such as 
Spina Bifida or Cerebral Palsy, our team of orthopedic specialists, nurses, physical and 
occupational therapists, and social workers are ready to help.  
  
Page 184 of 186 
 
Conditions Treated 
• Bone, Joint, and Muscle Infections 
• Cerebral Palsy 
• Growth Plate Fractures 
• High School Sports Injuries 
• Muscular Dystrophy 
• Neurofibromatosis 
• Nonossifying Fibroma 
• Osteochondritis Dissecans 
• Osteochondroma 
• Osteogenesis Imperfecta 
• Overuse Injuries in Children 
 
Shoulder and Elbow 
• Elbow Fractures in Children 
• Erb's Palsy (Brachial Plexus Birth Palsy) 
 
Hip and Thigh 
• Developmental Dislocation 
• (Dysplasia) of the Hip (DDH) 
• Limb Length Discrepancy 
• Pediatric Thighbone (Femur) Fracture 
• Perthes Disease 
• Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis 
• Snapping Hip 
• Sports hernia (Athletic Pubalgia) 
 
Knee and Lower Leg 
• Adolescent Anterior Knee Pain 
• Bowed Legs 
• Discoid Meniscus 
• Limb Length Discrepancy 
• Osgood-Schlatter Disease (Knee Pain) 
• The Limping Child 
 
Foot and Ankle 
• Ankle Fractures in Children 
• Clubfoot 
• Flexible Flatfoot in Children 
• Intoeing 
• Lawn Mower Injuries in Children 
• Vertical Talus 
  
Page 185 of 186 
 
Neck and Back 
• Back Pain in Children 
• Congenital Muscular Torticollis (Twisted Neck) 
• Congenital Scoliosis 
• Kyphosis (Roundback) of the Spine 
• Scoliosis in Children and Adolescents 
• Spinal Deformity in Children with Myelomeningocele 
• Spondylolysis and Spondylolisthesis 
 
Sports Medicine 
• Back and Hip Pain 
• Concussion 
• Dislocations 
• Muscle Contusions 
• Shin splints 
• Strains & Sprains 
• Suspected ACL Tears 
• Tendinitis  
 
Location: 
8200 Constantin Blvd, Suite 100 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phone: (225) 765-5500 
Fax: (225) 374-1670 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
Friday, 8 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
OLOLCH Pulmonology 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Health pediatric pulmonary specialists diagnose, treat, and 
manage breathing and sleep-related issues including, but not limited to, asthma, cystic fibrosis, 
neuromuscular conditions, and chronic lung disease related to premature birth. As pediatric 
specialists, their training, experience, and expertise focus on the impact these health-related 
issues have on the growing, developing body of their patients. Conditions treated include: 
 
• Apnea of prematurity 
• Asthma 
• Atelectasis 
• Bronchopulmonary dysplasia 
• Congenital Lung Malformations 
• Cough or Wheezing 
• Cystic Fibrosis 
• Dysphagia/Pulmonary Aspiration  
Page 186 of 186 
 
• Exercise-induced dyspnea 
• Hypoxemia 
• Neuromuscular disease 
• Recurrent pneumonia 
• Obstructive Sleep Apnea 
• Shortness of Breath 
• Stridor/Noisy breathing 
• Structural airway abnormalities 
• Thoracic insufficiency 
• Technology dependent/Ventilator Dependent/Tracheostomy Management 
 
Tests performed in the clinic: 
• Bronchoprovocation studies 
• Cardiopulmonary exercise studies 
• Pulmonary Function testing 
• Therapy Vest/Cpap/Bipap fittings 
 
Procedures Performed at OLOL Children’s Hospital: 
• Flexible Bronchoscopy 
• Polysomnography 
• Radiographs 
• Sweat chloride testing 
• Swallow studies 
 
Location: 
8200 Constantin Blvd, 3rd Floor 
Baton Rouge, LA 70809 
Phones (225) 765-5500 
Fax: (225) 374-1675 
Hours:  
Monday - Thursday, 8 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. 
Friday, 8 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. 
 
 
 