 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: 
 
Administration 
 
Title: Posting, Operating Rooms, Children’s 
Hospital 
Policy Reference #: SOA016-CH 
Supersedes #: 1985; 7/23/92 
Date of Origination: 01/20/1988 Review Date: 10/02/2024 
Revision Dates: 3/20/2015; 05/31/2018; 
09/28/2019 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide directions for facilitating effective and efficient scheduling of daily elective and 
urgent/emergency surgical procedures. 
 
POLICY:  All cases will be posted according to the guidelines established by OR Steering 
Committee. 
 
I. Posting   
A. Privileges -The physician must be an active or provisional active member of the 
Medical-Dental staff at Our Lady of the Lake with privileges to perform the 
procedure being scheduled.  The physician must also be in good standing; this 
excludes anyone currently suspended due to delinquent Medical Records. 
B. Restrictions- Restriction may be set by the OR Steering Committee (ORSC) for 
0700-0900 starts or allocation of block time.  ORSC is responsible for monitoring 
monthly delays and block utilization.   
1. When a Surgeon has 3 or more delays attributed to him/her in one month for 
0700 or first case of the day, he/she will be notified by the Chairperson of 
ORSC.  If the Surgeon has 3 or more delays attributed to him/her the following 
month, he/she will be restricted from posting any 0700-0900 case for a period of 
two months. A notification letter will be sent to the Surgeon from the 
Chairperson of ORSC. 
2. If utilization of a block is consistently @ or below 65%, the MD will be notified 
by Service Line Administrator or Chairperson of ORSC.  If utilization does not 
improve, the Surgeon in collaboration with ORSC will modified or cancel the 
block.  
 
II. Anesthesia Services provided for all cases by the Anesthesia Group (AG), according to 
contract. 
 
III. Posting of all cases should be done by the Surgeon or his/her designee. 
A. Information needed to post a surgical procedure: 
1. Requested Date/Time of Surgery 
2. Patient’s Name 
3. Patient’s Date of Birth 
4. Patient’s Social Security Number  2 
5. Patient’s Room Number (if Inpatient) 
6. Surgeon’s Name 
7. Patient Type 
8. Insurance Provider, Prior Authorization information (Not required, if required, 
reference number, date range prior authorization is valid. Prior Authorization 
information is not needed for inpatients.) 
9. ICD10 Code and Description 
10. CPT Code and Description 
11. Patient’s Phone Number 
12. Patient’s Weight (for Pediatric & Bariatric Patients) 
13. Procedure/Laterality 
14. Special Supply/Equipment Requests (Requested Vendor/Vendor Sets) 
15. Type of Anesthesia 
16. Special Concerns: Latex Allergy, Pacemaker, Hx Malignant Hyperthermia, 
Special Medications 
17. Name of Person Scheduling Case 
• If surgeon’s office utilizes EPIC, EPIC case requests are ideal. An OR Scheduling Fax form 
request within 24 hours after posting by phone allows OR Schedulers verification of correct 
ICD10/CPT codes and procedures. 
  
IV. Schedule Guidelines  
A. Open rooms - Cases are posted on first come, first service and based availability of 
OR room, staff, specialty instrument and equipment. 
B. Service and Physician Blocks:  See OR Block Guidelines and Block Grid. 
C. Elective cases are scheduled Monday – Friday from 0700 – 1500, except as agreed 
in advance or with established blocks. 
1. If first case is NOT posted for 7:00AM, it will not be posted until 8:30AM. 
2. Any case that will require any special needs supplies, or staff must be approved 
by OR Leadership before posting the case to ensure all case needs can be met. 
D. From 11p-7a only emergent cases may be scheduled. 
1. Examples of short duration inpatient cases are I&D, insertion of Hickman or 
Mediport, Lap Chole or Lap App. 
2. Example of elective case that will not be scheduled are Whipple, APR, Major 
GI, Pelvic or Acetablum FX, Liver Ablation 
E. After 1500 M-F and weekends, all cases will be booked as “To Follow” (TF).  At 
the time the case is posted an estimated, not a guaranteed, start time will be given.  
Once a specific start time is determined, the MD will be contacted.  If he/she can is 
not available to start, his/her case will be moved to later or the end of the schedule 
and the next MD will be contacted to move up. 
F. Add-on cases the daily elective schedule: 
1. Surgeon will notify OR Front Desk Staff of the need and the urgency of the 
request. 
2. The Manager/Supervisor/Charge Nurse will coordinate with Anesthesia to add 
the case to the schedule as soon as possible.  Surgeon will be notified of the 
times available. 
G. Rescheduling of Cases  3 
1. Surgeons who are late 30 minutes or more may have their cases rescheduled if a 
room assignment cannot be arranged to assure that other Surgeons will not be 
delayed.  Any delayed case will be rescheduled at the next available slot or at the 
end of the day’s schedule. 
2. Surgeons who have an unexpected delay during a case shall not start a TF case if 
the TF procedure is expected to delay the following Surgeon more than 30 
minutes.   The O.R. staff will assist the Surgeon in rescheduling the case. 
H. If a surgeon has not started a series of elective cases in time to be completed within 
time allotted, attempts will be made to rearrange time and room assignments for the 
remaining cases to avoid causing delays for other Surgeons.  The Charge Nurse will 
work with the Surgeon to resolve the situation. 
I. To improve utilization of all rooms (block and non-block), if a gap of greater than a 
hour is open, but not adequate time to accommodate a new request, the following 
process will be utilized to accommodate a new request: 
1. The MD with the posted case will be contacted and offered the opportunity to go 
earlier or to follow the new case. 
2. If the MD can not move up, he will be scheduled to follow the new case.  The 
add on case can not cause the originally schedule case to be delayed greater than 
2 hours from the original time. 
J. Communication: 
1. OR staff will notify the Surgeon as soon as OR is aware that his/her case will be 
delayed.  The staff will provide the Surgeon a status report of action taken to 
resolve the situation, estimated start time and alternatives. 
2. Surgeons will notify the O.R. as soon as possible of impending late arrival. 
 
V. Urgent/Emergent Cases 
A. See policy Operating Room Procedures – Emergent Cases (SOA031) 
 
VI. Contracts  
A. American Kidney Stone Management (AKSM) lithotripsy service  
AKSM is responsible for scheduling all cases and providing staff and equipment for 
the cases. AKSM will provide OLOL OR Scheduling Office a list of the “next day” 
schedule.  The list will provide all required patient demographic, MD, patient 
admission status.  Cases must be completed within the hours of operations of St. 
Mary Admission Unit. 
B. Cardiovascular and Thoracic Associates (CVT) 
 Designated Heart and Vascular Rooms are available according to OLOL/SMS 
contract. 
1. Posting in the CVT Rooms is done according to Block Posting Guidelines. 
2. It will be the responsibility of the CVT Surgeon to assure that a Heart room and 
staff is available before agreeing to PTCA stand-by, and to confirm Anesthesia 
available.  For PTCAs posted in advance, it is the responsibility of the CVT 
Surgeon or his office staff to arrange time with the Cardiovascular Lab, 
Anesthesia, and Cardiologists.  Any change in the schedule of the Heart and 
PTCA cases is also the CVT Surgeon’s responsibility. 
3. RN Circulators and Surgical Technicians are employees of CVT and provide staff 
coverage for all scheduled, emergency and "on-call" cases as defined in the 
contract.  4 
4. Perfusionists, Case Techs and Hemodynamic Monitoring Technicians are OLOL 
employee and are available daily for all scheduled, emergency and "on-call" cases 
during evenings, nights, weekends, and holidays. 
C. Vascular Specialty Center (VSC)    
1. Posting in the VSC Rooms is done according to Block Posting Guidelines 
2. Surgical Technicians are employees of VSC and provide staff coverage for all 
scheduled, emergency and “on-call” cases as defined in the contract. 
 
 