 1 
Our Lady of the Lake Ascension 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
Cardiovascular Lab 
 
  
EFFECTIVE 
DATE:  
11/09/17 
 
 
NUMBER:  CVLPC 1-120 
 
  
SUBJECT:  Flow of Care for the CVL patient:  
post-procedural care 
 
 
 
PAGE 1 OF 2 
  
APPROVED BY:  Yvonne Pellerin, VP of Patient Care Services, CNO 
 
 
I.  Purpose:  To provide guidelines for post-procedural care of a patient in the 
cardiovascular lab 
 
II.  Responsibility:  Cardiovascular lab staff 
 
III. Procedure: 
 
 
1. Upon arrival to the post procedural area the patient will be assessed and a 
modified Aldrete score will be documented.  The patient will be assessed 
every 15 minutes and a score will be documented until the score reaches 8 or 
greater.   
2. A final modified Aldrete score will be documented prior to discharge from the 
unit, which requires a score of 8 or greater. 
3. Report will be given by a member of the procedural staff.   
4. The patient will be attached to the cardiac monitor to include EKG, blood 
pressure and pulse oximeter along with oxygen therapy if ordered. 
5. The site will be assessed by the receiving nurse and a member of the 
procedural staff to establish a baseline along with pulses if applicable. 
6. The patient will be assessed for pain and general comfort. 
7. Educate the patient/family regarding restrictions on movement, bedrest, 
degrees of head of bed if appropriate and flow of care up to discharge 
including timeframe.  Inform the patient/family that the staff will check the 
site frequently for signs and symptoms of complications.  Inform the 
patient/family that the physician will be in shortly to speak with them. 
8. Before leaving the room allow the patient/family time to ask questions and 
ensure that the bed is low and locked, and the call light is within reach of the 
patient. 
9. The patient will be assessed no less than every fifteen minutes for the first 
hour, every 30 minutes for the second hour and hourly until discharge. 
10. These assessments will be charted, with the timeframe as above and will 
include vital signs, site assessment and pulses if appropriate. 
11. Check the chart for physician’s orders and execute accordingly. 
12. Upon discharge the patient will be provided with instructions about how to 
care for themselves at home specific to their procedure.  Copies of the  2 
instructions will be a part of the chart as well.  A medication list will 
accompany the discharge instructions reflecting any changes the physician 
made with regards to their medications and/or prescriptions.  Any follow up 
appointments will be noted.  New prescriptions will be called in to the 
patient’s pharmacy of choice and follow-up appointments will be made for the 
patient before discharge, unless otherwise specified by the physician. 
13. The discharge instructions will be reviewed with the patient and family with 
time allowed for questions. 
14. Sitting and standing blood pressures will be performed and recorded.  After it 
is determined that the patient is free of symptoms such as dizziness or light-
headedness the IV site will be discontinued. 
15. The patient will get dressed.  Assistance may be offered by the staff. 
16. The patient will be discharged via wheelchair to the vehicle. 
 
 
Review: 8/1/18-no change; 4/2019 Added #1 & #2, Name Change only; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 