OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
Surgical Services 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
06/20/2016 
 
 
 
SUBJECT:   
Standard Operating Process 
Post Anesthesia Care of ICU Patient in PACU 
 
 
PAGE 1 OF 1 
 
 
        
 
I. PURPOSE: 
To outline unit transfers for patients postoperatively to the adult Intensive Care Unit (ICU) in 
accordance with postoperative anesthesia unit standards. 
II. APPLIES TO: 
Post anesthesia care nurses, ICU nurses, OR nurses 
 
III. PROCEDURE: 
A. Patients requiring critical care monitoring postoperatively should be placed in the 
ICU following their surgery or procedure. The patient should be recovered in the post 
anesthesia care unit (PACU) unless there are special circumstances that would make 
recovery in the ICU more appropriate. 
1. Room availability should be verified with the house supervisor. Virtual 
transfer of the patient should be done through the Bed Board communication 
system. The house supervisor and Intensivist will assess acuity issues and 
complexity of current status in the ICU to determine if the patient can be 
accepted directly. When appropriate the physical bed should be obtained. 
2. The Circulating Nurse should check with the surgeon and/or the 
anesthesiologist to determine the patient’s need for any equipment or 
medication: 
a. Oxygen tank and an ambu bag 
b. Ventilator/BIPAP setup 
c. Pressure monitoring equipment: Arterial and CVP lines 
d. Current medications infusing and need for IV pump 
e. Other necessary equipment such as NG tube, chest tube drainage 
system, suction canister, etc. 
3. Once stabilized for transfer, the patient should be connected to a 
transportation monitor with EKG, blood pressure, and pulse oximetry 
capability. The circulating nurse and anesthesia care provider should 
accompany the patient to PACU and remain with them until the patient is 
stabilized and a complete report and handoff is complete. 
4. The PACU nurse should follow all orders and adhere to all policies (see Initial 
and Ongoing Assessment STEL).  
5. All ICU patients will be considered 1:1 during the recovery period.  
a. EXCEPTIONS: Patients in the ICU for inpatient floor overflow. 6. The surgeon should place “admission orders” for newly admitted patients 
going to ICU. If the patient is from the floor, the surgeon or the 
anesthesiologist should place a “transfer to ICU” CPOE order.  
7. After the patient meets discharge criteria, the PACU nurse should notify the 
unit personnel of imminent arrival. Report should be given to the ICU nurse 
accepting the patient and any special equipment needed should be 
communicated. A transport monitor should be reconnected to the patient for 
transfer. 
B. If the patient becomes unstable, the surgeon and/or anesthesiologist will determine if 
the patient should be directly transferred to the ICU from the operating room. 
1.After the decision has been made for a direct transfer, the surgeon and/or the 
anesthesiologist should call the Intensivist on site or call the bunker to speak 
to the physician on call prior to transfer. 
2.A nurse qualified in PACU care will assume responsibility for recovering the 
patient according to PACU standards of care.  
3.ICU patients recovered in their room by designated PACU nurse should be 
jointly managed with the assigned ICU nurse until the anesthesiologist signs 
off on the patient and the Intensivist is available to place orders. 
C. ICU patients who have gone to the operating room for minor procedures and given 
anesthetic agents for light sedation may return directly to the ICU with approval from 
the anesthesiologist and Intensivist. No “recovery time” is needed for these patients 
so the ICU nurse should resume care.  
1. Example: Patients undergoing tracheotomy procedures for long term 
ventilator care and will remain on the ventilator post procedure. 
 
 
IV. REVIEW: Originated 6/20/2016 L. Schexnaydre, RN. K. Templet, RN., 7/2017, 7/2018, 
7/2019, 7/2020, 7/2021 1/2022 (SOP) 
 
 
V. REVISIONS: added/revised 9/2016; reformatted and combined another policy 7/2018  