 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
Surgical Services 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
12/2016 
 
 
 
SUBJECT:  
Standard Operating Process 
 Phase II Discharge Criteria Policy 
 
 
PAGE 1 OF 1 
 
 
        
 
 
I. PURPOSE: To provide guidelines to determine patient readiness for discharge 
from Phase II recovery from anesthetic agents. 
  
II. APPLIES TO: Surgical Services 
   
III. POLICY: Ongoing assessment to address the patient’s physical, emotional, 
social, educational, and spiritual needs following Phase I level of care. This phase 
focuses on preparing the patient and their family for care outside of the facility. 
 
IV. PROCEDURE:  
A continuation of a general assessment, cardiovascular stability, comfort 
management, hydration, ambulation, urinary status, and home care needs is 
evaluated in Phase II recovery. No specific time or physical placement is required. 
1. The patient must be awake, alert, and oriented or return to documented preoperative 
baseline. 
2. Vital signs should be stable or return to baseline. Patient should not show any signs 
or symptoms of distress and should not require any assistance to maintain effective 
airway. Aldrete Score should be documented. 
3. The surgical site should be stable as appropriate to procedure performed with a 
clean, dry and intact dressing as applicable. 
4. The patient should be able to ambulate with minimal assistance according to the 
procedure performed and previous ability. Ensure all necessary equipment is 
available to the patient as appropriate. 
5. Patient should not be actively vomiting upon discharge. Nausea should be 
controlled and/or mild. The patient should be able to tolerate oral fluids (unless 
contraindicated). The IV should be discontinued prior to discharge. 
6. Pain control should be at an acceptable level for the patient and procedure 
performed. 
7. The MAR should be reviewed by the physician and the nurse prior to discharge to 
ensure prescription medication and home medications are not contraindicated. The 
list of medications should be printed on the discharge summary and given to the 
patient. The prescription can then be given to the patient. 
8. A depart discharge summary should be completed and reviewed and given to the 
patient according to the orders placed by the physician.  
a. It should include the physician’s office contact number and the scheduled 
return visit date (determined by physician).  2 
b. Special wound care instructions such as changing the dressing, emptying 
surgical drains, elevating and icing an extremity, observing extremity 
circulation, etc. 
c. Activity level should be discussed with ambulation restrictions. 
d. A list of possible complications and interventions should be included. Usual 
and unexpected signs and symptoms should be provided. 
9. Once all of the above has been addressed, the patient may be discharged into the 
care of a responsible adult and escorted out of the facility by medical staff 
personnel. 
 
V. CONTRAINDICATIONS/PRECAUTIONS 
1. If the patient does not meet discharge criteria, the anesthesiologist and surgeon 
should be notified. The patient should then be considered a Phase I recovery 
status (see Discharge Criteria from PACU policy). 
 
VII. REVIEW/REVISIONS: 
Originated: 12/5/2016 by D. LaCombe,RN 1/2022 (SOP) 
 
I. REVIEWED:  7/1/2017, 7/2018, 7/2019, 7/2020, 7/2021, 5/2024  
 
 
 