 1 
Our Lady of the Lake Ascension 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
 
Cardiovascular Laboratory   
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
 
July 1, 2016 
 
NUMBER:  CVL PC 1-400 
 
SUBJECT:  Arterial and/or Venous Sheath Removal 
 
 
PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
APPROVED BY:  Yvonne 
Pellerin, RN, MSN, CNO 
 
        
I. PURPOSE: To establish guidelines for the removal of arterial and/or venous sheaths. 
  
  
II. Responsibility:  Procedural staff as well as pre/post staff 
  
  
III. POLICY:  
1. All staff responsible for pulling sheaths will review the Lippincott’s Procedure 
Guide, “Arterial & Venous Sheath Removal”. 
2. In order to demonstrate competency, the staff person will be observed for the first 
ten sheath removals. 
3. Verify the physician’s order for sheath removal. 
4. Gather personal protective equipment to include but not limited to: gloves (non-
sterile and sterile), mask, eyewear or face shield, sterile gauze and occlusive 
dressing. 
5. Provide an explanation to the patient and family to include how long pressure 
will be held and any activity restrictions post sheath pull.  Allow time for the 
patient and family to ask questions. 
6. Adjust the cardiac monitor so that vital signs are taken every five minutes during 
the sheath pull.  Place the call light within reach of the staff person pulling the 
sheath.  Notify another staff person that you are pulling a sheath in the event that 
help is needed. 
7. Perform hand hygiene and apply non-sterile gloves and mask along with eyewear. 
8. Provide privacy to the patient by exposing just the groin area, keeping the rest of 
the patient covered. 
9. Palpate the pulses distal to the sheath to establish a baseline. 
10. Pull back 10cc of blood from the sheath and discard.  Remove the occlusive 
dressing that is covering the sheath. 
11. Remove non sterile gloves and perform hand hygiene. 
12. Open sterile gauze and apply sterile gloves.   
13. Locate and palpate the pulse 1-2 cm above the entry site so that you can properly 
apply pressure. 
14. Hold the sheath with one hand and apply pressure with the other one. 
15. Ask the patient to take a deep breath in and slowly exhale.  As the patient exhales 
slowly pull the sheath until it is removed. 
16. Inform the patient that they can breathe normally and that the sheath is out.  2 
17. Monitor vital signs while holding pressure to note any changes. 
18. Hold pressure for 15 minutes, or longer if necessary, for a 5 to 6 French sheath 
and 20 minutes, or longer if necessary, for a 7 French or larger. 
19. If a venous sheath is present, remove it (using the same technique) approximately 
5 minutes after the arterial sheath removal and apply pressure for 10 minutes or 
until hemostasis is achieved. 
20. Assess distal pulses to ensure that they are at baseline.   
21. Dress the site with a sterile gauze and occlusive dressing. 
22. Explain post sheath activity restrictions specific to radial vs. femoral approach. 
1.  Radial Approach: 
a.  The patient will be instructed to keep the affected wrist immobile. 
b. The head of the bed may be elevated. 
c. The patient may be assisted to the bathroom after vital signs are baseline. 
2.  Femoral Approach: 
a.  The patient will be instructed to keep the affected limb immobile. 
b.  The patient will lay flat for the first hour. 
c. At the end of the first hour the head of the bed may be gradually elevated. 
d. The patient will have bedrest for at least 4 hours. 
e. A urinal and/or bedpan will be used if necessary.   
23. Instruct the patient to notify the staff of symptoms of bleeding such a sudden 
warm and wet feeling at the site as well as any aching sensation.  Also ask the 
patient to notify the staff of any numbness or tingling of the affected limb. 
24. Ensure that the call light is with the patient and the bed is returned to its lowest 
position before leaving the room. 
25. Assess the site and document the appearance of the site itself as well as distal 
pulses and note anything of exception.  Document the vital signs every 15 
minutes for 1 hour, every 30 minutes for 1 hour and hourly afterward until 
discharge. 
26. Follow physician’s orders for length of bedrest and discharge time. 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 References:  Lippincott Procedures 
  
 
 
 
http://procedures.lww.com/lnp/view.do?pId=2569554&hits=arterial,sheath,removal,sheaths&a=false&ad=
false 
 
 
Review: 8/1/18-No Change; 4/2019 name change  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   3 
  
 
 
 