 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Surgical Services Section: Operating Room  
Title: Security of Prisoners in the Operative or 
Invasive Procedure Environment 
Policy Reference #: SOP053 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 04/01/2016 Last Date Reviewed: 08/08/2024 
Last Date Revised: 08/05/2020 
 
 
POLICY: 
 
Patients who are prisoners shall remain in restraints at all times in the Operative or Invasive Procedure 
area except when under General Anesthesia. 
 
Definitions: 
Cover Gown: A disposable gown that covers clothing in substitute of surgical attire. This is only a 
substitute in situations where the individual cannot dress in surgical attire (i.e. prisoner guard)  
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Supplies: 
 -Mask, cover gown, bouffant, shoe covers 
-2 sets of plastic restraints. Plastic restraints are preferred so they can be removed in absence of a 
key. Plastic restraints are to be stocked in the Preoperative Areas and in the OR cores. 
-Scissors to remove plastic restraints. 
 
1. Application and maintenance of restraints: 
Preop 
a. While prisoner patients are in the Preoperative Area, the Preoperative Nurse will ensure they are 
shackled to the bed/stretcher with plastic/flexible binders or handcuffs   
1) The prisoner guard will apply any restraints. 
2) One restraint should not be removed before the other is applied.  
3) should sufficiently restricts movement while allowing for nursing care to be administered. 
4) Should not affect procedure. 
b. The Preoperative Nurse should acquire 4 plastic restraints (2 sets of 2).  
1) One set for the prisoner guard to apply 
2) the second set for the Procedural Nurse to take to the operative/invasive area.  
c. The Preoperative Nurse should also give the prisoner guard a mask, cover gown, bouffant, and 
shoe covers for use in the operative/invasive area as needed. 
Intraop 
d. The prisoner guard should have mask, cover gown, bouffant, and shoe covers prior to entering 
the semi restricted and restricted areas 
e. The procedural nurse should take at minimum one set, (2 restraints) with them for 
removal/reapplication purposes during the procedure.  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
f. Plastic restraints shall remain in place for prisoner patients until Anesthesia.  
1) Restraints are removed (cut) by the procedural nurse only after the patient is deemed 
unconscious by the anesthesia provider. Only then should the patient be moved to the 
operative/procedural bed. 
2) An adequate level of Anesthesia should be maintained until the prisoner patient is moved to 
the postoperative bed/stretcher. 
g. If a patient is not receiving sedation they should be secured (minimum of 1 extremity) in a 
manner that does not affect the procedure.  
h. The prisoner guard shall be summoned to the OR immediately prior to moving the patient from 
the procedure bed to the postop bed/stretcher to reshackle the patient with plastic restraints in the 
OR room prior to transport to the PACU. 
 
2. Prisoner Guards: 
a. Prisoner guards will be in visual contact of the procedure/OR room at all times, except during 
periods when General Anesthesia is achieved 
b. If the prisoner guard’s “standard operating procedure” is to remain in direct visual contact with 
the prisoner until anesthesia is achieved, they shall be allowed to accompany the patient into the 
OR. 
c. Prisoner guards will be instructed by OR staff to put on surgical attire (i.e., mask, cover gown, 
bouffant, and shoe covers) over their uniform prior to entering the semi restricted and restricted 
areas. 
d. The guard should be present in a designated location adjacent to the operating room suite. 
e. Changing of guards during surgery is permitted only after handoff is communicated to the OR 
front desk. The OR front desk personnel will communicate the change to the OR procedure 
nurse. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
1. University of Kentucky Healthcare Policy on Security of Prisoners, 2014 
2. Anne Arundel County Police Department Written Directive, 2014; “Security of Prisoners/Victims 
for EMS and Hospital Settings” 
3. Maryland’s Model Guidelines for the Security of Prisoners for EMS and Hospital Settings, 2008 
4. “Providing Perioperative Care to Patients who are Incarcerated”, Thurmond, V. A., AORN Journal, 
March 2002 
 
 
 
 