Page 1 of 9 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Surgical Services Section: Operating Room 
Title: Electrosurgical Safety 
Policy 
Reference #: SOP006 
Supersedes #: NSA-010, SOSO25 
Date of Origination: 05/10/1988 Last Review 
Date: 08/24/2021 
Last Revision Date: 08/24/2020 
 
PURPOSE:  
To give direction for protecting the patient when using Electrocautery.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
A. Implantable electronic devices- include pacemakers, defibrillators, spinal cord stimulators, deep 
brain stimulators, sacral nerve stimulators, osteogenic stimulators, infusion pumps, and cochlear 
implants. 
 
POLICY:  
Staff and Surgeons in all areas utilizing Electrosurgery devices shall use safe & current practices. 
Personnel working with electrosurgical equipment should have documented evidence of initial training 
and competency assessment prior to use. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. General Safety  
Preprocedure 
1. Check the Electrosurgical unit (ESU). Examine cords and plugs for cracks or deterioration.  
2. Check the unit’s safety features prior to use (i.e., lights, audible activation sound level, etc.). 
3. The ESU and all accessories should be used according to manufacturers’ written instructions.  
4. If any malfunctions are detected the unit should be removed from service and sent to the 
Biomedical Department for assessment. 
5.  Not items should be stored on a ESU. If liquids are spilled on a unit or if a problem is 
suspected, the unit should be removed from service, and checked by Biomedical Department 
before returning to service.  
6. If the unit malfunctions during system check, the RN must send the ESU, dispersive 
electrode, cord, pad, and any packaging to Biomed with proper documentation including a 
Chain of Custody form. The Charge Nurse should notify Risk Management that the unit 
malfunctioned and was sent to Biomed. 
7. Patient’s metal jewelry should be removed.  
8. The patient should not be in contact with any metal devices that could offer an alternate 
return path for the electrical current. (OR bed, positioning devices etc.) 
9. For laparoscopic cases examine all electrodes for impaired insulation before use.  
10. On laparoscopic procedures ensure that the insufflation gas is non flammable ie, CO2. 
11. Water or saline should be on the sterile field to extinguish flames should they occur. 
12.  
 Page 2 of 9 
Intraprocedure 
1) Electrosurgical units should not be used in the presence flammable agents including the 
vapors which are released as they evaporate  (i.e., alcohol based prep agents, tinctures, 
defatting agents, collodian, phenol, aerosol adhesives, uncured methyl methacrylate, etc. ). 
2) Prepped areas should be dry before draping. Accordingly, prep fluids should not be allowed 
to pool or accumulate on linens. Change linens as required. 
3) Supplemental oxygen should be vented on head and neck procedures. Use lowest possible 
FiO2. 
4) ESU unit alarms and activation sounds should be functional and audible at all times during 
procedures and not tuned off.  
5) Power settings are set and adjusted at physician request. Lowest possible power setting 
should be the objective to prevent injury. 
6) If higher power is repeatedly called for during surgery, the entire ESU and accessories circuit 
should be checked beginning with the dispersive grounding pad, if problem persists; try a 
different pad, electrode, and ESU unit.  
7) The active electrode should be placed in a clean dry well-insulated safety holster when it is 
not in use to avoid accidental activation.  
8) Electrodes that do not fit in the holster should be placed in a designated location with tips 
away from flammable material. 
9) Active electrode cords should not be coiled around metal objects such as towel clamps. 
Cords should be secured to the drapes in a manner that will avoid the potential for alternative 
entry sites related to stray current. 
10) The ESU electrode should not be activated in the presence of intestinal gas. These gases are 
flammable and fires and patient injuries have occurred. 
11) The electrode should not be activated until it is in contact with the target tissue.  
12) If two active electrodes are required, there should be two separate ESU units and two 
separate grounding pads used.  
13) If two active electrodes are utilized, a hand activated and a foot pedal activated device, then 
each electrode should be isolated from patient contact when the other is being used.  
14) The electrode tip should be cleaned periodically to prevent tissue buildup. If a sponge is used 
to remove debris it should be moist to avoid accidental ignition. Abrasive electrode cleaning 
pads should only be used for non coated electrodes. 
15) Inhalation of smoke generated by the ESU should be minimized by the use of suction and 
other workplace control measures. 
 
 
Documentation 
1) The Registered Nurse should assess and document the patient’s skin condition before and 
after electrosurgical generator use in the EMR.  
2) The unique identifier number for he device along with settings and pad placement shall be 
recorded in the EMR.  
 
B. Dispersive Electrode (Ground) Pad Placement  
1. Only pads that have been freshly opened, with the date inspected, should be used. Check 
integrity of adhesive, cables and conductive surface.  
2. Refer to the manufacturer’s recommended pad placement sites as shown on the package. Page 3 of 9 
3. Inspect the placement site; it should be free of bony protrusions, excessive hair, scars, 
pressure points, areas distal to tourniquets, or areas to be x-rayed during surgery.  
4. Pads should maintain uniform body contact. No tenting, gaping, or liquids should 
interfere with uniform adhesion. 
5. The dispersive electrode should not be placed over a tattoo because of the potential for 
heating due to metallic dyes in the ink. 
6. The pad should be placed to ensure that no metal prosthesis or implant lies between the 
operative site and the dispersive electrode pad and away from implanted prosthesis.  
7. Pad should be placed before draping.  
8. Pad should be placed as close to operative site as possible.  
9. Pad placement site should be shaved if patient is excessively hairy.  
10. Pad should be placed on clean dry skin, over a large, well-perfused muscle mass. Obese 
patients require special care for placement or the grounding pad. Pad should be placed on 
muscular area that has least amount of fat density (i.e., calf instead of thigh).  
11. Pad should be placed around the circumference of an extremity, not lengthwise on the 
extremity.  
12. Pads must never be cut to fit a smaller patient.  
13. If the patient is moved or repositioned during surgery, the pad’s placement should be 
rechecked.  
 
C. Implantable electronic devices (IEDs) and the use of radio frequency equipment, both electrosurgery 
and radio-frequency oblation units.  
1. Patients should be routinely assessed for the presence of an implanted electronic device. 
2. If the patient has an IED ask the patient for the product identification card for 
manufacture contact information. The appropriate health care industry representative may 
be contacted for specific information regarding this device.  
3. Notify the surgeon and anesthesiologist that the patient has an IED. The anesthesiologist 
will direct the perioperative team in specific interventions relative to the type of IED 
involved. 
4. The company representative’s presence may be required before, during, and after the 
surgery as requested by the physician.  
 
D. General Safety for Patients with IED’s  
1. When electrocautery is necessary, bipolar electrosurgery should be used or a harmonic 
scalpel.  
2. If an ESU is required, use short intermittent cautery bursts on the lowest energy level.  
3. Place the active electrode and the dispersive electrode as far from the IED generator and 
wires as possible. The active and dispersive electrode should be as close as possible to each 
other to minimize the distance the electricity must travel. 
4. The current path from the active electrode to the dispersive electrode should not pass 
through the area containing the IED or the electrodes.  
5. Continuous ECG monitoring should be utilized during these procedures. 
6. The current pathway should be perpendicular to the IED’s lead system. This may be done 
by manipulating the placement of the patient return electrode.  
7. Avoid placing the dispersive electrode directly over the site of a metal implant.  Page 4 of 9 
8. The instrument and active electrode should be in direct contact before activation. Do not 
arc current between the active electrode and another surgical instrument.  
9. Verification of proper IED device functioning may be required postoperatively at the 
discretion of the anesthesiologist/surgeon. 
 
E. Patient with Cardiac Pacemakers - Electro surgery may interfere with pacemaker sensing which 
could change the rhythm.  
1. Notify the Anesthesiologist and Surgeon of the patient’s pacemaker device.  
2. The Anesthesiologist will assess the patient and give direction to the team for specific 
interventions including the need for device evaluation by the company representative or the 
attendance of the representative. For Pacemaker dependent patients the device may require 
reprogramming to an asynchronous mode if electrosurgery is likely to cause significant 
interference.  
3. The patient should have continuous cardiac monitoring including monitoring of a peripheral 
pulse, i.e., arterial line, pulse oximetry.  
4. Temporary pacing and defibrillator equipment should be immediately available.  
5. Have a magnet or control unit available in the OR for the anesthesia provider to place 
pacemaker in an asynchronous mode if necessary. Caution: in some pacemakers the magnet 
response may have been programmed off.  
6. Evaluate the pacemaker continuously for proper functioning.  
 
F. Patients with an Internal Cardiac Defibrillator (ICD) - Electrocautery devices may cause the ICD to 
erroneously interpret the interference as a rapid heart rate arrhythmia and cause the ICD to deliver 
a shock. If the interference signal is of sufficient magnitude, or if the cautery is used within 6 in. of 
the ICD/lead system it could reset or possibly damage the ICD.  
1. All safety precautions as stated in section E above apply to ICDs.  
2. During the use of electrosurgery the ICD tachy cardiac sensor should be suspended or 
programmed off. This can be done temporarily though the application of a magnet. In rare 
circumstances the magnet function may be programmed off. For any specific questions as to 
the devices’ programming, contact the company rep. or the patient’s Cardiologist.  
3. Recommended magnet placement over the ICD varies slightly according to ICD 
manufacturer. Specific product information and guidelines for use should be available in the 
individual departments.  
4. If ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation develops, remove the magnet and the 
device should detect and treat the arrhythmia.  
5. Magnet application does not affect the pacemaker function of the ICD. The ICD will not pace 
asynchronously when the magnet is in place.  
6. The ICD tachyarrhythmia function should not be programmed off or temporarily suspended 
until the patient is in the OR and properly monitored. 
7.  If external defibrillation is required, position the pads or paddles as far as possible from the 
generator and utilize anterior-posterior pad placement. 
 
G. Postoperative Management  
1. Continuously monitor cardiac rate the rhythm and have pacing and defibrillation equipment 
immediately available in the immediate postoperative period.  Page 5 of 9 
2. The Anesthesiologist/Surgeon should determine if interrogation and verification of function 
of the ICD or Pacemaker device by the company representative is required.  
 
REFERENCES:  
2021 AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practice Energy Generating Devices 
 
Practice Advisory for the Perioperative Management of Patients with Cardiac Rhythm Management 
 Devices: Pacemakers and Implantable Cardioverter– 
 
  
 Page 6 of 9 
GUIDANT 
Deactivating a Device Using a Magnet  
Guidant ICD / CRT-D Systems 
 
If the device is programmed to respond to doughnut magnet application, the process below describes 
how to determine the device's current therapy status by tones and deactivate the ICD or CRT-D 
accordingly. If no tones are heard, the magnet may not be properly positioned over the device, the 
device may be programmed to ignore the magnet, or the device may not be manufactured by 
Guidant. A Guidant programmer may be required. Note: magnet application does not affect 
bradycardia pacing 
 
To determine the device therapy status 
The tachy therapy status of a Guidant ICD or CRT-D can be determined by tones emitted upon 
magnet placement. 
1. Briefly position a doughnut magnet (Guidant Model 6860) over the device and listen for tones. 
2. If R-wave synchronous tones are heard, the device is capable of delivering tachy therapy. 
If a Continuous tone is heard, tachyarrhythmia therapy is not available, even if detection is met. 
Note: a continuous tone sounds like a "dial tone." 
 
To change the device therapy status 
1. Position a doughnut magnet (Guidant Model 6860) over the device and listen for tones. 
2. If tones are heard (either R-wave sync or continuous), then hold magnet in place for at least 30 
seconds. 
3. After 30 seconds, a change in tones will indicate that the status has changed (Table 3). 
4. To change the device therapy status again, remove the magnet for at least two seconds and    reapply 
it as described in Steps 1 and 2. 
 
Table 3. Device status changes and the associated tones that may occur with magnet application. 
 
Contact 
Guidant 
Technical 
Services at 
1.800.CARDIAC if you have any questions. 
 
 
 
 
 
Guidant Corporation 
4100 Hamline Avenue North, Sl. Paul, MN 55112-5798 
Tel 651-582-4000 Fax 651-582-4166 
Medical Professionals: 1.800.CAROIAC (227.3422) Toll Free Patients and Families: 1.866.GUIOANT (484.3268) Toll Free www.guida nl.com 
 
Page 1 of 2 
Rev. E July 20, 2004 
MO-286-0804 
Device therapy status 
before magnet 
application 
Apply magnet for >30 
seconds 
Device therapy status 
after magnet application 
Continuous tone 
(no therapy available) 
                       → Continuous tone 
(no therapy available) 
Continuous tone 
(no therapy available) 
                       → Continuous tone 
(no therapy available) Page 7 of 9 
 
 
GUIDANT 
To deactivate a Guidant ICD I CRT-D using a magnet 
  
 
 
 
 
 
      no 
 
 
 
yes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           no 
 
 
 
 
        yes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reminder: Magnet application does not affect bradycardia pacing. 
 
Contact Guidant Technical Services at 1.800.CARDIAC if you have any questions 
 
Guldant Corporation         Page 2 of2 
4100 Hamline Avenue North. SI. Paul. MN 55112-5798             Rev. E July 20. 2004 
Place doughnut magnet over device 
  
Do you hear 
tones? 
Check magnet position. If still no 
tones; a Guidant programmer is 
required or device may not be 
manufactured by Guidant. 
 
 
Continuou
s tone 
R-wave 
sync tone 
Hold magnet over 
device for at least 
30 seconds 
 
Is tone 
continuous (like 
a dial tone)? 
Therapy will be temporarily 
inhibited it the magnet is 
taped in place (R-wave sync 
tones will be heard as long as 
the magnet is over the 
device). It is not possible to 
permanently deactivate the 
device using a magnet due to 
programming. 
Device is deactivated. Magnet may 
be removed from device. To turn 
devise back on: 
• Reapply magnet> 30 seconds. 
• Listen for tones to change from 
continuous to R-wave sync 
tones. Page 8 of 9 
Tel 651-582-4000 Fax 651-582-4166                       MO-286-0804 
Medical Professionals: 1.800.CARDIAC (227.3422) Toll Free Patients and Families: 1.866.GUIDANT (484.3268) Toll Free   
www.guidanl.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
