 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Blood Delivery, Operating Room  
Policy Reference #: SOP005 
Supersedes #: 07/23/92; 09/29/87; 
09/20/91; 03/00 
Date of Origination: 09/29/1987 Review Date: 08/8/2024 
Revision Date: 08/2/2021 
 
PURPOSE: 
To state the process for the delivery of blood and blood components in the Operating Room 
 
POLICY: 
All blood and blood components will be administered with the order of a physician according to the 
procedure as follows. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
EMR: Electronic Medical Record  
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Preoperative  
1. Prior to the start of a case the circulator will verify:  
a. That the patient is properly consented for blood transfusion (for non-
emergent situations). A new consent must be obtained for each hospital 
admission. 
b. Verify blood band is on the patient, properly completed, and not expired 
(within 72hrs). 
c. If blood is already ordered and Blood Bank has available cross matched 
blood or blood product(s). 
d. Any equipment or resources required for autologous transfusion are readily 
available and working.  
 
B. Ordering Blood 
1. See section I for Mass Transfusion Protocol 
2. If additional blood or blood product are required during the surgery, the 
anesthesia provider will document the verbal order in the EMR. 
a.  Follow Order Entry sequence for ordering blood/blood products, under 
‘anesthesia blood administration’ order set.  
3. If blood loss is excessive and a mass transfusion is ordered, follow policy NBL-
003.  
4. When the blood or blood product is available, transfusion results will appear in 
EMR under the ‘Lab’ activity tab in the patient’s record.  2 
5. Complete a Blood Bank Product Request form for each blood product to be 
administered. Blood Bank number must be recorded from patient’s armband 
onto the Product Request form for Red Blood Cell issue. Take form to 
Transfusion Service 
6. The surgeon or anesthesia provider may order: 
a. Autologous Blood or Fresh Frozen Plasma, designating the number of units 
to thaw. 
1. NOTE: One-hour preparation time is required for each unit of 
autologous blood and 24 hour expiration time limit after blood has 
been thawed. 
b. Platelets, designating the number of units for apheresis.   
c. Cryo Precipitate, designating the number of units. 
1. NOTE: For information regarding all blood/blood component 
Turnaround Times from the Blood Band reference OLOL policy# 
NBL-002 
C. Specimen Collection  
1. Re-labeling of Blood Bank samples is prohibited. All samples are to be labeled 
in the presence of the patient, prior to leaving the bedside. No exceptions will be 
made. 
2. If the Blood Bank needs a blood sample, the anesthetist will draw the sample 
into a large purple top tube (9ml EDTA)  and order a crossmatch.  
3. Patients must have 2 blood types from 2 separate phlebotomies before 
crossmatched Red Blood Cells or Fresh Frozen Plasma can be given out for 
transfusion. This sample may be drawn in a 3 mL purple top labeled using 2 ID 
process. It cannot be drawn at the same time as the crossmatch sample 
4. If a computer generated lab label is available, label the specimen tube(s) with 
that label. Record initials and / or team member’s Lawson id, date and time 
collected on the tube and attach a Blood Bank Identification System unique 
number to the tube. 
 
If a computer generated lab label is not available, the computer generated chart 
label or handwritten patient information is acceptable. (Must have 2 pt. IDs) 
Record Lawson id, date and time collected on the tube and attach Blood Bank 
Identification System unique number to the tube. 
  
5. Write initials and/or team member’s Lawson ID, date and time of draw on the 
Blood Bank Patient Identification System bracelet insert, which is found on the 
bottom of the Blood Bank Patient Identification System label sheet. 
6. Remove the Blood Bank Patient Identification System insert from the label sheet 
and place it in the red plastic armband sheath. 
7. Secure the plastic Blood Bank Patient Identification System armband to the 
patient’s wrist or ankle. Do not apply the band too tightly. Allow ample slack. 
Try to put the armband on the same arm as the hospital armband. 
8. Send in a green STAT lab bag. 
9. The name of person who drew specimen and the date and time must be recorded 
in the EMR or on the label if EMR is not properly functioning.     3 
10. All specimens will be transported to the Blood Bank by OR staff. 
 
 
 
D. Patient Blood Identification Band 
1. Blood bands must reside on the patient. If it is removed, a new blood band and 
type and type and match must be completed.  
2. During many procedures the patient’s Blood ID Band is inaccessible to RN 
circulator because of patient position and potential compromise of the sterile 
field.  The Blood Bank Identification Number should be double verified with the 
Anesthesia provider prior to positioning and draping and recorded by the 
Circulating Nurse in a readily accessible location that may be referenced by 
perioperative personnel as needed.  The location of this information should be 
reported as part of any intraoperative “handoff” procedure. 
3. When checking a Blood ID Band, the RN circulator, Anesthesia Provider,  
Perfusionist or another trained licensed person will verify all information:  
a. the patient’s name, Medical Record Number, and blood bank identification 
number with the corresponding information labeled on the Blood ID Band. 
4. When blood or blood products are required for emergent use 
(uncrossmatched/emergency released) no Blood Bank armband is required for 
issue or transfusion. Patient information will be matched using the Emergency 
Request for Blood/Blood Products form supplied with the products from 
Transfusion Services. No unit tags will be present on blood or blood products 
issued in these emergent situations 
5. Platelets, plasma and cryoprecipitate orders do not require the use of 
Blood Bank Patient Identification System 
 
E. Blood Verification  
1. Patient identification is to be performed based on the location of the blood band 
ID in section D. 
2. Patient Identification : (performed at bedside) 
a. Must be performed by either two RNs 
b. One individual conducting the identification verification must be the 
qualified RN who will administer the blood or blood component to the 
patient. 
c. The second individual conducting the identification verification must be 
qualified to participate in the process (i.e. RN, LPN, MT) 
d. These two staff members (named above) compare the patient’s name and 
date of birth on the patient’s armband with the patient’s name and date of 
birth on the blood unit tag and if transfusing RBCs they must also compare 
the patient’s Blood Bank Identification System unique number on the 
blood unit tag and the patient’s Blood Bank armband 
3. For Emergency Only: Match patient identification on patient armband to 
information on the Emergency Request for Blood/Blood Products Form supplied 
by Transfusion Services with the products.  4 
4. Both staff members verifying patient and blood product must sign the Blood 
Bank unit tag and record the start time on the tag. All identification attached to 
the unit shall remain attached until the transfusion has ended 
 
F. Blood Administration  
1. Banked blood delivered via peripheral and central lines will be administrated 
according to Patient Care Services Policy for blood and blood product 
administration. (NBL-002)). 
2. The only IV solution to be used with blood and blood products is 0.9% NaCl 
USP (Normal saline). This solution may be used to prime and flush blood 
administration set, and to dilute blood. 
3. Blood tubing must be changed after the administration of two (2) units of 
blood/blood products. 
4. If using a blood warmer to administer blood these guidelines must be followed: 
a. The temperature of the warming device should not exceed 42° 
b. The blood should be administered in four (4) hours or less. 
c. The reissue of warmed blood is prohibited 
5. During CAB procedures, the Perfusionist will administer bank blood via the 
cardiopulmonary bypass pump per order of the surgeon or the anesthesia 
provider. 
6. Autologous Blood Recovery System – Per the order of the surgeon or 
anesthesiologist, an autologous blood recovery system will be used in specific 
types of surgical procedures.  The system will be prepared by the Circulator and 
the Anesthesia Technician (or trained technician).  The salvaged blood will be 
prepared according to the manufacturer’s guidelines and given on the order of 
the Anesthesia Provider. 
7. All blood/blood product administration are recorded by the anesthesia provider 
in the Intraoperative anesthesia record.  
8. After the blood bank unit tag has been completed, the completed tag is placed in 
the patient’s folder to be scanned into the EMR.  
9. Anesthesia will monitor or any blood transfusion reactions. Such an event will 
follow Policy NBL002 and documented in EMR. 
 
G. Blood Storage System 
1. When multiple units of blood are needed, Blood Bank personnel will place the 
units in a storage system with coolants. 
2. The blood storage system may only be out of lab for less than four hours.  If the 
storage system must be used for greater than four hours, the blood bank 
personnel will provide a temperature monitoring device inside the storage unit to 
recheck the temperature.  Temperature monitoring will be performed by Blood 
Bank personnel with the assistance of the OR Circulating Nurse as requested. 
3. Plasma and red cells are placed in blood storage system.  Cryoprecipitate and 
platelets are left at room temperature. 
4. The RN circulator and anesthesia provider will be responsible for the blood 
storage system.  5 
5. The storage system should remain closed except for removal of blood units in 
order to maintain internal temperature of the blood storage system. 
6. If the storage unit becomes visibly soiled, it will be wiped with approved 
disinfectant. 
 
H. Unused Units of Blood and Transporting Blood to another unit 
1. At the completion of the case, the RN circulating must assure that unused units 
remain in the blood storage system and are returned to the Blood Bank by OR 
Staff. 
2. If the surgeon orders a unit to be given in the Post Anesthesia Care Unit (PACU) 
any available product from the OR will transport with the patient.  Any 
remaining units are to be returned to the Blood Bank. 
 
I. Mass Transfusion  
1. In trauma situations, when the attending Physician/Surgeon deems it necessary 
to facilitate emergency blood volume replacement, the transfusion team will be 
notified to institute the Massive Transfusion Protocol (MTP) 
2. MTP will remain in effect until canceled by the attending Physician/Surgeon. 
3. Blood identification bands will be placed on the ankle instead of the forearm to 
facilitate access 
4. MTP physician’s verbal order is first called directly to Transfusion Services 765-
8891, bypassing the electronic medical record system. Caller provides the Blood 
Bank Technologist with the following.  
a. Identification (MR/Trauma #) 
b. Patient’s weight in kg 
c. Gender 
d. Ordering physician’s name 
e. Location to which blood products are to be delivered 
f. Contact number for ongoing communication between departments 
5. If not done prior to the initiation of MTP, send patient blood samples to lab for 
STAT 
6. Type & Match, CMP, CBC and Coagulation Panel (PT, PTT, Platelets & 
Fibrinogen). 
7. One nurse attending the patient is assigned as the MTP coordinator and a blood 
bank technologist is designated as the Blood Bank coordinator. 
8. The nurse MTP Coordinator does the following:  
a. Update the Blood Bank coordinator if the patient is relocated. 
b. Monitor patient response to MTP and lab values relevant to protocol. 
c. Monitor and document blood product administration, keeping a running 
chronology. 
d. Order STAT coagulation panels with fibrinogen following administration 
of each batch. 
e. Upon receipt of coag lab results, promptly communicates those results to 
the physician, for consideration of MTP batch alteration.  6 
f. Maintain communication between lab team and bedside team regarding all 
aspects of MTPf. Notify the Blood Bank @ 5-8891 immediately when 
MTP termination order is received. 
g. Ensures immediate return of all unused MTP blood products to the Blood 
Bank. 
9. Standard ADULT (Patient ≥ 50kg) MTP COMPONENT BATCHES 
-6 units PRBC 
-6 units of Thawed Plasma or FFP 
-20 units of Cryoprecipitate (Cryo) 
-1 Platelet, Apheresis 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
Autologous Blood Transfusion Infusion… (N/BL001) 
Blood and Blood Products, Administration of… (N/BL002) 
Massive Transfusion for Trauma Emergency Resuscitation (NBL-003) 
 