SOP-044 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Post Operative Patient Transfer Policy Reference #: SOP044 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 05/2002 Review Date: 11/09/2023 
Revision Date: 01/10/2012 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To outline unit transfers for patients post operatively to the adult Intensive Care Unit 
(ICU). 
 
POLICY: 
To best meet the post operative care needs of surgical patients the following criteria shall 
be adhered to for the purpose of post operative patient disposition. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A. Patients requiring post anesthesia care will be transferred to the Post Anesthesia 
Care Unit (PACU).  The Circulator will call PACU and report to them any special 
needs/consideration such as patient acuity, isolation requests, etc. and will also 
inform the PACU of any specific equipment needs i.e., ventilator, IVAC, etc.  The 
Circulator will also call the PACU immediately prior to transfer. 
 
B. Patients not requiring post anesthesia care will be transferred back to SMAU. 
 
C. The Beds Coordinator and/or House Manager will make all patient bed 
assignments.  For Critical Care Bed assignments, the House Manager should 
notify the Intensivist who is triaging ICU Beds.  The final decision for Critical 
Care bed assignments will be made by the Intensivist. 
 
D. All Open Heart surgery cases transfer directly to the Cardiac Intensive Care Unit 
from the Operating Room. 
 
E. Unstable patients requiring direct transfer from the Operating Room to a Critical 
Care unit must adhere to the following procedure. 
1. The surgeon/anesthesia provider determines that the condition of the 
patient is unstable/critical and direct transfer is preferred. 
2. The Anesthesiologist must review the direct transfer request with the 
Intensivist.  
a. After the decision has been made for a direct transfer by the 
Intensivist and Surgeon, the Intensivist will call the House SOP-044 
Page 2 of 2 
Manager/Beds Coordinator for the bed assignment. The Intensivist 
and charge nurse of the critical care unit will assess acuity issues 
and complexity of the current patient population in the ICU to 
determine if the patient can be accepted to the unit directly.  If a 
bed is available for the direct transfer, the patient will be 
transferred to the Critical Care unit. 
1. The Circulator will call the Critical Care unit and report to 
them any special needs and the acuity of the patient.  The 
Circulator will also inform the Critical Care Unit of any 
specific equipment needs i.e., ventilator, IVAC, etc. 
2. The Circulator will then call the Critical Care unit 
immediately prior to transfer.   
b. If a bed is not available for the direct transfer, the patient will be 
transferred to the PACU.  Notification and arrangements with the 
PACU, especially during off time hours, needs to be made one 
hour before the transfer is needed.  This will allow time for the 
PACU nurse on call to arrive at the hospital and any other staffing 
considerations to be planned. 
 
G. Any nurse staffing issues in PACU/ICU will be addressed by House Manager.  
 
H. Patients under general anesthetic may only return directly from the operating 
room, outside of the PACU, to an intensive care unit. 
 