 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Specimens, Operating Room Policy Reference #: SOP029 
Supersedes #: 01/20/89; 06/93 
Date of Origination: 01/1989 Review Date: 03/28/2024 
Revision Date: 8/09/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide direction for the appropriate handling of specimens. 
 
POLICY: 
TISSUE and FOREIGN BODIES removed from a patient that require or have a requested 
pathology exam will be sent to Pathology.  An anatomic pathology report will be generated for 
every specimen submitted to the Pathology department for gross exam and/or histology/cytology.  
Appropriate examination will be ordered by the surgeon and/or pathologist. All specimens 
submitted to pathology should be labeled with the appropriate patient demographics, all specimen 
information, dated and timed, initialed and accompanied by the appropriate patient specimen 
requisition with pertinent history.  
 
As a Catholic health care facility, we must always respect the dignity of the human person and the 
human life.  This requires that all human limbs, organs and tissues be treated with respect. 
 
The hospital will facilitate requests from patients or patient representatives to its best ability, to 
provide information on obtaining burial or cremation of amputated limbs, if the desire to do so is 
communicated to the hospital in a timely fashion.  Amputated-limbs will be released only to 
licensed funeral homes.  
 
Definitions: 
Newborns corresponds to neonates 
Children corresponds to Child 
Neonate/Newborn =birth to 28days 
Infant= first 12 months 
Child= 13 months to 12 years 
Adolescent = 12 to 17 years 
Adult = 18 years and older 
 
The removal of all specimens and the disposition of or appropriate test must be recorded by the RN 
in the medical record, on the Specimen section. All specimens not specifically exempted must be 
sent to the pathology department for a gross and microscopic examination. Two exceptions are 
missiles from Police cases (see Specimen Released to Law Enforcement Agency – Section U) and 
Artificial Implants including orthopedic hardware (Section V). 
  2 
 
Following is a list of SPECIMENS EXEMPTED FROM MANDATORY SUBMISSION TO THE 
PATHOLOGY DEPARTMENT:  (See References)   
• Bone donated to the bone bank 
• Bone fragments removed as part of corrective, reconstructive orthopedic procedures or 
elective joint replacement (e.g., rotator cuff repair, synostosis repair), large specimens such 
as femoral heads, and knee, ankle, or elbow reconstructions for elective surgeries. 
Pathologic fractures should be sent to pathology for examination. 
• Cataracts removed by phacoemulsification 
• Dental appliances 
• Fat removed by liposuction 
• Foreign bodies such as bullets or other medicolegal evidence given directly to law 
enforcement personnel 
• Foreskin from circumcisions of newborns 
• Intrauterine contraceptive devices without attached soft tissue 
• Medical devices such as catheters, gastrostomy tubes, myringotomy tubes, stents, and 
sutures that have not contributed to patient illness, injury or death 
• Middle ear ossicles 
• Orthopedic hardware and other radio-opaque mechanical devices provided there is an 
alternative policy for documentation of their surgical removal 
• Placentas from uncomplicated pregnancies that appear normal at time of delivery (do not 
meet institutionally specified criteria for examination) 
• Rib segments or other tissues removed only for purposes of gaining surgical access, 
provided the patient does not have a history of malignancy 
• Saphenous vein segments harvested for coronary artery bypass 
• Skin or other normal tissue removed during a cosmetic or reconstructive procedure (e.g., 
blepharoplasty, cleft palate repair, abdominoplasty, rhytidectomy, syndactyly repair), 
provided it is not contiguous with a lesion and the patient does not have a history of 
malignancy 
• Teeth when there is no attached soft tissue 
• Therapeutic radioactive sources 
• Normal toenails and fingernails that are incidentally removed 
 
If an attending physician requests that any such specimen be examined by the Pathology 
Department, such specimen will be submitted to Pathology.  Either a gross examination only or a 
gross and microscopic examination (to be determined by the pathologist) will be performed and a 
report will be produced. 
 
It is recommended that the following specimens MUST BE SUBMITTED TO THE PATHOLOGY 
DEPARTMENT FOR EXAMINATION.  These specimens may require only a gross examination, 
but exceptions are at the pathologist’s discretion.  When necessary a microscopic examination will 
be performed along with the gross examination and a report will be produced:  
 
• Accessory digits 
• Bunions and hammertoes  3 
• Extraocular muscle from corrective surgical procedures (e.g., strabismus repair) 
• Inguinal hernia sacs in adults 
• Nasal bone and cartilage from rhinoplasty or septoplasty. 
• Prosthetic breast implants (2) 
• Prosthetic cardiac valves without attached tissue 
• Tonsils and adenoids from children 
• Torn meniscus 
• Umbilical hernia sacs in children 
• Varicose veins 
 
 
PROCEDURE FOR HANDLING OF SPECIMENS IN THE OR: 
 
All documentation should be completed in the Electronic Medical Record. If it is not available, the 
RN will document per downtime specimen protocol.   
  
A. SPECIMENT TIME OUT 
1. Before transferring the specimen from the sterile field, the RN receiving the 
specimen must use the read back method to confirm the order matches the 
specimen label, requisition form, and EMR with the surgeon.  
 
2. The RN should validate the following information on all documents per the 
verbal order(at a minimum): 
a. Patient name 
b. Surgeon Name 
c. Specimen name  
d. Tests ordered 
e. Confirm any special comments or handling protocols 
  
 
B. SPECIMEN PREPARATION PROTCOL 
1.  Only one specimen per proper container. The size of the container should 
accommodate both the size of the specimen and the volume of fixative (if 
required, the amount of fixative is 10-20 times the volume of the specimen.) 
2.  Each specimen container shall be identified with the appropriate Specimen Label. 
Do Not Attach Labels to the Container Lid (in whole or part). The appropriate 
chemical label (i.e. formalin) should also be attached to the container. 
  3.  Abbreviations should not be used in identifying specimens. 
4.  When handling contaminated material, standard precautions are to be used to 
safeguard all personnel involved. 
5.  All specimens are accompanied by appropriate specimen requisition forms and 
documented in the specimen logbook prior to transport to the Lab. 
 
 
 
  4 
C.  SCRUB NURSE / TECH (Scrub Person) 
 
To avoid drying of tissues that are not immediately placed into formalin at time of 
procurement: the specimen should be placed in a sterile basin and kept moist, wrapped in 
saline-dampened towel or gauze, until the specimen can be properly placed in fixative Do 
not submerse the specimen, only cover with moist gauze or towel. 
 
Having received the specimen and permission from the surgeon, the scrub person will hand 
it off the field to the circulating nurse.   
  
  Upon handoff the scrub person shall: 
1.  Verify identity of specimen and the test(s) to be ordered with both the circulator 
and the surgeon. 
  2.  Avoid using any counted sponges when passing specimens off the field. 
3. Place the specimen in a sterile cup or other appropriately sized container labeled 
with the patient name matching the requisition and physician order. 
 
 
D.  CIRCULATING NURSE 
  
  Upon verifying and receiving the specimen, the circulating nurse shall: 
1.  Place it into an appropriate container, if this has not already been done, (avoid 
contaminating the outside of the container). 
                  2.  Document the time the specimen was removed from the patient in the computer.  
3. The circulator consults with the surgeon as to whether or not cultures are to be 
ordered. If ordered, do not use formalin. 
  4. Prepare the specimen per specimen preparation protocol. 
5.  Order requested exam in computer or using appropriate lab request form/s  
     (include all specimen information (i.e. site with laterality or markings, Patient 
Identifiers, date, and Surgeon’s first & last name).  
6.  When ordered, add appropriate amount of preservative to the container of the 
specimen. 
  7.  When applicable document the time in formalin on the specimen         
       requisition. 
   8.  The specimen container should be placed in a biohazard bag.  The appropriate  
       specimen requisition form should be placed in the outer pocket of the bag 
  9.  Document all specimens in the logbook prior to transport to the Lab. 
  10. The circulator should place the container with the specimen in the designated  
       receptacle in the specimen room and log the specimen in appropriately. 
 
E. DISCARDING SPECIMENS 
Specimens not sent to the Lab should be discarded in the following manner: 
1. Tissue specimens weighing < 1.5 lbs may be discarded with routine surgical 
waste, i.e, drapes, sponges, etc.  
2. Specimens weighing > 1.5 lbs must be placed in specially designated biohazard 
container labeled “Regulated Medical Waste”.    5 
3. The “Regulated Medical Waste” box will be sent to SPD and held with all other 
red biohazard containers for disposal.  
 
F. DOWNTIME SPECIMEN PROTOCOL 
1. Each specimen container shall be identified with the appropriate Patient 
Identification Label (containing 2 patient identifiers), all specimen information 
(i.e. site with laterality or markings), date, the preparer’s initials, and Surgeon’s 
name. 
2. Each specimen shall be accompanied by the appropriate specimen request form. 
(OLOL Pathology Tissue/Fluid/Cytology exam requisition form (Histology) 
and/or Surgery Lab order form and documented in the specimen logbook prior to 
transport to the Lab. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
 A.  ROUTINE HISTOLOGY SPECIMENS: 
   
  1.  The Specimen should be covered with 10 to 20 x’s the volume of formalin  
       immediately to avoid ischemic time.     
  2.  Time in formalin should be documented on the specimen requisition/computer. 
  3.  Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens 
 
 B.  GROSS EXAM ONLY: 
  1.  Indicate “FOR GROSS EXAM ONLY”. 
  2.  Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens 
 
 C.  FROZEN SECTION (F.S.):  
  *DO NOT ADD FORMALIN* 
1.  The circulating nurse notifies Histology Lab (5-8149) of a forthcoming frozen 
section. 
2.  Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens 
3.  The circulator places the specimen in a properly labeled container (NO 
FORMALIN).  
4.  The circulating nurse initiates the appropriate lab request. 
  5.  If sample size is <1.0cm, specimen should be placed on a saline moistened  
       dressing gauze pad 
  6.  After notifying Histology that the specimen is obtained, the specimen should be  
       delivered to the Frozen Section Lab with specimen request indicating which OR  
       submitted the request, intercom and/or telephone number of the OR room and  
       documentation if the patient is awake.  The specimen is given to the Pathologist  
     or Histology technologist.  If no one is present upon arrival to the Frozen Section  
      Lab, the person delivering the specimen is to wait. 
  7.  The Pathologist may communicate with the surgeon via the intercom system. If  
       the patient is awake the telephone should be used. 
 
 D.  NEEDLE LOCALIZATION WITH FROZEN SECTION:  6 
       
   1..  Proceed as with any Frozen Section with the following exceptions: 
   a.  Once the specimen is obtained, Radiology is called and the circulator  
          Gives the specimen and patient labels to the radiology tech.  
   b.  The Radiology Tech assumes responsibility for the specimen, obtains 
images and gets radiologist approval.   
   c The radiologist calls report to the OR room. 
   d. The radiology tech returns the specimen to the circulator in the OR who 
then assumes responsibility of the specimen.  
e.  The circulating nurse will then prepare the specimen for the ordered 
pathology exam (ie frozen or routine) 
 
 
 E.  STERILE OR FRESH SPECIMEN: 
  *DO NOT ADD FORMALIN* 
  1.  The circulator completes the specimen request form. 
  2.  Scrub person or surgeon places specimen into proper tissue/fluid transport  
       container or a sterile container.  
  3.  The time the specimen was removed from the patient is documented   
      (computer/specimen requisition). 
  4.  Circulating nurse will notify OR transport or the front desk.  The transaction will  
       be documented in the specimen logbook, and transfer to the lab initiated. 
5.  Specimen is brought to the Lab Central Processing Desk in main lab.  
Transporter will notify Lab Processing Desk that the specimen is STAT. 
 
 F.  MICROBIOLOGY- CULTURE AND SENSITIVITY: 
Fluid and Tissue larger than 1cm are the preferred specimen type for 
microbiology testing.   
  However- SWABS are acceptable.  It should be noted that swabs may result in  
  false negative results and may limit testing.        
 
If Histology is ordered in addition to culture on a tissue, best results are obtained by 
sending separate specimens.  
   
  Flocked Swabs:  
   AFB cultures- must be collected on a single separate swab. 
   Aerobic, Anaerobic and Fungus cultures- all performed off the same single  
   swab. 
 
If ALL CULTURES ORDERED (AFB, Aerobic, Anaerobic and Fungus)- 
COLLECT 2 FLOCKED SWABS 
 
  1.  The surgeon or scrub person places the specimen in the transport tube.  The swab 
is  
       carefully replaced, and the top replaced. 
  2.  For larger specimens to be cultured the specimen must be placed in a proper   7 
       tissue/fluid transport container or a sterile container. 
  3.  The scrub person hands the specimen off the field to the circulator. 
4.  If visibly soiled, the outside of the tube or container is wiped by the non-sterile 
person with a hospital approved disinfectant. 
5. Formalin must not be added to culture specimens.  Rationale:  Formalin negates  
       the cultures. 
  6.  Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens  
  7.  The circulator brings the specimen to the OR front desk along with the completed  
       request form for immediate transport to the Microbiology Lab.  The transaction  
       should be documented in the specimen logbook. 
 
  NOTE: Cytology cannot be done on swab specimens. 
 
 G.  BRONCHIAL SPECIMEN: 
  1.  Washing: 
   a.  The specimen is collected in a Lukens tube during bronchial endoscopic  
        procedures and sterile saline is added if needed. 
   b.  Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens  
c. Complete lab request slip for cultures, cytology/histology, and  
any other required tests. This may require requesting proper tubes for 
tests such as culture sensitivity. Then the circulator brings the specimen to 
the OR front desk for immediate transport to the Microbiology Lab. The 
transaction should be documented in the specimen logbook. 
  2.  Brushings: 
   a.  Specimen is obtained during endoscopic procedure with a disposable  
        brush. 
b.  The brush is wiped across one or two sterile slides (label slides with 2 
patient identifiers and site), which are then placed back-to-back with the 
specimen sides facing out into a container with 95% alcohol. 
   c.  The brush is cut off with sterile wire cutters and placed into a separate  
        specimen container with 1ml sterile saline. 
   d.  Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens.  
e. The circulator brings the specimen to the front desk for immediate 
transport to the Microbiology Lab. The transaction should be documented in 
the specimen logbook. 
 
 H.  BODY FLUID SPECIMEN FOR CYTOLOGY ONLY: 
The surgeon should obtain and submit as much fluid as possible. 
                        Up to 400cc of fluid is optimal for cytological/cytology analysis.  
 
  1 Urine: 
a. The surgeon obtains urine specimen. 
b. Approximately 40cc of urine is recommended for adequacy. 
   b.  Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens 
   c.  Send to Lab immediately 
  2.  Ureteral and/or Renal Brushing:  8 
   a.  Obtain sterile scissors for cutting brush wire. 
   b.  Obtain a specimen container with formalin and a specimen container with  
        cytolyt (for pap smear and bronchial washings). 
   c.  The surgeon secures brush biopsy. 
   d.  The surgeon determines if the biopsy brush is to be cut off into either the  
        formalin or 95% ETOH container. 
   e.  Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens 
   f.  The circulator brings the specimen to the OR front desk for immediate  
        transport to the Lab.  The transaction should be documented in the  
        specimen logbook. 
 
 I.  SPECIMENS TOO LARGE TO BE FIXED IN SOLUTION: 
Do not place limbs going to morgue in a red biohazard bin. This could send the limb 
for disposal prior to examination. 
 
  1.  Any specimen that is too large for standard containers: 
   a.  Package amputated limbs in a double impervious red biohazard bag.  (To  
        prevent any puncture from exposed bone).  
   b.  Package large soft tissue specimens in a disposable basin covered with an  
impervious material for transport. Must be secure so contents do not spill 
and labeled biohazard. 
c.  Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens. Note that source 
and patient identifiers and requisitions must be on outermost covering. 
d. The circulator brings the specimen to the OR front desk for immediate 
transport to the Lab. The transaction should be documented in the 
specimen logbook at the OR front desk.  The specimen should be 
transported to the lab in a designated large specimen container. 
e.  Amputated limbs should be brought to the lab central processing 
department and signed into the specimen logbook. Laboratory staff will 
then place the limb into the Autopsy Suite refrigerator, documenting this 
step in the lab’s Amputated Limb Log.   
 
 J.  SKELETAL MUSCLE AND NERVE BIOPSIES: 
1.  Skeletal muscle and nerve biopsies may be scheduled Monday – Thursday, 7am – 
4pm and Friday, 7am-12pm.  If  another time is needed the Physician must first 
schedule with the Histology  Department (5-8149). 
                        2.  Whenever possible call the histology department (5-8149) ahead of time,   
       preferably at least one day prior to the surgery to arrange the special handling. 
  3.  The surgeon obtains the specimen. 
4.  The OR calls histology (5-8149) to inform that a muscle or nerve has been 
obtained and is in route. 
  5.  The specimen is placed in a plastic container with NO FIXATIVE and taken  
       immediately to the laboratory and hand deliver to the histology technician. 
6.  Clearly communicate to Lab that the specimen is a muscle or nerve biopsy that           
       requires special handling and that histology needs to be involved immediately. 
 K.  ESTROGEN OR PROGESTERONE RECEPTOR ASSAY:  9 
  Does not require special handling. 
  The time the specimen is removed, and the time in formalin should be documented.  
 L.  Venous Multi-site Sampling (i.e. Renin, Aldosterone, Cortisol): 
  1.  Contact Laboratory Referrals (765-6946) prior to the procedure, preferably at the   
       Time of scheduling, with the following information. 
• Patient information (name, MR#, DOB) 
• Date, time and location of the procedure 
• Physician performing the sampling  
• Ordering physician 
• Analytes to be tested on the samples 
• Number of sites to be collected, if known  
  2.  Provide a contact name and number for follow-up by the laboratory. 
  3.  Laboratory will provide test-specific information for required analytes,   
       Including tube type and special handling per analyte.  Referrals Supervisor, 
       or designee, will coordinate with surgical personnel to be present to oversee 
       the process and for immediate transport of samples to the laboratory for  
       processing.    
  4.  Physician will draw blood sample and hand scrub nurse.  
  5.  Sample is injected into appropriate tube(s), maintaining strict adherence to the   
       handling guidelines provided by laboratory. 
  6.  Sample tube(s) is/are labeled with Patient Identification label.  Collection date,   
      time and source of specimen must be documented on each sample tube.    
7.   A manual requisition is to be completed.  Include each specimen site collected 
      and specific analytes to be tested.  
      
  
 
   M.  TESTICULAR BIOPSIES: 
  1.  The specimen is placed immediately in formalin.   
  2.  The specimen container and requisition are labeled appropriately including the   
       site and logged in as a routine specimen. 
   
 N.  LYMPH NODES, LYMPHOMA STUDIES: 
  *DO NOT ADD FORMALIN* 
1.  The circulating nurse notifies Histology (5-8149) or the Pathologist of a 
forthcoming Lymph node specimen or tissue for Lymphoma studies. 
  2.  The specimen is placed in a plastic container with a saline moistened gauze  
  3.  Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens 
4.  Take immediately to the lab and hand delivered to the histology technologist with 
the requisition clearly labeled “for lymphoma protocol”. 
  5. Clearly communicate to lab personnel that the specimen is for   
       lymphoma protocol and that histology must be involved immediately. 
   
 O.  SPLEEN FOR LYMPHOMA OR LEUKEMIA: 
 *DO NOT ADD FORMALIN  10 
1.  The circulating nurse notifies Histology Lab (5-8149) or the Pathologist of a 
forthcoming spleen specimen. 
  2.  The specimen is placed in a plastic container  
3   Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens 
4. Take immediately to the lab and hand delivered to the histology technologist 
with the requisition clearly labeled “for lymphoma or leukemia protocol”. 
  5. Clearly communicate to lab personnel that the specimen is a spleen and 
                       requires special handling and that histology must be involved immediately.  
 
 P.  PAP SMEAR: 
  Conventional Method: 
  1.  The specimen is obtained by brush, broom or swab. 
2.  The swab is wiped across one or two sterile slides (label slides with 2 patient 
identifiers), which are then placed back-to-back with the specimen sides facing 
out into a container of 95% alcohol. 
  3.  Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens  
4. Bring the specimen to the OR front desk for transport to the Laboratory Central 
Processing Desk. The transaction should be documented in the specimen book.                    
 
 
ThinPrep Method: 
1. Obtain the appropriate collection kit (ThinPrep Pap Test) solution/container/ 
brush from central supply. 
  2.  Follow manufactures directions. 
  3.  Do not break brooms/brushes off into the specimen vial.  They damage the   
       instrument if not noticed and removed prior to processing. 
  4. Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens  
5. Bring the specimen to the OR front desk for transport to the Laboratory Central 
Processing Desk. The transaction should be documented in the specimen book.   
  
Q.  OTHER LAB TEST REQUIREMENTS: 
  (Blood drawn by anesthesia personnel) 
1.  Once the blood is collected, follow directions for Procedural handling of 
specimens and have a transporter carry to the lab immediately. 
 
 R.  ARTERIAL BLOOD GASES (ABG’s): 
  1.  Specimen is drawn by an anesthesia provider or perfusionist. 
  2.  Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens    
3.  Respiratory Care is notified by phone. 
  4.  Specimen is sent to Respiratory Care department, Blood Gas Lab immediately,  
       and received by therapist. 
  5.  If no one is in the Blood Gas Lab, Respiratory is to be recalled. 
 
 S.  SPINAL FLUID (CSF): 
  1.  CSF is collected by surgeon or anesthesiologist and placed in sterile containers. 
  2.  Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens     11 
3.  Bring the specimen to the OR front desk for transport to the Laboratory Central 
Processing Desk. The transaction should be documented in the specimen book.   
 
 T.  STONE ANALYSIS:  
  1.  If patient has had recent stone analysis, the surgeon may request that stone  
       specimen not be sent to the Lab.  Disposition of the stone specimen must be  
       documented in the medical record. 
2. Specimen is sent dry (no fluid or fixative). 
3. If chemical analysis is ordered, order and clearly mark “stone analysis”  
4. If gross exam is ordered, order gross exam in computer.  
3.  Follow directions for Procedural handling of specimens  
4.  The circulator brings the specimen to the front desk for transport to the 
Laboratory Central Processing Desk. 
 
 U.  SPECIMEN RELEASED TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES: 
  1.  Obtain a TAMPER EVIDENT KIT prior to beginning case. 
  2.  The specimen should be placed directly into specimen container by the surgeon  
       and the container is immediately sealed with a tamper evident seal, which is  
           initialed and dated by the circulator and place into a tamper evident bag, which is  
       sealed again. 
  3.  If possible, the specimen should not be directly handled by the scrub nurse or  
       circulating nurse. 
  4.  The specimen is labeled with a Patient Identification sticker, date and contents.   
       The circulator initiates a chain of custody form. 
  5.  The circulator who initially receives the specimen should not lay the specimen  
       down but keep it on their person. 
  6.  The specimen is to be given directly to the Law Enforcement Agent if he/she is  
         present.  The chain of custody form will stay with the patient’s chart. If he/she is  
       not present, the specimen with the Chain of Custody Form is turned over to the  
       Lab Charge Technician to be locked up.  When the Law Enforcement Agent  
       arrives, he/she receives the specimen directly from the Lab. 
 
 V.  ARTIFICIAL IMPLANTS INCLUDING ORTHOPEDIC HARDWARE: 
  1.  If the device is believed to have malfunctioned or to be defective or broken, then  
       the device and Chain of Custody form is brought to the Risk Management  
       Department.    
a. If a device has instructions for handling from an attorney, those 
instructions should be followed.   
b. If the device has no attorney instructions, the device should be cleaned 
prior to sending to Risk Management.  
c.  If the device cannot be cleaned, it should be sent to the lab with the 
chain of custody form and Surgical Services is to notify Risk 
Management of the device’s location.   
d.  
e. If it is after hours, send device with Chain of Custody form to the Lab 
Charge Technologist to be locked up.  Risk   12 
 Management is notified the next day by the Surgical Services Administrative 
Assistant.   
  2.  If an artificial implant is removed from a patient and is not believed by the  
       surgeon to have malfunctioned or to be defective or broken: 
   a.  If the implant is listed under the FDA’s Safe Medical Devices Act, then  
        removal and disposition must be documented on the Explant form. 
   b.  Gross exam on artificial implant or orthopedic hardware will be done only  
        if physician specifically requests it. 
   c.  If no exam is requested, per surgeon, and the patient has not requested the  
        return of the implant, the implant will be discarded in the “Biohazard  
        Boxes” (located in each Specimen Room), that are clearly labeled for  
        incineration with a special yellow tag by the circulating nurse.  Removal  
and disposition must be documented in specimen section of the Patient 
chart.  (See section W if the patient requests the implant). 
   d.  Artificial Implants will not be given by the Operating Room staff to the  
        patient, the family, any company representatives, or physician. 
 
 W.  RELEASE OF MATERIALS TO PATIENT/FAMILY: 
  1.  By a decision of Perioperative Services, The Executive Committee, the  
       Pathology Department, and Infection Control Department, no tissue is to be  
       released to a patient or patient’s family. 
  2.  If a patient requests return of the artificial implant prior to surgery, the device  
       may be released if all of the following criteria are met: 
   a.  The patient must be free from any signs or symptoms of active infectious  
        disease. 
   b.  The implant is not believed to have malfunctioned, or to be defective or  
        broken (see section V-1 above) 
   c.  If the implant is listed under the FDA’s Safe Medical Devices Act, then  
        removal and disposition must be documented on the Explant form. 
   d.  The implant must be able to be terminally sterilized before being sent to  
Risk Management. OR staff will be responsible for the disinfecting, 
cleaning and terminal sterilization of the implant.   
   e.  After appropriate terminal sterilization, the item is placed in an  
        appropriate container, labeled with patient ID and description of item,  
additionally labeled “for patient pick-up” and transported to risk 
management with a copy of the appropriately signed implant release form. 
   f.  The surgeon (M.D.) must approve the patient’s request.  
   g.  The surgeon (M.D.) documents the condition and disposition of the  
        implant in the post-operative surgical note. 
   h.  The circulator documents the item(s) removed and requested by the  
        patient, and the item(s) is sent to risk management for release. 
i.  The patient/family will sign and bring the Authorization and Release form 
(see attachments folder) to risk management within 7 days of the 
procedure. Processing time for implant may take longer than 7 days. This 
could delay the time the patient may pick up the implant. 
   j.  If a Pathology Gross Examination is requested prior to release of the   13 
 implant to the patient/family all of the above (W-1 and W-2a-2j) still 
apply and must be adhered to, with the following additions/exceptions:   
The appropriately labeled specimen/device will be logged in and placed in 
the specimen room with the implant release form AND a requisition form  
        stating "Patient wants this device back”.  The specimen will be sent to  
Pathology for testing and then returned to OLOL main lab. Main lab will 
then release to surgery, who will then sterilize and send to risk 
management. Risk management will release to patient. 
   k.  Artificial Implants will not be given by the Operating Room staff to the  
        patient, the family, any company representatives, or physician. 
 l. Pathology does not release hardware to patients. All specimens or explants 
will be returned to Our Lady of the Lake risk management for release to 
the patient. 
 
A. SPECIMENS TO BE RELEASED FOR TRIAL STUDIES: 
1. The principal investigator must have submitted the study for approval through 
the OLOL Office of Research and Grant Administration and received approval 
from the IRB of record for the specific study. IRB approval documents should be 
submitted to the Office of Research and Grant Administration Office.  
2. Unless a waiver of consent has been approved by the IRB, the patient must sign 
an informed consent in order for specimens to be released for study. Research 
coordinators assigned to each study will upload the signed consent into the 
patient’s electronic medical record.  The original signed consents will be kept in 
the OLOL Office of Research and Grant Administration. A copy of the informed 
consent will be placed in a study specific binder which will include the study 
protocol and be housed in surgery next to the Research refrigerator.  
3. OR team will be notified prior to tissue collection and patient will be flagged as 
a research subject in the electronic medical record or on OR snap board. If 
samples are to be collected in a specific sample container this will be brought to 
the OR ahead of time and marked appropriately with the patient’s study ID 
number. Samples should be redacted as required.  
4. The specimens will be collected per protocol and marked appropriately with 
patient’s study ID number. 
5. The OR nurse will document in the nursing notes that a specimen was collected 
for research purposes.  
6. Specimen will be placed in refrigerator specific for research study per protocol.  
7. Research specimens will be signed out by both the research coordinator or 
assistant and the nurse manager. The sign out log will be kept in the research 
specific binder.  
8. Remaining steps are dependent on the study specific protocol.  
a. If specimen is to be first sent to pathology, the pathology orders will need 
to be flagged as research in EPIC. Send the order for anatomic pathology 
and request for research material to Pathology along with a copy of the 
patient consent form and the portion of study protocol that states the 
tissue requirements.  Pathology deidentifies specimens according to 
study protocols. Protected Health Information (PHI) must not be used  14 
to identify slides. Pathology group will contact research coordinator if 
specimen needs to be sent to sponsor. It is the responsibility of the Office 
of Research and Grant Administration to ship specimens to the sponsor 
per protocol. 
b. If a specimen is not to be sent pathology but rather to an outside 
organization, after collection by the surgeon, the tissue and/or blood 
samples will be transported by a member of the OLOL Office of 
Research and Grant Administration team from OLOL to the outside 
organization for processing and storage per protocol.  
 
 Z. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (prion disease) cases 
  1. Do not order frozen section 
2 Specimens will be placed on a piece of formalin moistened telfa, folded to create a 
sandwich, placed in a specimen cup labeled with biohazard signage and noted as 
possible CJD agent.  The labeled specimen cup should be double bagged in 
specimen bag.  Pathology will be notified, and appropriate requisitions will 
accompany the specimen for analysis.   
3. A second circulator will be available outside of the room during the case and the 
infection control coordinator may be contacted as necessary.  The second 
circulator will personally transport specimens to pathology personnel with 
specimen requisition sheet. 
  4. No excess formalin. If there is a pool of formalin, then it is too much formalin.  
  5. Call 5-8291 and notify the lab of the specimen for proper handling and transport 
6. If there are any questions, ask the lab (5-8291) for the surgical pathologist that is       
covering the operating room. After hours and on weekends ask for the on-call 
pathologist. 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
AORN Standards and Recommended Practices 2024 
 
College of American Pathologists, Surgical Specimens to be submitted to Pathology for 
Examination (revised Nov. 2007) 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Surgical Services Division  Policy SOP040 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) Guidelines for Suspected CJD Cases in Operating Room. 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Surgical Services Division OR policy SOP018, 
Needle Localizations Requiring Radiology 
 
 