4OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER  
Policy Manual:  
  
Surgical Services  
  
Section/Chapter:  Operating Room  
Title:  Designation/Management of 
Fluids/Medications   
Policy Reference #:  SOP037  
Supersedes #:    
Date of Origination:  02/08/2001  Review Date:  09/16/2024 
Revision Date:  09/10/2021     
            
  
  
PURPOSE:  
To assure accurate administration of fluids/medications present on the sterile field.  
  
POLICY:  
Circulator will verify all fluids/medicines to the field with the surgeon.   
  
All fluids/medications will be clearly labeled.  
  
PROCEDURE:  
  
For medications on the sterile field  
  
1. Any drug/fluid transferred to the sterile field is checked by the registered nurse 
and the scrub person before it is transferred.  
  
2. Confirm all ordered medications/fluid with the surgeon before delivery to the 
sterile field.  
  
3. Verify medication/fluid in its original container for the correct name, strength, 
dosage, and route with the surgeon’s preference card or documented verbal order.   
  
4. Actively communicate the medication/fluid name, strength, dosage, and 
expiration date as the medication is passed to the sterile field.  
a. Verbally and visually confirm all medications/fluids delivered to the 
sterile field, including medication name, strength, dosage, and expiration 
date.   
b. Medications/fluids should be verified concurrently by the circulating 
registered nurse and scrub person.   
c. If there is no designated scrub person, the circulating registered nurse 
should confirm the medication/fluid visually and verbally with the licensed 
professional performing the surgical procedure.  
  
5. Deliver one medication/fluid at a time onto the sterile field.  
   6. The scrub person verbally and visually confirms the medication/fluid (ie, 
medication name, strength, dosage, and expiration date) upon receipt from the 
circulating registered nurse even if only one medication is involved.   
 
7. Label the medication/fluid container on the sterile field immediately before 
receipt of the medication. Avoid distractions and interruptions during the labeling 
process and while dispensing medications/fluids onto the sterile field.   
  
8. Label all medication/fluid containers and delivery devices with:  
a. Medication or solution name  
b. Strength  
c. Amount of medication or solution (if not apparent on container)  
d. Diluent name and volume (if not apparent on container)  
e. Date and time drawn with initials  
  
9. Verbally and visually confirm the medication/fluid name, strength, and dose by 
reading the medication/fluid label aloud while passing a medication/fluid to the 
licensed professional performing the procedure.    
  
10. When patient hand-offs (eg, personnel relief) occur, the medication/fluid 
verification process should take place. The medication/fluid should be confirmed for 
accuracy (ie, product label reviewed for the medication name, strength, and expiration 
date) in conjunction with a review of the written medication/fluid order to validate 
that the correct medication/fluid is on the field.   
  
11. Discard any solution or medication found on or off the sterile field without an 
identification label.  
  
  
For medications not on the sterile field  
   
1. Confirm all ordered medications/fluid with the surgeon.  
  
2. Verify medication/fluid in its original container for the correct name, strength, 
dosage, and route with the surgeon’s preference card or documented verbal order. All 
medications should be properly labeled.  
Labels should include:  
a. Medication or solution name  
b. Strength  
c. Amount of medication or solution (if not apparent on container)  
d. Diluent name and volume (if not apparent on container)  
e. Date and time drawn with initials  
  
3. Any IV medication will contain the aforementioned labeling requirements from step 2. 
In addition IV medications and solutions must be labeled with the date, time, and initials 
from when the bag was spiked. The bag and line system must remain closed and integrity 
must remain uncompromised.  All spiked medications/solutions must begin infusing within 1 hour of being spiked.   
   
4. When patient hand-offs (eg, personnel relief) occur, the medication/fluid 
verification process should take place. The medication/fluid should be confirmed for 
accuracy (ie, product label reviewed for the medication name, strength, and expiration 
date) in conjunction with a review of the written medication/fluid order to validate 
that the correct medication/fluid.  
  
5. Discard any solution or medication found without an identification label.  
  
Compounding Medications:  
It is preferred that any compounded medications are prepared by pharmacy prior to the 
procedure. In the event the preparation requested is not readily available the OR team, consisting 
of the Surgical Technologist and the Circulator, will compound medications adhering to the 
following:   
1. Compounding will only be done with approved medication combinations  
2. Compounding will only be done with compatible medications  
3. Confirm correct medication, concentration, and amounts  
4. Compounding will be performed while using sterile supplies, sterile technique 
and must be performed in the perioperative suite where the medication is to 
be administered   
5. All compounded medications must be properly labeled, unless being 
immediately administered   
6. Visually inspected for particulate material and other issues related to separation of 
suspension or improper compounding   
7. Unless otherwise approved by the manufacturer, compounded medications must 
be administered within 1hr of preparation.  
 
New Formulary and Non-Formulary  
1. All new drug requests or request for using drugs outside of recommended use (off 
label) must follow Pharmacy policy PH-11-08 “Formulary Management.” 
a. Resources are found under in the following link: Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center (formweb.com) 
2. This process requires review and approval from the Pharmacy & Therapeutics 
Committee.  
3. Upon approval the drug can be used as described in the final recommendations for 
use by the committee and for the allotted time (ongoing or limited use) 
 
References:  
AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practice, 2024 Edition.   
USP 797  
Formulary management policy PH-11-08 