 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center  
Standard Operation Procedure:  OLOL Indigent & Sexual Assault  Patient Prescription Program 
All team members are expected to review and follow department standard operating procedures, and will be held 
accountable accordingly. 
 File Path:  
Last Edited:  7.10.2023 
 1 
This is a program coordinated between the OLOL Medical Management & OLOL Retail Pharmacies in order 
to provide up to 30 days supply of medication to patients in financial need or who are victims of sexual 
assault who are unable to obtain critical medications at time of discharge. 
During Regular Outpatient Pharmacy Business Hours    
1. Social Worker or Nurse or Physician contacts the pharmacy via telephone as requests to speak with 
a pharmacist: 
a. MidCity pharmacy (OLOL) - (987-9105)  
b. Lake Children’s Pharmacy (Lake Children’s Hospital) -374- 1350  
2. Pharmacist provides the Social Worker or Nurse or Physician the cost of medication as well as 
availability and turn around time to fill the prescription. 
3. Social Worker or Nurse or Physician discuss the option of obtaining the medication through the in-
house pharmacy as well  as the cost of medication with patient and communicates the information 
to the pharmacist tech via telephone call: 
a. If patient can not afford medications, Pharmacist or Tech will call St Vicent de Paul to obtain 
free medications if available. 
i. Pharmacist or tech will send all documentation to St Vicent de Paul  
b. If patient can afford medications and 
i. Has transportation to the pharmacy or arrangements to have family/caregiver  get 
the medication: 
1. Pharmacy fills the prescription 
2. Patient or family member is instructed regarding location and operating 
hours of pharmacy for pick up of medication post discharge. 
ii. Does not have transportation or family/caregive to pick up medication: 
1. Social Worker coordinates delivery of prescriptions with the pharmacy.  
Prescriptions must be received by pharmacy by 12 noon (M-F) for courier 
delivery from pharmacy at 2pm (M-F). If received by the pharmacy after 12 
noon 
(M-F), the delivery will be coordinated for the next business day 
 
4. Patient will receive notification via MyChart that medication is ready. The Social Worker, Nurse, or 
Physician may view status of prescription in Epic  
 
 
  
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center  
Standard Operation Procedure:  OLOL Indigent & Sexual Assault  Patient Prescription Program 
All team members are expected to review and follow department standard operating procedures, and will be held 
accountable accordingly. 
 File Path:  
Last Edited:  7.10.2023 
 2 
After Hours & Weekends 
1. Provider will generate 2 prescriptions: 
a. Limited days supply  electronic prescription to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy or Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital Pharmacy 
b. Balance prescription to Midcity Pharmacy (OLOL) or Lake Children’s Pharmacy (LC Hospital) 
2. Call Pharmacy at 225-765-4434 (OLOL) or Lake Children’s ( 225-374-1380)and request to speak to a 
Charge Pharmacist to discuss request and determine an ETA.   (Note: Given the limited resources in 
the main pharmacy after hours and and weekends as well as the necessity to prioritize acutely ill 
patients, the turnaround time can be expected to minimally be 3 hours or more depending on the 
number of prescriptions) 
3. Pharmacy will check EPIC Willow Ambulatory system and validate that prescriptions are in the 
system awaiting dispensing 
4. Pharmacist should estimate the cost of prescriptions.   If the total cost of the prescriptions exceeds 
the current estimated cost of care per day, they should request approval from pharmacy 
administration before dispensation (Note: the cost per day to keep the patient in the hospital is 
$1500 and the average length of stay is 3 days, if medication cost is less than $4500 then the 
medication should be dispensed without need for approval from Pharmacy Administration) 
5. Pharmacy team member will fill prescriptions for no more than 3 day supply unless otherwise 
instructed by pharmacy administration 
6. Pharmacy team member will contact the nurse when medications are ready for pick up  
7. The nurse will pick up medications at 1st floor main pharmacy window (OLOL) or 2nd floor inpatient 
pharmacy window for OLOL Children's Hospital. 
8. If provider sends Rx to a different pharmacy location after hours, the inpatient pharmacy will not be 
able to transfer those prescriptions, however, they can view where it was sent in EPIC along with the 
information for the prescription and contact the provider to send again to the inpatient location.   
9. If the pharmacist is unable to reach the provider to resend the presccritpions, the pharmacist should 
notify the SW or nusre and request help. 
*The patient reserves the right to use a pharmacy of their choice at their own expense 
 