OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
 
Title: 
Request for Biological Implants (non-
human cellular based implantable and 
transplantable products) 
Policy Reference #: SOS046 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 07/01/2009 Review Date: 08/22/2024 
Revision Date: 08/15/2019 
 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To assure compliance with Joint Commission and FDA established regulations and 
standards for the transport, receiving, storage and tracking of all biological implants 
(human and non-human cellular based implantable and transplantable products).   
 
POLICY: 
Every biological implant will comply with regulatory standards for receipt, inspection, 
storage and traceability from point of receiving until implantation.  
 
PROCEDURE:  
1. Product must be an OLOLRMC approved product, through a value analysis 
review process, OR Supply committee & CQVA Surgery PAC. 
2. If a product is needed prior to approval by the appropriate committees, the MD 
must receive interim approval through collaboration between Service Line 
Director and Senior Divisional Director Surgical Services.  Approval will be 
given for a limited time period or specific number of cases. Once interim 
approval is obtained, the product will be handled through the same process as 
approved items.   
3. The Vendor must complete a “Supplier Qualification form” and provide a letter, 
on company letterhead, stating the shipping process of the biological product 
(how shipped, the temp maintained during shipping, how long product is 
guaranteed good until in OLOL possession). 
4. FMOL Purchasing Department issues a purchase order. 
5. All products must be shipped to OLOLRMC Surgical Materials Department from 
the manufacture/vendor.   
6. No products will be accepted directly from a sales representative not implanted. 
7. OLOL will not pay for any product that does not have a purchase order number.  
8. Upon receipt by Surgical Material Dept,  staff  must: 
• Validate the integrity of the shipping container 
• Verify that the recommended temperature has been maintained. 
• Record In house storage temps 
• Verify recipient and implant info match. 9. Surgical Materials Department will be responsible for ensuring all required 
information is entered into the tracking system. 
10. If upon inspection the product does meet all requirements for shipping and pack 
integrity, it will be rejected and returned to the Vendor.   
 
 