 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Attire, Surgical Policy Reference #: SOS002 
Supersedes #: 07/23/92; 07/22/92 
Date of Origination: 11/1990 Review Date: 03/11/2024 
Revision Date: 05/11/2021 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide a policy on surgical attire. 
 
POLICY: 
Appropriate attire is worn to and from the hospital.  Surgical attire, appropriate for area, is worn in 
the surgical suite. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. All team members are to wear a uniform or appropriate attire to and from work in accordance 
with the Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) policy for employee 
dress.  
 
2. Undershirts - A short sleeve undershirt may be worn with the following restrictions: 
a. Low lint material, freshly laundered, and light colored (so that it does not conceal visibly 
soiled substances). 
b. Must not exceed the neckline of the undershirt or any amount over or on top of the scrub 
top. (i.e. turtle neck or shirt with collar) 
c. Must be short sleeved and minimal exposure beyond the edge of the scrub top arm holes. 
d. If visibly soiled, item must be laundered by the healthcare facility. 
 
3. Scrubs  
a. Team members who enter the semi-restricted and restricted areas of the surgical suite will 
change into freshly laundered surgical attire provided by the facility.  
b. Visitors entering the semi-restricted or restricted areas of the surgical suite (eg, law 
enforcement officers, parents, biomedical engineers) should don either clean surgical 
attire or a single-use jumpsuit (e.g. coveralls, bunny suit) designed to completely cover 
personal apparel. 
c. A long sleeved warm-up jacket is required when assembling sets in SPD prep and pack. 
Otherwise, it is optional unless the following items are worn: jewelry or watches on the 
arms. It should be snapped closed during use. 
d. Socks or hose are worn with closed shoes with backs. Sandals and bare feet are not 
allowed. 
e. Scrub clothes should be changed whenever they become visibly soiled or wet.  2 
f. Hospital provided scrubs may not be worn to and from or taken off of the hospital 
campus.  
 
 
 
4. Hats  
a. All hair should be covered with an appropriate cap. 
i.  A skull cap may be used.  Only a minimal amount of shortly groomed hair not to 
extend past the nape of the neck is allowed beyond the skull cap. 
ii. A bouffant will be used in all other situations. 
b. A cloth cap or bouffant may be worn but must be fully covered by a hospital provided 
disposable bouffant. If visibly soiled, the item must be laundered by the healthcare 
facility. 
c. Staff with long hair should wear two bouffant hats to contain their hair. 
d. Staff with beards, long sideburns, or facial hair not contained within a mask must use the 
proper beard cover when in the restricted areas or SPD (prep and pack and decontam).  
 
5. Shoe covers  
a. Are not required if OR team members have shoes dedicated to use within the operating 
room and not worn in from outside. 
b. Are required only in situations when exposure to blood or potentially infectious material 
is reasonably anticipated.   
c. They must be changed daily and whenever they become torn, wet, or soiled. They must 
be removed before leaving the surgical area. 
d. Hand hygiene must be performed after removal. 
 
6. Masks 
a. All persons entering the restricted area of the surgical suite will wear a mask. 
b. A surgical mask will always be worn while in a restricted area. 
c. Once the patient has left the operating room, staff may choose to not wear a mask.  
During room clean up masks should be worn if there is a risk for a splash to the face.  
d. Masks will cover both mouth and nose and be secured in a manner that prevents venting. 
e. Masks should be removed and discarded when it has been visibly soiled or taken down. 
Masks are not to be worn around the neck. 
f. Masks are single use and not to be saved or used on another case.  
g. Masks should be handled by the ties only when removing. 
h. Masks are to be removed prior to leaving the O.R. Department. 
 
7. Jewelry - Individuals involved in direct patient care will have jewelry confined within surgical 
attire or removed. 
a. One wedding band can be worn unless donning sterile gloves. If visibly soiled it must be 
taken off and be disinfected. 
b. Other jewelry (watches and neck chains) will be totally confined within the scrub attire or 
removed. 
c. Earrings should be of small size or removed and covered by a bouffant hat. 
  3 
8. Nails   
a. Nail polish will not be worn by individuals involved in direct patient care. 
b. Artificial nails will not be worn.  Artificial nails are defined as substances or devices 
applied to the natural nails to augment or enhance the nails, include but are not limited to 
bonding, tips, wrappings and tapes. 
 
 
9. Cosmetic and make-up should be kept to a minimum and no strong scented products (colognes 
and perfumes) should not be worn. 
a. When cosmetics such as artificial eye lashes are worn, a mask with attached face shield 
should be worn. 
 
10. Protective barriers are available and utilized to reduce the risk of exposure to potentially 
infectious materials. 
a. Gloves will be selected and worn depending on the task to be performed. 
1) Sterile gloves are worn when performing sterile procedures; unsterile gloves will 
be worn for other tasks. 
2) Gloves are changed between patient contact or after contact with contaminated 
items when the task is completed. 
3) Hands are washed/sanitized after removing gloves. 
b. Protective eyewear is worn whenever activities could place one at risk for a splash to the 
face or eyes. 
1) Protective eyewear that becomes contaminated will be cleaned as promptly as 
possible, according to manufacturer’s guidelines. 
c. Additional protective attire (such as fluid-resistant aprons, gowns, and shoe covers) is 
worn when contact with blood and body fluids is unavoidable (e.g., certain emergency 
situations, traumas, cases involving large blood losses), when large volumes of irrigation 
are used or when working in instrument clean-up rooms. 
 
11. Personal items   
a. ID badges and lanyards must be visible, secured to person, and a material that can be 
wiped down.  
b. Cell phones are allowed in the operative area but must be kept away from the sterile field 
and only used to perform job functions. 
c. Hearing aids are approved to be worn if medically necessary during the case. Auditory 
devices (i.e. ear buds and headsets) should not be used by hospital staff.  
e. Backpacks, purses and other personal items are not allowed in the semi-restricted or 
restricted area. 
i. Bags that are approved to carry supplies must be kept clean and wiped down 
between cases.  
ii. These bags must stay in a designated area of the operating room and not be left on 
the ground.  
iii. They should remain in the hospital and not taken to and from home 
iv. If an approved bag must be taken out of the facility, it should be cleaned prior to 
reentry of the operating room. 
f. All personal items must be cleaned regularly with an approved disinfectant.  4 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practice, 2024 
 
 
 