 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Immediate Use Steam Sterilization 
(IUSS) 
Policy Reference #: SOS015 
Supersedes #: 01/19/87; 09/26/91 
Date of Origination: 01/19/1987 Review Date: 07/5/2024 
Revision Date: 06/27/2023 
 
 
To provide direction for immediate use steam sterilization (IUSS) in the operating room 
in an emergent situation only. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Immediate use steam sterilization (IUSS), formerly called flash sterilization, is 
used only in selected clinical situations and in a controlled manner when there is 
an immediate need for an item/product and insufficient time to process by the 
preferred wrapped or container method performed by the Sterile Processing 
Department. 
 
IUSS should not be used as a substitute for insufficient instrument inventory. 
IUSS items are intended for immediate use only.  Therefore there is no shelf life 
for these items. 
 
Should time not permit for regular processing of instruments for a routine 
scheduled case; the nurse manager and surgeon will be notified of the situation.   
 
IUSS Methods and Recommended Sterilization Cycles 
 
Cycle  Type of Load Temp Exposure Time Dry Time 
Prevacuum Basic Instrumentation 270 F 4 min N/A 
Prevaccum Loaner/Vendor Instrumentation 270F 10 min N/A 
Figure 1 
 
A. IUSS criteria: 
1. Device manufacturer’s recommendations (IFU’s) are followed for all 
steps in this process to ensure proper parameters are met. 
2. This procedure is appropriate for any loose instrument or set of 
instruments that will fit inside the inner tray and comply with the 
manufactures recommendations.   2 
3. Items are disassembled completely and thoroughly cleaned following 
the proper decontamination procedures. 
4. Check container and inner tray for cleanliness. Confirm the permanent 
filters are in place and appropriately secured. 
5. Load the inner tray ensuring that the instruments are not overloaded, 
preventing overlapping of the instruments, and ensuring the container 
will close/lock appropriately. 
6. Place inner tray inside container and lock the outer two locks located 
on either end of the outer container. 
7. Place the sealed container inside the autoclave with a biological pack, 
close the door and select the appropriate cycle for that item(s) based on 
the manufactures recommendations. 
8. Following sterilization, verify the cycle parameters have been met (see 
autoclave cycle record from the machine). 
9. Donning the proper heat resistant gloves, carefully remove container 
from autoclave utilizing the handles and transport immediately to point 
of use.   Item must be immediately transferred to the sterile field using 
appropriate sterile aseptic technique.  
 
B. IUSS documentation should include the following: 
1. Date & time 
2. Patient’s name 
3. Item being sterilized 
4. Autoclave & Load # 
5. Reason for flashing 
6. Integrator/Biological results 
•  (Lot number, control results, and biological results) 
7. O.R. room # 
8. Operator’s name/initials 
9. Verification with initials on the sterilizer computer print out 
• Cycle Type 
• Temperature 
• Exposure time 
 
II. Manufacturer Guidelines – manufacturer guidelines are the unequivocal 
reference for IUSS and routine sterilization parameters and cycle selection.  If 
doubts concerning cycle selection/method arise, always refer to SPD for the 
appropriate recommendations.  
 
NOTE:  Some specialty instruments may require extended exposure times.  Some 
manufactures do not recommend IUSS.  Therefore the recommended guidelines 
from the device manufacturer should be followed. 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
  3 
AORN Standards, Recommended Practices, 2024 
ANSI/AAMI ST79:2017/A4:2017 
 