 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Administration 
Title: Evacuation of the Operating Room/ Endo Policy Reference #: SOS012 
Supersedes #: 09/13/1990 
Date of Origination: 09/13/1990 Review Date: 01/17/2025 
Revision Date: 12/23/2013 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To outline steps for safe and efficient patient care in the event an evacuation is ordered for the 
Operating Room (OR)/ Endoscopy staff, patients, and visitors. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event an internal disaster occurs requiring evacuation, the staff should have knowledge of all 
evacuation routes, evacuation procedure, and how to evacuate patients in a safe, efficient, and 
orderly manner. In the event of a fire, elevators must not be used. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Patient Evacuation from Operating Room/Endoscopy 
1. The order to evacuate should be given by the Fire Marshall or the Chief Administrative 
Officer of the hospital. 
2. The Divisional Director/Surgical Services, or designee in his/her absence, should direct 
the evacuation of the surgical patients. 
A. An ambu bag is provided in each procedure room  
B. Additional patient equipment will be provided as appropriate (02, transport monitors) 
C. If immediate evacuation is required, patients undergoing surgery should be: 
1. Stabilized as quickly as possible 
2. Open wounds should be packed and covered as appropriate for the particular 
case and as directed by the surgeon. 
a. No attempt should be made to complete the procedure. The skin should be 
closed and/or covered as rapidly as possible and the patient evacuated 
immediately. 
b. In case a patient is unable to be transported immediately, the surgeon should 
assume responsibility for directing further actions. 
3. Patients should be transported on the OR bed/stretcher to the nearest exit.  
a. Patients not yet anesthetized should be transported on a stretcher or in a 
wheelchair. 
b. If ground level exits are obstructed, patients should be evacuated through 
the walkway to the parking garage, Medical Plaza or Emergency Room exit 
on 2nd floor. 
c. If these exits are obstructed, patient should be evacuated by way of the 
stairs to the first floor.  2 
1. Anesthetized patients should be moved using the blanket carry. 
2. Non-anesthetized patients should be escorted.  
d. Employees should be placed in strategic locations by Divisional Director or 
designee. 
1. To give assistance turning corners. 
2. To open doors. 
3. To convey information as needed. 
B.  EVACUATION ROUTES  
1. Several egress routes exist on second floor and should be utilized as dictated by facility 
conditions at the time of an evacuation order.  Each route provides access to exit the 
building without encountering stairs.  Lighted “Exit” signs can direct personnel to any of 
these locations. 
a. Parking Garage #2 
b. Emergency Room 
c. Medical Plaza 1 & 2 as it leads to Employee Parking Garage #4 
 