 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Gowning & Gloving Policy Reference #: SOS017 
Supersedes #: 1985; 10/08/91 
Date of Origination: 10/19/1987 Review Date: 08/15/2024 
Revision Date: 07/20/2020 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide a technique for gowning and gloving following the surgical hand scrub.  
 
POLICY: 
Gowning and gloving should be performed prior to touching sterile equipment or the sterile field. 
 
PROCEDURE:  
1. Preparing gown and gloves  
a. Gown and gloves for the scrub nurse/tech who will be establishing the sterile set-up 
should be located away from the sterile table. 
b. The wrappers containing the gown and the gloves should be opened aseptically to 
create a sterile area from which they can be retrieved.  
c. All PPE and other items needed such as eye shields, shoe covers, and x-ray 
protection should be donned prior to gowning and gloving 
d. Perform hand antisepsis (rub or scrub) prior to sterile gowning and gloving 
e. Use sterile technique when donning or changing gowns and gloves. 
 
2. Drying of the hands and arms (hand scrub method): 
a. The towel should be grasped firmly and lifted straight up and away from sterile field 
without dripping water onto the sterile field. 
b. The person should step away and bend slightly forward at the waist, holding the 
hands and elbows above the waist and away from the body.  The towel should be 
allowed to unfold to its full length and width. 
c. The top half of the towel should be held securely with one hand and the opposite 
fingers and hand blotted dry, making sure they are thoroughly dried before moving 
to the forearm. 
d. A rotating motion should be used going up the arm toward the elbow. Once an area 
is dried, it should not be revisited. 
e. The lower end of the towel should be grasped with the dried hand and the same 
procedure should be used for drying the second hand and forearm.  
f. The towel should be discarded into the appropriate hamper. 
 
 
  2 
3. Putting on the sterile gown: 
a. The sterile gown is grasped at the neckline with both hands and lifted from the 
sterile field.  The person steps into an area where the gown may be opened without 
risk of contamination. 
b. The gown should be spread open and the hands and arms inserted into the sleeves. 
c. The hands should not emerge outside of the gown cuffs if a "closed" gloving method 
is to be used. 
 
4. Gloving 
 General 
a. Initial sterile person gowning and gloving should use “closed” method 
b. Gloves should completely cover the cuffs of the gown and should not be 
adjusted. 
c. Inspect gloves after donning and periodically thereafter. Recommended 
changing when: 
  -after each procedure 
  -every 90-150min 
  -when defect or perforation is noted 
  -after direct contact with methacrylate 
  -after touching optic eye piece 
  -touching fluoroscopy machine 
  -touching helmet hood or visor 
    
"Closed" gloving: 
1) The cuff of the glove is laid over the cuff of the gown.  The glove cuff is 
held securely by the hand (which is under the gown cuff) on which it has 
been placed, the opposite hand (also under the gown cuff) stretches the glove 
cuff opening over the sleeve opening entirely. 
2) The gown cuff with the glove is then pulled toward the body keeping the cuff 
covered by the glove. The fingers are directed into their position and the 
glove is adjusted. 
3) The gloved hand then positions the remaining glove on the opposite sleeve in 
the same fashion as above.  Gloves should be wiped with a wet towel to 
remove glove powder if present. 
"Open" method includes: 
1) Gowned person may use this method when it is necessary to change only one 
glove.  If both gloves need to be changed and there is no sterile person to 
assist, the gowned person must remove the gown then the gloves, and then 
re-gown and glove. 
2)    The gowned person may cover a single contaminated glove using the “open” 
method by placing the remaining sterile hand under the cuff of the 
replacement glove and pulling the glove over the contaminated glove.  The 
cuff of the replacement glove should be adjusted to completely cover the 
underlying glove. 
 
5. Assisting others with gowning and gloving (open and closed):  3 
a. The gown is opened by the sterile scrub person as described previously.  The inner 
side of the gown is held opened toward the individual who is to be gowned.   
b. A cuff is made of the neck and shoulder area to protect the gloved person. 
c. The gown is held until the person's hands and forearms are in the sleeves of the 
gown.  
d. The circulating nurse pulls the gown onto the shoulders, adjusting the back and 
securing the ties. 
e. The scrub person grasps the glove under the everted cuff. 
f. The palm of the glove is turned toward the other individual's hand. 
g. The cuff is stretched to open the glove.  The scrub person keeps their fingers within 
the cuff to prevent contamination. 
h. The hand is inserted into the glove. 
i. The gowned person brings the cuff over the gown cuff. 
j. Procedure is repeated for other hand. 
k. The wrap around back on the gown is fixed by the scrub person after the gloving is 
completed. 
6. Changing soiled gown and gloves 
 Gown  
a. if a sleeve is contaminated, assess is a sleeve protector can be used 
b. If any other sterile part of the gown is contaminated, a new sterile gown should be 
donned. 
Gloves 
 a. change contaminated or perforated gloves away from the sterile field 
b. unscrubbed team member should remove without altering the position of the gown 
cuff or touching any parts of the sterile gown or under gloves.  
c. the closed assisted or open assisted method should be used when gloving. Open 
method may be used if an under glove was used and it has not been compromised  
 
7. Removing soiled gown and gloves. 
a. For disposable/paper gowns: 
1) Grasp the front of the gown with gloved hands 
2) Pull the gown away from the body to break the ties 
3) While removing the gown, fold or roll the gown inside out into a bundle. 
4) The gloves should be “peeled off” while taking your arms out of the sleeve. 
Only touch the inside of the gown with bare hands. 
5) Place gown into the appropriate waste receptacle 
6) Perform hand hygiene 
7) Remove any additional PPE such as eye shields 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practice, 2024 
 
 
 
 