 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Disinfection, High Level Policy Reference #: SOS008 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 05/30/1988 Review Date: 02/18/2024 
Revision Date: 2/18/2022 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide a policy for readying instruments and equipment for patient use by high level 
disinfection. 
 
POLICY: 
High level disinfectant solutions should be used according to manufacturer's instructions for 
instruments and equipment which cannot be steam autoclaved.  Only solutions approved by the 
EPA Environmental Protection Agency, (the Federal Agency responsible for registration of 
disinfectants) should be used. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A. General  
1. Record the date the solution was opened and/or activated on a container label or in a log 
book.  Also, record the expiration date for the opened solution. 
2. Test concentration of solution with the appropriate test strip for the product and according 
to manufacturer’s directions (prior to each use). Record temperature and ensure temp meets 
parameters according to manufacturer’s directions (prior to each use).Date opened and 
expiration dates must be written on the bottle of test stripes. 
3. Prior to use of the solution, the expiration date should be checked. 
4. Thoroughly pre-clean all items to be immersed with a mild detergent or enzymatic solution 
to remove all debris, and rinse with tap water. 
5. Place pre-cleaned and dried items in the solution and completely immerse.  (Try not to 
introduce additional water droplets to solution since this will dilute the solution).  Any 
cannulated items or tubings should have solution inside them through the use of a syringe, 
ear syringe, or asepto. 
6. Keep container closed as much as possible to prevent evaporation and minimize odor. 
7. Immersion time and temperature parameters should be according to manufacturer’s 
directions. 
8. Remove items from disinfectant solution and rinse thoroughly according to manufacturer’s 
directions. 
9. All items are to be cleaned, soaked, and dried after patient use before returning to storage. 
10. The solution may be used up to the maximum number of days specified by the manufacturer 
unless the test strip indicates the solution is no longer effective.  2 
11. If the high level disinfection agent requires environmental monitoring, then it is performed 
according to the manufacturer recommendations. 
12. Perform quality control on test strips according to manufacturer’s directions. 
13. For Latex sensitive patients the soaking solution must be prepared using non Latex gloves 
and the solution must be labeled for Latex sensitive patients only. 
 
B. Trophon  
1. Ensure item ahs been cleaned per manufacturers specifications  
2. Ensure Trophon unit is functional and HLD solution is within number of uses  
3. Load clean, dry probe into the disinfection chamber 
4. Ensure a chemical indicator is placed at the base of the chamber door, red side up. 
5. Run cycle  
6. Validate cycle, apply gloves, open chamber door, and validate chemical indicator. 
7. Ensure probe is clean and dry, use lint free cloth.  
8. If not immediately used, place in a cover, and label clean with expiration date. 
9. Record cycle and log information in the Trophon logbook.   
10. Maintenance machine as required and report any errors. 