 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Sharps/Needle, Hazardous Materials, and 
Drug Disposal  
Policy Reference #: SOS026 
Supersedes #: 05/11/88 
Date of Origination: 05/11/1988 Review Date: 03/11/2024 
Revision Date: 03/11/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To state the appropriate disposal of sharps, needles, hazardous materials, and drugs within the 
Operating Rooms to ensure the safety for all healthcare workers, patients, and guests. 
 
POLICY: 
1. Items will be handled and disposed of in a manner: 
a. To minimize risk for healthcare workers, patients, guests and contracted waste 
handlers. 
b. To comply with State Infectious Waste Management regulations, Drug Enforcement 
Agencies, Environmental Agencies, OSHA Bloodborne Pathogens standard, and 
other regulatory requirements. 
 
2. All team members are responsible for regularly inspecting bins and ensuring they are 
available prior to the case and can be used for the duration of the procedure. 
3. Bins will be replaced when reaching the line designating that it is full. If no line, then 
bins shall be replaced when ¾ full. 
4. Containers will be available in OR room/areas as items are being used and are to be 
used for proper disposal of materials or drugs. 
5. Containers will be securely closed prior to disposal. If required, solidifier is to be added. 
They are to be placed on the surgical case cart and sent to decontamination for proper 
disposal. 
6. Containers are considered potentially infectious and/or hazardous waste and will be 
manifested to a contracted infectious waste disposal handler for proper disposal. 
 
 
          
PROCEDURE: 
Sharps/Needles 
1. Sharps container will be available in all OR rooms/areas where sharps are used.  These 
containers are for sharps only. 
a. Sharps container can be utilized for more than one case.  Discretion should be 
utilized in this case as to discarding these boxes when 3/4 full. 
b. If container becomes 3/4 full during case, a new container should be provided for 
remainder of case.  2 
2. Needles/Syringes should have safety mechanism activated (when using safety device) then 
discard intact, uncut and unsheathed (uncapped) into the needle box (sharps container).  If 
re-capping is necessary, it should be done carefully with sheath sitting on level surface.  
Hand to hand re-capping should be avoided. 
3. Other sharp object (i.e. scalpels, glass tubes, lancets, glass fragments, disposable 
instruments maybe placed into sharps containers. 
4. Needle cutters will not be used in order to prevent aerosolization of blood particles. 
 
 
Hazardous Drugs 
1) Bins for antineoplastic will be brought to Operating Rooms when surgery is anticipated 
to used Group 1 Hazardous drugs. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act bins 
(RCRA) will be available in PACU areas for disposal of group 2 hazardous drugs. 
2) Bins with hazardous materials will remain closed when not in use. 
3) Contaminated fluids or solutions will be contained or solidified prior to placing in bins. 
4) Bins will be removed when ¾ full.  
5) Bin will be used for their intended purpose. Bins marked for sharps can contain sharps. 
Those designed for items such as inhalers will be utilized for disposal of those items.  
 
Controlled Substance  
1) Bins will be available in procedural and perioperative areas. 
2) Bins will be changed out every 90 days or when full. Areas such as Children’s 
hospital will change out bins more frequently (every 14 days). All bins will be 
labeled with the date they were replaced. 
3) Bins will be stored in a secured area and locked into mounting apparatus. Lids must 
remain closed when not in use. 
4) OR will not add water to bins. Units not using propofol add water to the specified 
markings. 
5) Bins are for Controlled substances only. No sharps will be placed in these bins 
6) Prior to transporting a full bin, the proper amount of solidifier must be added. 
 
OR Recyclable bins (Stryker Sustainability)  
1)  Place direct energy devices, trocars, shavers, arthroscopic wands, suture passers, scissor 
tips, laparoscopic instruments, bits, burs and blades in the bin.  
2) Do not cut cords. 
 
 
 