 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Tourniquets, Application of Policy Reference #: SOS021 
Supersedes #: 1988 
Date of Origination: 02/16/1988 Review Date: 08/19/2024 
Revision Date: 08/19/2022 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To clarify proper use and care and operation of pneumatic tourniquets. 
 
POLICY: 
Tourniquets will be used on those cases as stipulated by the physicians and proper documentation 
will be made as to its use. For purposes of this policy, both pneumatic and manual exsanguination.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
Pre procedure 
1. Asses the patient and screen for contraindications. Selection and placement of the 
tourniquet cuff should be determined by the surgery type, patient's age, anatomy, medical 
condition, and specific specifications of tourniquet manufacturer. 
2. Check pulses distal to tourniquet. 
3. Develop a plan of care based on these findings. 
4. Tourniquet size should be appropriate to the size of the extremity. 
5. Tourniquet cuffs should be clean or sterile based upon application and manufacturer 
instructions. A sterile cuff is preferred when it will be close to the incision site. If the cuffs 
are unable to be adequately cleaned, single use cuffs should be selected as allowed by 
manufacturer.  
 
Procedure 
1. If not part of an all-in-one tourniquet, padding is to be applied under the tourniquet cuff. 
The skin under the cuff should be protected from mechanical injury by keeping the cuff and 
padding wrinkle free. Padding should allow for cuff compliance 
2. The pneumatic cuff should be positioned at the point of maximum circumference of the 
limb, however, lower extremity tourniquets should be applied to the proximal third of the 
thigh, avoiding vulnerable neurovascular structures. 
3. Once applied, a tourniquet cuff should be secured and not be rotated to new position 
because the tourniquet may move or have shearing forces that may damage underlying 
tissue. 
4. Tourniquets should be covered with the appropriate adherent drapes to prevent pooling of 
solutions and to keep the tourniquet clean   2 
5.  If tourniquet is applied prior to prep, skin preparation solutions should not be allowed to 
collect or pool under or on the tourniquet. 
6.  Exsanguination of the extremity should take place prior to starting the tourniquet. If the 
cuff is an all-in-one tourniquet, exsanguination will be part of application.  
7. Pneumatic tourniquet pressure settings should be based on limb occlusion pressure (LOP). 
a. Before cuff inflation, adjust the cuff pressure setting by adding a safety margin to     
the LOP as follows: 
-add 40 mm Hg for LOP less than 130mm Hg 
-add 60 mm Hg for LOP between 131-190 mm Hg 
-add 80 mm Hg for LOP greater than 190mm Hg33 
-for pediatric patients, adding 50 mm Hg has been recommended  
8. The patient condition should be continually monitored while the tourniquet is “started” or 
“up” 
9. The surgeon should be alerted to the tourniquet time at the end of the first hour of inflation 
and at requested designated intervals thereafter. 
10. The pressure regulator for pneumatic tourniquets should be self-calibrating upon activation. 
11. Deflation or removal of the tourniquet should be coordinated with the surgeon and the 
anesthesia care provider regarding the patients’ hemodynamic status. 
12. At the end of each case the tourniquet is removed per manufacturer’s instructions. 
 
Charting 
1.  The following items about the tourniquet should be recorded in the appropriate area of the 
intraoperative record: 
-Application site 
-condition of site 
-start time 
-end time 
-pressure in mmHg (if pneumatic) 
-person who applied the tourniquet  
 
REFERENCES:  
AORN  Standards and Recommended Practices 2024 
 
 