ECLS-012 7047 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Special 
Procedures/Imaging 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 7047 Special 
Procedures/Imaging 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 06/05/2020 Review Date: 6/3/2024 
Revision Date: 12/22/17 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) to guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Emergency Exits: 
o Door leading to main tower hallway 
o Double doors down hallway leading to Endoscopy  
o Double doors down hallway leading to Pediatric Emergency Department 
o Double doors leading to Emergency Department main hallway 
• Adjacent Smoke Compartments 
o Through double doors down hallway leading to Endoscopy ECLS-012 7047 
Page 2 of 2 
o Hallway leading to CT 
o Entryway to main tower hallway  
▪ For room 3 
• Through the double doors down hallway leading to Pediatric Emergency 
Department 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drill or Code RED response 
• The Technologist or designee will assume responsibility of the patient that they are examining, 
and bring them to the adjacent smoke compartment 
• The Scrub Tech or designee will ensure all doors are shut, that do not automatically shut. The 
Supervisor will confirm automatic fire doors closed  
• The Registered Nurse or designee will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The 
hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• An Imaging  Manager or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and 
those with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• The Supervisor or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for by having a copy of the 
daily schedule 
• The Supervisor or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for by checking the 
transportation logs, and case board  
• The Technologist or designee will ensure all rooms are empty in area 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off. 
• The Medical gas shut off is located in the hallway across from Radiology Room 7. The medical 
gas can be shut off by any of the technologist with permission of the Manager, Director, or 
Respiratory  
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments. 
Patients will be transported in the same manor they were transported to the department.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• There are fire extinguishers located: 
o Outside Special Procedures Room 3 
o By the Radiology Core entrance closest to the MRI/CT hallway  
• The closest manual pull stations are: 
o Outside wall of trauma bay 4 
o Hallway between elevator 9-S and stairwell 3A  
 
   The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• For all rooms 
o Primary horizontal evacuation route would be through double doors down hallway 
leading to Endoscopy 
o Secondary horizontal evacuation route would be through the entryway to main tower 
hallway 
o Primary vertical evacuation route would be down the stairwell in the adjacent smoke 
compartment to the first floor 