 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Reuse of Single-Use Devices  Section/Chapter: Operating Room  
Title: Reusing Single Use devices  Policy Reference #: SSA010 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 12/12/22 Review Date: 4/15/24 
Revision Date: 12/15/22 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To assure proper measures are taken when a single use device must be reused due to critical 
shortage of the supply in order to facilitate patient care.   
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Spaulding Classification System is used to define the types of items and how they are processed  
 
1) Critical: items that are sterilized and enter sterile tissue or the vascular system. This 
category includes surgical instruments, cardiac and urinary catheters, implants, and 
ultrasound probes used in sterile body cavities. 
2) Semi-critical: items that are High Level Disinfected and contact mucous membranes or 
nonintact skin. This category includes respiratory therapy and anesthesia equipment, some 
endoscopes, laryngoscope blades, esophageal manometry probes, cystoscopes, anorectal 
manometry catheters, and diaphragm fitting rings.  
3) Noncritical: items are decontaminated, and low level disinfected that come in contact with 
intact skin but not mucous membranes. Examples of noncritical patient-care items are 
bedpans, blood pressure cuffs, crutches, and computers. 
  
POLICY: 
This policy will be active for a stipulated time frame during the duration of the critical shortage.  It 
will be set for review monthly and will be retired once shortage is resolved.  
 
The devices that are allowed for reuse will be specified in this policy and will state the number of 
reusable times along with the timeframe this policy is applicable.  
 Current items being used in this policy are:  
-Stryker Sterile Disposable Tourniquet Cuffs in the 5921-024-135 to 5921-024-236 series.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
Any device that is stated as Single Use Device (SUD) must follow the Instructions For Use by the 
manufacture unless the facility has reviewed and validated the following: 
1) Semi-critical or Critical device Single Use Device cannot be reused. 
2) The SUD must be inspected and tested for its ability to be reused. 
a. The number of times of reuse must be validated, stipulated, and tracked. 
b. The duration, if applicable, must be validated, stipulated, and tracked.    2 
3) SUD must have a cleaning protocol in place. 
4) The items and patient must be monitored in order to identify and track adverse events 
5) Risk assessment with Surgical Services lead, Infection Prevention, Risk Management, 
and other identified stakeholders will be performed.  
 
Reuse eligibility 
In order for a tourniquet to be considered for reuse it must meet the following criteria 
1) Not be used as sterile or have been reprocessed outside the specified protocol.  
2) Must be inspected  
a. No signs of damage or malfunction during use. 
i. e.g. Tubing not kinked, no identified cracks, no loose or damaged 
connections, Velcro works, etc.  
3) Must be cleaned  
a. Was not used on a patient with contact or contact-plus isolation precautions. 
b. Can be cleaned and disinfected.  
c. No visible soilage, debris, or contaminates. 
4) Not exceed the maximum number of uses.  
a. Tourniquets max out at 6 (initial use being the 1st with 3 reuses) 
 
Monitoring and Tracking  
Both the device and the patient must be tracked. 
  
Device: 
1) Standard documentation of tourniquet usage and inflation/deflation times will be entered 
into the EMR.  
2) The number of uses must be marked with an industrial sharpie on the label directly 
under the Stryker logo. The device must be marked before applying the tourniquet. Even 
if the tourniquet is not used during the surgery, it will be deemed as a usage. See 
example below.  
 
-The 2 dots show initial used from manufacturer and the 2nd use after 
reprocessing. 
-This device can be used 4 more times. It would be thrown away at 6 dots.  
 
 
 
  3 
Patient: 
1) Standard documentation of preoperative checks, pre/post skin condition, tourniquet 
usage, and inflation/deflation times will be entered into the EMR.  
2) Additionally, after the first usage, each patient (dots 2 - 6) will have a safety event 
entered.  
3) The safety event will be entered as a “Device & Medical Equipment” with the option 
“other” and specify “tourniquet reused”   
 
Reprocessing  
The steps for reprocessing are as follows form the time of initial use:  
 
1) Tracking 
a. The device (and patient) must be tracked per described above in tracking and 
monitoring. 
 
2) Protection  
a. User will protect the device as much as possible from contamination without 
compromising the device. e.g. using a 1010 or other drape to protect from 
excessive contamination during used.  
b. No adhesive must be placed on any part of the tourniquet.  
 
3) Inspection  
a. Before and after using the device, inspect for:  
-that it has not exceed the number of uses (6 dots) and dots are clearly visible 
-any signs of damage or excessive wear 
-any contamination 
 
4) Communication   
a. The MD must be aware they are using an unsterile tourniquet that is being 
reused outside the manufactured specification of single use prior to the surgery. 
b. Inform supervisor or any issues with the usage or reprocessing of the device. Use 
safety events as required.  
c. Ensure team cleaning room is aware of the device along with the cleaning and 
handling requirements.  
 
5) Cleaning  
a. All parts of the tourniquet will be wiped with hospital approved disinfectant for 
the proper duration.  
i. The Stryker tourniquet will use Super Sani-Cloth wipes  
b. Any part of the tourniquet that cannot be cleaned will render the tourniquet 
ineligible for reuse. e.g. blood stuck in Velcro.  
 
6) Storage 
a. Reprocessed tourniquets will be stored in a clean bin outside the patient room 
and away from other sterile supplies.  
b. They will be organized using the First in First Out method.   4 
 
Approved by Reuse Approval Committee:   
 Dr Catherine O’Neal CMO 
 Dr Phillip Allen ACM  
Nicole Telhiard CNO 
Dr. Katie Taylor Infection Control 
Troy Collins VP Risk Management  
Neal Hargrave Sr Director Logistics – Inventory  
 Rebecca Al-Marhoun Senior Director Surgical Service   
 
References 
 Policy: Tourniquets, Application of SOS021   
 
 AORN Standards and Recommended Practices 2024 
 
 2017 The Joint Commission white pages “Reuse of Single-Use Devices” 
https://www.jointcommissioninternational.org/-/media/jci/jci-documents/offerings/other-
resources/white-papers/jci_white_paper_reuse_of_single_use_devices.pdf 