 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Administration 
Title: Product Recall/Medical Alert Policy Reference #: SSA008 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 08/17/1988 Review Date: 11/15/2024 
Revision Date: 1/3/11 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide a policy for removal of recalled products and/or equipment from the patient care area. 
 
POLICY: 
Upon notification of product recall or medical advice alert, the product will be removed from use. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A. Product Recalls, External 
1. The Director of Material Management will receive, on a continuing basis, information 
from the American Hospital Association in the form of their "Alerts" publications.  
Product recalls from manufacturers, vendors and governmental agencies will also be 
directed to the Director of Materials Management. 
2.  The Director of Materials Management will direct, upon receipt, all appropriate alerts 
or recalls to the Surgical Services Director, who will then communicate this 
information to the appropriate Nurse Manager or Inventory Specialist. 
3. Stock of the recalled item shall be removed immediately from the unit.  In the case of 
equipment recall, the equipment should be tagged and removed from use. 
4. If appropriate, equivalent products should be identified to replace the recalled product 
and ordered as soon as possible. 
5. Recall notices will be kept on file in the units, along with a report outlining the action 
taken and persons notified of the recall, when applicable.   
6. Risk Management is notified of all recalls. 
7. The Nurse Manager or Inventory Specialist is responsible for informing the staff and 
physicians about recalls through bulletin boards, communication book, memos, and 
telephone calls if applicable.  
 
B. Product Recalls, Internal 
1. Should there be an internal recall of sterile products, the Sterile Processing 
Department (SPD) Manager will inform the Director, Nurse Manager, Assistant Nurse 
Manager or Charge Nurse in the Operating Room. Sterile recall items are returned to 
the SPD. Infection Control and Risk Management are notified.   
2. Physician notified by the Director, or Nurse Manager if a recalled item was used.  2 
3. Patient follow up will be conducted by the Infection Control Office and/or Risk 
Management.  
4. If any of the recalled product has been implanted, the Infection Control Director, or 
the Director of Surgical Services will conduct appropriate follow-up for these cases 
and physicians. 
 
 
REFERENCE:        
Administration Product Recall Policy SE/A/8. 
Sterilization Recall Process SPS019 
 