ECLS-012 102-10317-2511 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for St Clare Mental and 
Behavioral Health Unit 102-10317-2511 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 102-10317-
2511 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: November 3, 2017 Review Date: June 17, 2024 
Revision Date: June 17, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exits are located to the South of the unit and to the North of the unit. There are EXIT signs 
marking their locations.  
• Adjacent Smoke Compartment(s) –is to the North through the entrance to the unit (Smoke 
Compartment E) 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response ECLS-012 102-10317-2511 
Page 2 of 2 
• Mental Health Technician or designee will clear hallway of any carts or equipment by moving 
them to the quiet room on the C hall or the or the laundry room on the D hall  
• Mental Health Technician or designee will close all doors and windows 
• Registered Nurse and Mental Health Technician or designee will move patients and visitors to 
safety explaining, “The facility is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Mental Health Technician or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) 
and those with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Charge Nurse or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• Charge Nurse or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for 
• Registered Nurse or designee will ensure each room is empty.  
• Social Workers or designees will be required to access the unit to assist with patient observation, 
movement and the monitoring of doors at the direction of the Charge Nurse or designee. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments  
• Wheelchairs may be used as special patient transporting devices. This is patient specific and if 
someone needs a wheelchair it will be on the unit to be used during emergencies.   
• If a patient is bound to a wheelchair, it will be either in use or in the patient’s room with the 
patient.    
• Patients in this department are primarily ambulatory.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The pulls for the Fire Alarm are located in the nurses’ station.  
• There are fire extinguishers in the following locations: 
o South corner D Hall 
o South corner C Hall 
o North corner D Hall 
o North corner C Hall 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• These are psychiatric patients that may be legally committed. They may be violent, aggressive or 
psychotic and responding to internal stimuli. Additional hospital resources will be required if 
horizontal or vertical evacuation is required.  
• Oxygen tanks are used/stored on the unit  
• There is badge access for this unit. Only MBH Team Members and Security have access.   
• In the event of a Fire Drill or Alarm, all magnet doors automatically unlock. Mental Health 
Technicians, Customer Service Representatives, Nurses and Social Workers are required to 
monitor exit doors to ensure no one enters or leaves.  
 
The location of the horizontal evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route and destination to the north will be the cafeteria 
(compartment E). If unable to evacuate to the north, evacuation will take place to the south of 
the building. Alternate movement will be to the west into the courtyard. 