 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
 
7/28/2016 
 
NUMBER: 
STELPACU131 
 
SUBJECT:  Discharge Criteria from PACU 
 
 
PAGE 1 OF 1 
 
 
        
 
 
I. PURPOSE: To establish guidelines for assessing and evaluating patients’ 
readiness for discharge from PACU. 
  
II. APPLIES TO: Surgical Services, PACU 
   
III. POLICY: The post anesthesia nurse should discharge patients after all the 
following criteria have been met. 
 
IV. PROCEDURE:  
1. Airway patency and respiratory function is adequate.  
a. The patient should be able to maintain his/her own airway, clear secretions, deep 
breathe and cough on command as appropriate to patient condition. 
b. Breath sounds should be clear bilaterally or as appropriate to patient condition. 
c. No signs and/or symptoms of respiratory distress evident upon discharge. 
2. The patient’s hemodynamic status should be stabilized. 
a. Blood pressure and heart rate should remain stable and correlate with preoperative 
anesthesia baseline recordings unless documented by the physician. The patient 
should be able to maintain three (3) consecutive blood pressure readings within   
+/- 20 mmHg of pre-anesthetic level. (See Aldrete Scale below). 
b. The patient should be free of significant changes to their EKG rhythm or 
development of any new cardiac arrhythmias. EKG should be assessed and 
compared to preoperative baseline. Any changes should have been reported to 
physician with treatment initiated as ordered. (Example: patient now requires 
telemetry monitoring on the floor or transfer to ICU for observation). 
c. Oxygen saturation should be maintained at a minimum of 92% on room air unless 
contraindicated for patient condition according to their preoperative baseline and 
cleared by physician and documented prior to discharge. Any sources of 
supplemental oxygen should be discontinued at least fifteen (15) minutes prior to 
discharge unless physician has placed an order for it to be continued. If 
supplemental oxygen is ordered, patient should maintain at the minimal acceptable 
values. 
d. Patients’ core temperature should be a minimum of 36 degrees C (96.8 degrees F) 
unless approved by physician. If the patient’s temperature is ≥ 101 degrees F at the 
time of discharge, an order should be placed by the physician to approve discharge. 
3. The patient’s neurological status should be assessed.  
a. A confirmation of orientation to name and appropriate responses when asked  2 
questions applying to surgeon, procedure performed, current hospital, year, etc., or 
similar orientation to that exhibited preoperatively.  
b. Patient is able to move all four (4) extremities on command or in a manner similar 
to that present preoperatively according to patient condition. 
c. Sensation level and strength of movement should be assessed after local block 
and/or injections have been given. Findings should be documented and reported to 
physician prior to discharge. (See Monitoring the Local Anesthesia Patient policy). 
4. Surgical site stability should be assessed. 
a. The operative site and/or dressing should be checked for excessive bleeding and/or 
drainage as appropriate to the procedure. Dressings should be intact.  
b. The physician should be notified of any significant changes to the dressing not 
expected after specific procedure and drainage margins marked appropriately.  
c. Peripheral pulses should be assessed as appropriate to surgical procedure. 
5. Accurate Intake and Output should be recorded to address the patient’s fluid balance. 
a. The patient should be neither hypovolemic nor hypervolemic as evident by the 
patient’s vital signs, urinary output, surgical drains (if applicable), etc.  
b. Intravenous lines should be addressed and documented upon discharge. 
c. Intake should include total IV fluids given in PACU such as bolus amounts, 
piggybacks, maintenance fluids, blood and/or blood products, PO fluids, etc. 
d. Output should include all that apply such as estimated blood loss, urinary output 
(voided or catheterization), surgical drains, emesis, etc. 
e. Irrigation fluids used should be calculated and subtracted from the output. 
6. The patient’s pain level should be assessed and documented as appropriate for the 
procedure performed and patient condition. Pain medication order sets placed by the 
anesthesiologist and/or surgeon should be initiated and implemented as applicable to the 
patient’s current verbal/non-verbal level of pain. A discharge pain evaluation should be 
documented upon discharge.  
7. Each patient should be evaluated for discharge using the Aldrete Scoring Scale. The score 
should reflect the current status of the patient which should result in a minimum total of an 
eight (8).  There should not be any zeroes (0) reflected in any category unless confirmed 
by physician or appropriate to patient condition with a return to baseline state.  See 
attachment below for the full Adult Aldrete Scoring Scale. (Exception:  Critical patients 
going to ICU). 
8. Once all of the above criteria have been met, a verbal report of all significant information 
pertaining to the procedure and/or postoperative care given will be called to the receiving 
nurse or charge nurse. Patient should be transported with adequate staff as appropriate to 
patient discharge status via bed, stretcher, or wheelchair. A bedside handoff should be 
performed from RN to RN assuming responsibility for the care of the patient. Upon the 
transfer of care, vital signs should be taken and confirmed with RN prior to leaving the 
patient. A final nursing assessment, plan of care, discharge summary, and evaluation of the 
patient’s current status should be performed and documented. The criteria addressed on 
admission to PACU should be addressed again at discharge. The patient’s family should 
then be notified of the transfer. 
 
 
 
 
 
V.  COMPLICATIONS:   3 
 
1. Exceptions for discharge from PACU. 
a. Airway 
i. Patient may remain on BIPAP with approval from anesthesiologist and 
surgeon or kept intubated and transferred to ICU. 
b. Level of Consciousness  
i. Patient is only partially oriented because of pre-existing condition. 
c. Vital Signs 
i. Pre-existing variations such as hypotension, hypertension, bradycardia, 
etc., have been verified by the physician and treated as indicated. 
Variations in blood pressure greater than 50 mmHg from baseline have 
been evaluated by physician and discharge order is obtained.  
ii. Sustained elevation or decrease in temperature which has been evaluated 
and a positive response to treatment noted. 
iii. Any variation in respiratory effort have been evaluated by the physician. 
d. Surgical Site 
i. Any drainage that appears in excessive amounts or exhibits unusual 
characteristics should be reported to the surgeon and evaluated for 
approval for discharge. 
ii. Any variation in surgical drainage devices and/or urinary tubes appear 
clogged and not draining appropriately (less than 30cc/hr), excessive 
drainage, copious or unusual in characteristic have been evaluated by the 
surgeon and cleared for discharge. 
iii. Any changes from pre-existing condition or procedural baseline peripheral 
pulses, cap refill, muscular movement and sensation will be evaluated by 
the physician with approval for discharge. 
  4 
VI. ATTACHMENT: Aldrete Scoring Scale 
 
 
 
 
 
VII. REVISIONS 
Revised: 6/20/2016 by Kimberly Templet RN, Leigh Schexnaydre RN, 
9/28/2016 by Devin LaCombe RN 
 
VII. REVIEWED: 
  
Reviewed: 7/2017, 7/2018, 6/2019, 7/2020, 7/2021; 9/2022; 9/2023; 9/2024; 1/2025 
 
 
Aldrete Score Scale (Adult) Scoring  
  
Moves Extremities  2=moves 4 extremities 
 1=moves 2 extremities  
 0=moves 0 extremities  
  
Respiratory Effort 2=deep breath/coughs freely 
 1=dyspnea or limited breathing 
 0=apnea 
  
Preanesthesia BP 2=systolic BP +/- 20mmHg of pre-anesthetic level 
 1=systolic BP +/- 20-50mmHg pre-anesthetic level 
 0=systolic BP +/- 50mmHg pre-anesthetic level 
  
Arousability  2=full awake 
 1=arousable on calling 
 0=not responding 
  
SaO2  2=SaO2 ≥ 92% on room air 
 1=SaO2 > 92% on O2 
 0=SaO2 < 92% on O2   