OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION   
 
POLICIES AND 
PROCEDURES: 
  
PLANT OPERATIONS 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
  
2/09 
NUMBER:    
STELPLT395 
SUBJECT: 
PNEUMATIC TUBE SYSTEM 
Page 1 of 2 
Reviewed/Revised: 
12/09, 12/11, 8/12, 6/15, 3/18, 10/19, 7/21 
APPROVED BY: 
Justin Brown 
    
  
  
  
Applies to:       
  
All departments 
 
Pneumatic Tube System 
 
I. LOCATIONS: 
Main Control PC (Plant Operations Office) 
Main Equipment Room Surgery (Semi Sterile Corridor) 
Station 110  -  Emergency Room 
Station 111  -  Laboratory 
Station 112  -  ICU 
Station 113  -  Surgery Holding                           . 
Station 120  -  Pharmacy 
Station 121  -  Nurse Station Telemetry 
Station 122  -  Charge Nurse Station 
Station 123  -  Medicine Hall 1 (Alert Station only) 
Station 124  -  Medicine Hall 2 (Alert Station only) 
Station 125  -  Surgery Hall (Alert Station only) 
 
II. DESCRIPTION: 
Computer controlled electro-pneumatic tube system for the purpose of distributing 
medications and lab specimens throughout the facility. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
POICIES AND PROCEDURES – CONTINUED                                          Page 2 of 3 
PNEUMATIC TUBE SYSTEM 
 
 
 
 
III. OPERATION: 
A. Load specimen into carrier ENSURE that latches are closed  
     completely. 
B.  Set carrier onto dispatcher with latches sealed, 
C.  Using the keypad, send carrier to your selected destination station#. 
 
IV. WHEN THIS SYSTEM FAILS: 
A. The house supervisor /or/ the plant operations personnel will go to the main 
control PC in the plant operations office and will first log-in by entering the user 
name (admin) and password (admin) into the system page of the Swisslog 
operating program. 
B. Next, go to the event log page to determine what caused the system to fail. 
C. After determining that the cause of the problem has been cleared /or/ an attempt 
needs to be made to resume operation of the system – clear the event log item(s) 
/or/ clear all. 
D. The system should be restored to operation. 
E. In the event that there is still a problem and the system is still down – call the 
(oncall) plant operation personnel to return to the hospital and further investigate 
the failure. 
F. Problem still persists: Plant Operations will call for SwissLog Customer Service: 
1-800-396-9666, Account # 11063. 
 
V. CLEANOUT  PROCEDURE: 
When spillage of liquid occurs within the pneumatic tube system, the station sending 
the carrier and receiving station involved should be noted. Also, the contents of the 
broken container should be noted to aid in proper cleanup. 
 
The entire system or part of the system may require shutdown to prevent transferring 
the spillage to the entire system. 
 
After identifying the segment of the system involved when the spillage occurred, sign 
off the zone. If the carrier was enroute from one zone to another, both zones should 
be signed off and the interzone pipes cleaned out. 
 
To aid in cleanup a standard carrier can be used with the TransLogic cleanout 
container. The cleanout container provides a means of getting cleaning solution to the 
inside of the transmission lines and the carrier acts as a swab in the cleanout 
operation. 
 
 
POICIES AND PROCEDURES – CONTINUED                                          Page 3 of 3 PNEUMATIC TUBE SYSTEM 
 
 
 
Add water mixed with a suitable cleaning agent to the container, to within a quarter 
inch of the holes. Install the bottle cap and hand tighten. 
 
Insert the container in the carrier. Be sure carrier is properly closed and latched. 
Holding the carrier in the vertical position, take it to the sending station where the 
spillage occurred. Place the container in the dispatcher. 
 
With the system or zone turned off, go to diagnostics and set up the same air path 
which existed when the spillage occurred. When the carrier and container are in the 
horizontal position, the cleaning solution will be automatically dispensed. 
 
Send the carrier to the destination station involved when leakage occurred. Be sure to 
have someone at this station to remove the carrier upon arrival in the receiver. 
(Horizontal position of the carrier will continue to dispense cleaning solution in the 
station receiver) 
 
It may be necessary to repeat this procedure several times in the affected line. It may 
also be necessary to extend this procedure to more than just two stations. It depends 
on the quantity of the transactions occurring after the spillage. 
 
After running the cleaning carrier through the line several times, remove the container 
and the carrier and continue to send the empty carrier in the affected transmission 
line. The carrier wear bands will pick up the excess cleaning solution from the line. 
Occasionally remove the carrier from the system and towel dry the wear bands to 
speed up drying time.  
 
NOTE 
 
1. A slight amount of cleaning solution remaining in the transmission line will not 
affect the system’s operation. 
 
2.  Remember, good judgment is required in the clean-up after any accident. Use the 
same precaution in the selection of a cleaning agent that would be used if the 
spillage occurred on the floor. Sticky solutions should be avoided. One 
recommended solution is a 10% bleach solution. 
             
 
 
6/15 added swiss log acct # 
3/18 No Changes 
10/19 Name Change 
7/21 No Change 