 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
 
October 2016 
 
NUMBER: 
 
STELPACU132 
 
SUBJECT:   
 
Perianesthesia Care of the Pediatric Patient  
 
PAGE 1 OF 1 
 
        
 
 
I. PURPOSE: To provide guidelines for an accurate assessment and care of the 
pediatric patient during all stages of anesthesia. 
  
II. APPLIES TO: Surgical Services, PACU 
   
III. POLICY: The perianesthesia nurse should provide age-appropriate care that is 
individualized to meet the needs of the pediatric patient. The nurse should be 
knowledgeable of the differences in the pathophysiology and anatomy of a 
pediatric patient. Refer to the “Discharge Criteria from PACU” policy to 
determine the criteria that should be met prior to discharge. 
 
IV. PROCEDURE 
1. Respiratory System 
a. Upon admission, the pediatric patient’s respiratory function should be 
assessed prior to the procedure. Parent/guardian should be questioned 
regarding recent illnesses, current colds, loose teeth, etc. Nasal patency, 
respiratory effort, and breaths sounds should be addressed and 
documented. 
b. The pediatric patient is more susceptible to airway obstruction and 
hypoxemia. The perianesthesia nurse should be able to properly maintain 
the airway and be knowledgeable of potential signs of complications such 
as nasal flaring, sternal retractions, asymmetry of the lungs, etc. 
c. Ensure the proper sized equipment is available if a complication were to 
occur such as oral airways, pulse oximetry, ambu bags, etc. 
d. Respiratory rate should be appropriate for the age and condition of the 
pediatric patient.  
e. Oxygen saturation should remain greater than 95% on room air. 
2. Cardiovascular System 
a. Blood pressure and heart rate should be assessed and compared to 
preoperative values. Only an initial blood pressure is required to be 
documented while in PACU. The pulse oximetry monitor should be kept 
in place to measure the pediatric patient’s heart rate until discharge. 
b. The pediatric patient’s capillary refill should be addressed and 
documented. (See Aldrete Scoring Scale below). Brachial pulses should be 
assessed as appropriate for patient’s age.  2 
c. A temperature should be taken on all pediatric patients pre and post 
operatively to ensure adequate thermal regulation. Newborns and infants 
sensitive to heat loss should be assessed and actions taken accordingly to 
prevent complications. 
3. Neurological Status 
a. Level of cognitive function and the pediatric patient’s gestational age 
should be determined from parent/guardian prior to procedure. The 
perianesthesia nurse should assess for speech/communication 
development, motor skills, degree of coordination, and interaction skills. 
b. Consolability techniques should be considered such as swaddling, pacifier, 
blanket, bottle, stuffed animal, etc. that is applicable to age. 
c. The pediatric patient should be alert and appropriate for age. Should be 
able to recognize parent/guardian when aroused and/or respond to name. 
4. Nutritional Status 
a. Assessment of the pediatric patient’s hydration status should be addressed 
prior to the procedure. A weight should be obtained and recorded in chart. 
b. The parent/guardian should be asked how the pediatric patient receives 
nutrition (examples: bottle, juice cup, breast feeds). 
c. The perianesthesia nurse should be aware of the method used for 
elimination for each pediatric patient such as diapers, pull ups, potty 
training etc., to determine accurate intake and output. (1cc/kg/hr) 
5. Psychosocial and Developmental Considerations 
a. The pediatric patient population is defined as an infant, toddler, school- 
age child, and adolescent that is seventeen years of age and/or younger. 
b. The perianesthesia nurse should be knowledgeable about each stage of 
development. The psychosocial and emotional needs of the pediatric 
patient should be met to facilitate a positive experience upon discharge. 
6. The pediatric patient’s pain level should be assessed and documented as 
appropriate for age and patient condition. The use of the Wong Baker Face Scale 
and/or FLACC Scale should be used as tools to determine level of pain. 
Individualized pediatric order sets based on weight should be placed by the 
anesthesiologist and/or surgeon and should be initiated and implemented. 
7. Safety considerations should be assessed while caring for the pediatric patient 
such as the size of the stretcher, side rails, and need for the pediatric rail bumper 
pads. A second nurse must be available to assist as necessary during the first 
phase of recovery to ensure stable airway and hemodynamic stability. 
8. Each pediatric patient should then be evaluated for discharge using the Pediatric 
Aldrete Scoring Scale. The score should reflect the current status of the patient 
which should result in a minimum total of an eight (8). There should not be any 
zeroes (0) reflected in any category unless confirmed by physician or appropriate 
to pediatric patient condition with a return to baseline. See attachment below for 
the full Pediatric Aldrete Scoring Scale.  
9. Upon discharge, parent/guardian should be located and brought to bedside after 
three ID confirmed. Any pediatric outpatient less than seventeen (17) years old 
should be discharged to the care of parent/guardian. All discharge instructions 
should be discussed with the pediatric patient and parent/guardian as applicable to  3 
age. The pediatric patient may be held in the arms of the parent/guardian and 
carried for transport to vehicle as appropriate to age and patient condition 
followed by medical staff personnel. 
 
V. EXCEPTIONS: 
1. The pediatric patient may remain intubated with approval from anesthesiologist 
and surgeon and transferred to the ICU or awaiting transfer to another facility. 
(Refer to the Transfer Policy). Two nurses should be assigned to the pediatric 
patient if they exhibit signs of distress (agitation, restlessness, combative 
behaviors, etc.), and/or are hemodynamically unstable with unstable airway, and 
eight (8) years of age and younger. 
2. Tonsillectomies 
a. Should remain in PACU for a minimum of one (1) hour postoperatively. 
b. Tolerating fluids and medications unless approved by physician. 
c. No evidence of hemostasis or variation in surgical drainage unless 
evaluated by the surgeon for discharge approval.  
3. If the pediatric patient meets Phase I discharge criteria prior to leaving the 
procedure room, the patient may be directly admitted into a Fast Track recovery. 
Refer to the “Fast Tracking” policy.  
 
VI. ATTACHMENTS: Pediatric Aldrete Scoring Scale 
Aldrete Score Scale (Pediatric) Scoring  
  
Moves Extremities  2=moves 4 extremities 
 1=moves 2 extremities  
 0=moves 0 extremities  
  
Respiratory Effort 2=spontaneous resp/no distress 
 1=spontaneous resp w/signs and symptoms of distress 
 0=apnea/no spontaneous resp 
  
Capillary Refill 2=cap refill < 2 seconds 
 1=cap refill = 2-3 seconds 
 0=cap refill > 3 seconds 
  
Arousability  2=full awake 
 1=arousable on calling 
 0=not responding 
  
SaO2  2=SaO2 ≥ 95% on room air 
 1=SaO2 > 95% on O2 
 0=SaO2 < 95% on O2  4 
VII. REVISIONS: 
Originated: 10/4/2016 by D. LaCombe, RN, G. Bowler, RN  
VII. REVIEW: 7/2017, 7/2018 , 7 /2019, 7/2020, 7/2021 ; 9/2022; 9/2023; 9/2024 ; 
1/2025 
 
 