 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
June 2016 
 
NUMBER: 
STELPACU133 
 
SUBJECT: Transfer Policy to Another Facility 
 
 
PAGE 1 OF 1 
 
 
        
 
 
I. PURPOSE: To provide clear guidelines for the transfer of a patient to another facility 
  
II. APPLIES TO: Nursing staff and Physicians. 
   
 
III. POLICY: The patient who has an emergency medical condition may be transferred if 
the patient or legal representative requests a transfer or the physician signs a certification that the 
medical benefits reasonably expected from the medical treatment at another facility outweigh the 
increased risk to the individual’s medical condition from effecting the transfer.  
 
1. TRANSFER:   A transfer includes any patient who departs the hospital facility. 
2. APPROPRIATE MEDICAL TRANSFER:  A transfer in which the transferring hospital 
provides medical treatment within capacity that minimizes the risks to the individual’s  
health.  Excludes nursing home facilities (considered patient’s home) 
3. EMERGENCY MEDICAL CONDITION:  A medical condition manifesting itself by 
acute symptoms of sufficient severity (including severe pain) such that the absence of 
immediate medical attention could reasonably be expected to result in placing the health 
of the individual in serious jeopardy, serious impairment of bodily functions or serious 
dysfunction of any body organ or part. 
4. STABILIZATION:  To provide such medical treatment of the emergency condition as 
may be necessary to assure, within reasonable medical probability that no material 
deterioration of the condition is likely to result from or during the transfer. 
 
 
IV. PROCEDURE 
A. A physician or anesthesiologist will decide on the need for a patient to be 
transferred to another facility for a higher level of care. If the patient is not 
stable and assistance is needed (even at ambulatory surgery) the ER 
physician needs to be notified. They can help stabilize the patient and 
facilitate a faster transfer. Respiratory therapy can also be contacted if 
further assistance is necessary. 
B. Once decision is made by the physician to transfer, the House Supervisor 
should be notified. All forms needed to be completed will be provided by 
the House Supervisor. They should contact the receiving facility 
supervisor for acceptance of the patient.  
C. A physician order is required for transfer. The order must specify which 
facility, reason for transfer, current diagnosis and the accepting physician.  2 
Once the transfer has been accepted, the physician must call report to the 
other facilities physicians. This can be the surgeon or the anesthesiologist.  
D. The patient and family should be made aware of the need for the transfer 
and authorization be obtained. (See forms). All patient belongings should 
be given to the family prior to transfer. 
E. Paperwork such as the certificate to transfer, the transfer checklist, and the 
medical release form should be filled out and copied. (Forms should be 
obtained from the House Supervisor). Ensure that the patient or family 
member has signed the required forms as appropriate. 
F. Once all the above have been completed, the patient’s primary nurse 
should call the accepting facility and give a detailed report to the nurse 
receiving the patient. 
G. Contact the route of transportation (i.e.ambulance) 
a. For pediatric patients being transferred to OLOL:  
OLOL Pediatric Transport Team 1-855-765-7428 (call first) 
PICU (225)765-8842 (MD must call report to the PICU physician.  This can 
be the surgeon or anesthesiologist) 
Call (225)765-6565 ask for Bed Control and fax a Face Sheet to 765-9545 
(Bed Control) 
 
H. Send all copied information with the patient being transferred including 
the certificate to transfer, the transfer checklist, and the medical release 
form. Ensure that orders have been given for the mode of transportation 
and treatment needed while in route to the new facility (medication to be 
given, ventilator, oxygen supplements, etc.). 
I. Nursing personnel and/or qualified personnel must escort patient out of the 
hospital to ensure safe transport of the patient, medical equipment needed, 
and any life support measures. 
 
 
V. REQUIRED DOCUMENTATION (Nursing) 
A. Acceptance of patient at receiving facility by admissions or supervisor 
B. Name of the requesting physician and the accepting physician 
C. Reason for the transfer and current diagnosis 
D. Name of the nurse report was given to at the receiving facility  
E. Date, time of acceptance, time transfer notified, time of transfer 
F. All required vital signs and assessments must be recorded and documented 
within one hour of transfer 
G. Patient condition on transfer (include method of transfer and equipment used) 
  
VI. REVIEW/REVISION: 
Date of Origination: 6/22/2016 by G. Bowler RN, K. Templet RN, 9/28/2016 D. LaCombe RN  
VII. REVIEW: 7/1/2017; 7/2018, 7/2019 , 7/2020, 7/2021 ; 9/2022; 9/2023; 9/2024 ; 
1/2025  3 
 
 