 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
 
Surgical Services, Sterile Processing 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
April 1,2010 
 
NUMBER: 
STELSPD115 
 
SUBJECT: 
Steam Sterilization Assurance and Quality Control Program  
 
 
PAGE 1 OF 4 
 
 
        
I. PURPOSE 
 To provide guidelines for sterilization assurance, efficacy testing, and documentation of quality 
monitoring. 
  
II. APPLIES TO 
 Surgical Services, Sterile Processing 
  
III POLICY 
 1.  Quality monitoring shall be performed and documented for each sterilizer load according to procedure. 
 2.  Sterilizer efficacy testing shall be performed and documented according to procedure.  
 3.  Chemical indicator/integrators, biological vials, and physical process printouts will be utilized along  
     with load cards, and log records to ensue the quality of the sterilization process. 
 
IV. PROCEDURE 
 A.    Documentation Process -Steam Sterilizer Logbooks:  
          1. Every Sterilizer cycle will be documented in Censitrac.  If Censitrac is down, we will then use         
Sterilizer Logbook designated for each autoclave. 
               Information should include:   
               A.    Sterilizer Number 
               B.    Load # 
               C.    Items sterilized/ Implants   
               D.    Pt. label (for cycles run for pt.  specific cases) 
               E.    Physical printout, all sterilization parameters met, load released 
               F.     Chemical indicator (strip) 
               G.    Pass or Fail 
               H.    Biological Results if applicable 
                I.    Lot # for Biological or Bowie Dick devices 
                J.    Date/Time 
                K.    Operator’s Initials 
 
B.     Bowie-Dick (DART) Test 
          1.    A Bowie-Dick test pack is to be run in each pre-vac autoclave prior to daily  
                  operation of the autoclave. 
                    A.  The test pack is to be run in the first empty load of the day, on the rack, near the chamber   
                           drain. 
                    B.  The test pack cycle should be run according to manufacturer’s instructions.   
                    C.  After cycle completion, the external pack indicator should turn from yellow to black.  
                    D.  Take precautions to prevent thermal injury when removing and unwrapping the pack from  
                          the autoclave. 
                    E.  The markings on the internal indicator card should have a uniform color change to black. 
                          The color should appear evenly across the entire card for a “pass” result indicating  
                            appropriate steam function.  The autoclave may then be used for subsequent loads. 
                     F.    Currently use Censitrac. Document results in the logbook, along with the test sheet, 
printout, and indicator strip should the Censitrac system go down.  
                            Follow documentation process.  2 
 
         
C.    Efficacy Testing/Biological Monitoring of Steam Sterilizers (ATTEST/Super Rapid 
Readout Auto- reader 490): 
 
        1.     Biological Indicator (BI) sterilizer efficacy testing is performed daily on 
each autoclave when in use and in every standard Pre-Vac sterilizer load.    
                  a)    The biological test pack can be processed in a separate load after the daily DART test. 
                  b)    The BI test pack should be run in a pre-vac autoclave at 270° F for greater than or equal to 4  
                          minutes.   
                  c)      The test pack/vial should be placed in the portion of the load that is determined to be most  
                          resistant to steam penetration, usually bottom shelf, near the door or near the drain or in an  
                          implant canister/ tray. 
                   d)      Follow manufacturer’s instructions for use for ATTEST and read out. 
                   e)      Check the chemical integrator, SteriGage (strip) within the pack. A dark color must  
                             appear in the ACCEPT window of the strip to indicate sufficient steam penetration for  
                             Sterilization.  
                   f)      Document sterilizer#, load #, operator’s initials and date on the vial’s label and in the log  
                                book. Include vial lot #, printouts, and indicator strip in Censitrac.    
                   g)      While wearing protective equipment/eyewear, crush, tap, verify presence of the growth 
                                media in the lower vial chamber and incubate the vial in the Auto- reader incubator  
                                according to directions. 
                    h)        Observe the LCD read out panel to confirm the vial is correctly seated.  Incubation time 
                                in minutes will be displayed.                  
                    i)         Passing results, (a successful cycle), will be detectable within 24 minutes. The LCD                                                                                                                                        
display will give a “+” or “- “result on the LCD readout screen.   
                     j)       A positive “control” vial is processed daily to ensure correct incubation temperatures,  
                                 viability of spores, capability of the vial media to promote rapid growth and proper  
                                  functioning of the AUTO READER. Results are documented in Cesnitrac or the    
biological log book should Censitrac go down.   
                      k)     A “+” result on a processed biological vial indicates a failed sterilization cycle.  All           
                                    instruments and implants should be recalled from the load for reprocessing and     
                                     Surgical Administration notified immediately, and appropriate action plan followed.  
                        l)     All routine Pre-vac steam processed loads are processed with a BI and are        
                                   quarantined until a passing biological indicator is obtained 
                         m)    A biological indicator is processed with every load and is  
                                     quarantined until a passing BI is obtained.  
                         n)    Non implant IUSS loads may be released with a class 5 chemical integrator after  
                                   that autoclave has already passed a daily biological test.  
                              
                                          
   D.    Chemical Integrators 
 
          1.     Two chemical integrators shall be used both internally and externally on all steam processed  
                   supplies. Chemical integrators consist of: 
 
                               a)  Internal -SteriGage (strips) placed internally in all steam processed containers,  
                                     wrapped trays/items, or peel pouch items.  The color indicator must appear in the  
                                     ACCEPT window of the strip for verification of steam sterilization.  If it does not  
                                     appear, do not use the item. Follow mfg. IFU for placement in trays.   
                          
                                b)  External tape placed on wrapped trays must have a color change to black stripes to  
                                      indicate steam exposure. 
 
                                c)   External canister locks have an indicator that should turn brown before use.  3 
 
                                d)    Peel pouches have an external indicator that also turns brown indicating exposure to  
                                        steam.   
     
           2.        If the above parameters are not met, Do NOT Use the supply.  Send items for reprocessing,  
                       and evaluate autoclave function. 
 
 
E.    Physical Monitoring devices are graphs, gauges or printouts that monitor sterilization 
       parameters 
  
          1.  The printouts for each sterilizer load will be saved and documented in Censitrac or the log 
                book specific to that autoclave, ensuring the time, temperature and pressure have been met.   
 
            2.  A load record card is included on each load that sterilizes multiple sets, peel packs and wrapped  
                items.  The load record includes: 
                                     a. Sterilizer ID number, 
                                      b. Sterilizer Load Number (of the day) 
                                      c. Date of Sterilization 
                                      d. Departments for which items are being processed, if other than the operating  
                                            room. 
                                       e.  Number and name/description of items beings processed 
                                        f.    Initials of instrument tech preparing load.                   
                                         g.    Pass or fail 
 
                3.  At completion of cycle, the documentation process is followed, the load record card, indicator  
                    and printed parameter strip is retrieved and placed in the logbook and filed to be used if a 
                    recall becomes necessary.  
  
 
F.   Action Plan for Sterilizer Failure 
    
          1.  If at any time an indicator fails, equipment failure, physical print out parameters are inaccurate, or  
a positive biological growth occurs, the sterilizer is checked for possible operator error. Retest the autoclave   
with a biological test and chemical indicator in an empty chamber.  If the cycle has failed again, the sterilizer 
is removed from service until the malfunction has been ruled out as operation error or an authorized service 
technician has made proper inspections or repairs.   
 
         2.   Any positive biological result or sterilizer failure is immediately reported to the Director of Surgery  
               and the Infection Control Coordinator for implementation of action plan. .(In the case of a  
               positive test, always re-test the autoclave, look for possible errors in operation first.)  
               Action Plan:    
                                    a.   In the event of a positive biological monitoring result, or sterilizer failure, the  
                                           sterilizer will be immediately removed from service and labeled as such. 
                    b.    Quarantine the load contents, recall any supplies or instruments from the failed  
                            load for reprocessing. 
                     c.     Surgery Director will notify physicians if any supplies have been involved in  
                              any surgical procedures. 
                                     d.   Appropriate notification for sterilizer service and repairs.   
 
             3.  After the service has been completed and the sterilizer is approved for use, retest the sterilizer  
                  with three consecutive Bowie-Dick DART tests, then three biological tests.  The autoclave    
                               maybe used after passing all tests.  Document actions in the Action Plan Record   
                   after passing all tests.   
  4 
G.    Washer Disinfector –Quality Testing 
        
          1. Quality testing will be performed on the first, EMPTY load prior to use to assure disinfection    
              parameters have been met and instrumentation is safe to handle. 
 
        2.  Follow manufacturer’s instructions for use with the VERIFY © All Clean Test Indicator. 
             a)  Ensure the ALL Clean © test holders are clean and dry. 
             b)  Ensure user hands are clean and dry 
             c)  Place the indicator in the holder ensuring it is centrally placed and not protruding from either side 
             d) A holder with an indicator should be placed in an “all wire basket”, centrally located on each    
                 shelf. Place one of the soil symbols flat onto the wire basket and the other symbol oriented  
                 vertically. 
             e) After running a complete cycle, remove the indicators from the holders (use caution, it may be 
                 hot) and residual soil may stain. 
             f)  Check for evidence of residual soil/symbol (place the indicator against a piece of white paper) 
 
        3. Document results in the designated washer/disinfector in Censitrac or the log records. 
       
       4.  If failure of the test indicator occurs, consult the manufacturer’s instructions for trouble shooting.  
            Remove the washer from service if indicator failure cannot be resolved and contact the appropriate 
management for repair/ maintenance. 
 
H. Ultrasonic Function Testing 
 
1. Perform qualification testing daily and after performing any repairs on the equipment.   
2. Utilize a dosimeter for cavitation energy testing, in an ultrasound bath.   
3. Follow manufacturer’s IFU for performing the testing for a PASS or FAIL result  
4. Document the results in Censitrac/logbook. 
5. Report any unsatisfactory results or equipment failure to the appropriate management for corrective 
action.     
 
 
 
V. REFERENCE 
 AORN, Perioperative Standards and Recommended Practices, 2010 edition; pages 457-480 
  
3M, Comply and SteriGage; informational insert/instructions for use 
 
3M, Attest; package insert/instructions 
 
ANSI/AAMI ST79:2017, Comprehensive guide to steam sterilization and sterility assurance in health care facilities. 
©2017 Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Arlington, VA.  
 
 
VI REVISIONS: 
March 2010 renamed this policy from STELSPD115 Biological Monitoring of Steam Sterilizers to 
STELSPD115 Steam Sterilization Assurance and Quality Control Program.  Included all Quality testing and 
documentation on steam sterilizers. 
April 2010-revised to include washer/disinfector quality assurance. 
Revision: removed Surgeon Waiver/Release Form option for release of implan ts before biological read out 
07/2018 
Revision: added section H, for ultrasonic equipment qualification testing 7/2018 
Revision: 7/26/2018; updated rapid readout biological from 1 hr. to 24 Min. readout  
Revision: 10/09/2018. (MMS) Autoclaves are to be BI/efficacy tested daily when in use. A BI is processed 
in every standard pre-vac cycle implant and non-implant load.  Instruments quarantined until a passing BI is 
returned.  9/2024 Added Censitrac  5 
 
 
VII Review: 
 1/2011; 1/2012; 1/2013; 1/2014, 1/2015; 7/2017; 7/2018; 7/2019; 9/2021; 9/2022; 9/2023; 9/2024; 1/2025 
 
 
 
 