 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
 
April 1,2010 
 
NUMBER: 
 
STELSPD 121 
 
SUBJECT: 
 
STERRAD PROCESSING 
 
PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
 
 
        
I. PURPOSE 
 The policy is written to provide guidelines and recommended practices for achieving 
decontamination, disinfection, sterilization, and storage of instrumentation, supplies, and 
equipment used in the surgical environment.   
 
  
II. APPLIES TO 
 Sterile Processing, Surgical Services  
 
  
III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV. 
POLICY 
 Surgical instrumentation, patient care supplies, and equipment are to be cleaned, 
decontaminated, disinfected, packaged, sterilized and stored according to guidelines.  Patient care 
items will be free of contamination at the time of use, thereby minimizing the risk of cross 
contamination and surgical wound infections.  This policy is to be followed in conjunction with 
Policy STELSPD115 Steam Sterilization Assurance and Quality Control Program.  
 
 
PROCEDURE 
  
Low-Temperature Gas Plasma Hydrogen Peroxide (STERRAD) Sterilization: Low –
temperature gas plasma sterilization may be used for moisture stable/sensitive and heat 
sensitive items. (Sterrad) 
 
 
1.  Disassemble instruments according to Manufacturer’s IFU.  Remove all blood and soil 
from the instruments.  Rinse thoroughly and remove all residues.  All instruments must 
be cleaned, rinsed and thoroughly dried prior to placement in the STERRAD sterilizer.  
Compressed air may be used to blow moisture out of lumens and other hidden 
spaces. 
2. Instrument trays used in the STERRAD system should be designed to optimize 
diffusion of the hydrogen peroxide and not interfere with the RF energy or absorb 
hydrogen peroxide.  
3. Instrument trays must be wrapped with polypropylene wraps for sterilization. 
Packaging products constructed of other materials can absorb hydrogen peroxide and 
interfere with the successful completion of the sterilization cycle. 
4. Only pouches made with Tyvek may be used to package items not contained in 
instrument trays.  Tyvek is permeable to hydrogen peroxide vapor, and the Tyvek 
material provides a microbial barrier. Peel pouches should not be placed in wrapped 
trays.   
5.  Chemical Indicator Strips should be placed inside each pouch or tray to monitor the 
penetration of hydrogen peroxide.  After exposure to the sterilization process, the red 
bar will be golden yellow or lighter. 
6. Sterilization tape is used for sealing trays and packages as an external indicator.   
7. The Chemical Indicator Strips and STERRAD tape should be stored away from light,  2 
acids, bases or paper and other sterilizers. 
8. Wrapped instrument trays are to be labeled with the load # date and initials on the 
STERRAD indicator tape and peel pouches can be labeled on the Tyvek flap with load 
# and date and expiration date.  All writing should be on the chemical indicator tape or 
on the Tyvek side of the peel pouch. 
9. Trays must not contain materials manufactured from cellulose base or items such as 
cotton, paper, cardboard, linen, towels, gauze sponges, wood or foam, as these will 
absorb the hydrogen peroxide and cause cycle cancellation. . 
10. Count and content sheets can be taped to the outside of the packages after the 
sterilization process is completed.  
11. Traditional paper load stickers may be used if applied at the end of the sterilization 
cycle.  Stickers made from Tyvek are compatible with the STERRAD system.  
12. Single use devices and implants should be processed according to written instructions 
from the original device manufacturers. 
13. Do not put liquids or dead-end lumens in the STERRAD Sterilizer.  
14. Vent caps designed for the ETO sterilization process should be placed on scopes as 
recommended by the scope manufacturer prior to processing in the STERRAD 
Sterilizer. 
15. Instruments and devices labeled specifically for gravity sterilization should not be 
processed in the STERRAD.   
16. Refer to STERRAD System Cycle Selection for selection of standard or advanced 
cycles.   
17. For devices with lumens, refer to STERRAD IFU for the sterilization cycle to use .  
18. Refer to the manufacturer’s guidelines and education manual for equipment cassette 
loading, maintenance and operation. Please refer to the STERRAD Owner’s manual 
or log onto www.SterradSterilityGuide.com 
19. Maintain sterility assurance biologicals, quality controls and documentation on 
the provided forms 
20. Biologicals are performed with every cycle/load (Standard, Flex, Duo and 
Express).  Follow mfg.  IFUs for using biological test devices. 
21. Biological test read out occurs in 15 minutes.  Instruments may be released for 
use after a negative biological test.    
  
  
  
V. REFERENCE 
 STERRAD processing/ in-service training manual 2014 
  
VI REVISIONS 
 New policy April 2010; 12/30/2015 
Rev. 11/2/2018 for rapid 24 min. Bio read out and release of instruments 
07/24/2019: new sterilization unit, deleted brand names, added new sterilization cycles.  
9/2024 Biological Test Readout occurs in 15 minutes/Censitrac 
 
 
  REVIEW 
1/2011; 1/2013; 1/2014; 1/2015; 1/2016; 4/2016; 7/2017; 7/2018; 7/2019; 9/2021; 9/2022; 9/2023; 9/2024  ; 
1/2025 
 
 
 
 
 