 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
 
SURGICAL SERVICES MANUAL 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
 
January 2010 
 
NUMBER: 
STELSUR532 
 
SUBJECT:    
 
Biohazard and Waste Disposal, Surgical Services 
 
 
PAGE 1 OF 3 
 
 
 
 PURPOSE:  
 To design an efficient waste segregation program that reduces hospital costs for infectious waste disposal, 
while assuring worker safety and complying with the disposal process that follows OSHA’s Occupational 
Exposure to Blood borne Pathogen’s guidelines.    
  
 RESPONSIBILITY: 
 All employees of Surgical Services Department, Environmental Services 
 
 POLICY: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
This policy specifies the packaging, disposal, and/or solidification and removal of regulated waste 
generated within the Surgical Services department. Universal precautions will be used by employees 
when handling biohazard waste. Personal Protective Equipment includes gloves and eyewear. When 
handling saturated items that are not contained and could potentially spill, splatter or saturate, a gown, 
mask and shoe covers may also be necessary. 
        Universal precautions, the use of PPE, and correct handling of regulated biohazard waste will be part 
of employee orientation. 
 
 
Definitions:  
Regulated waste is defined by OSHA as any liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious 
materials; contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially infectious materials in a liquid 
or semi-liquid state when compressed; items that are caked with dried blood or other infectious materials 
and are capable of releasing these materials  or fluids during handling; contaminated sharps; a nd 
pathological and microbiological wastes containing blood or other potentially infectious materials.  
Potentially infectious materials:   include human body fluids, contaminated items with body fluids or in 
situations where it is not possible to differentiate between fluids, any unfixed tissues or organs.  
   
 
 PROCEDURE 
  
I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Red Bag Biohazard Trash Disposal 
 
1.  A Bio-hazardous (RED Bag) hamper located in the core, and decontamination areas for disposal 
of saturated laps, sponges, drapes or other items.  Saturated is considered as any thing that could 
spill, leak, splatter, or spread if not contained. Some of the items for bio-hazardous waste disposal 
include: 
 
•  Grossly saturated laps/sponges 
• Liquids in canisters or urinary drainage bags (GU bags should be emptied into the Neptune 
or solidified) 
• Drapes that have been grossly soiled with blood and body fluids to the point they could 
leak, spill, splatter etc. when compressed. 
• Any tissue removed during a procedure that is to be disposed of  2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  Smaller red Bio-hazard bags will be available for small items. 
 
3.   Dispose of bio-hazard bags in the large red receptacles located in the trash collection/biohazard 
storage and decontamination areas. 
 
4.   Environmental Services is responsible for removing biohazard trash from the storage areas.  
 
 
Liquid Waste Disposal 
 
1. When possible, use the Neptune Waste Management System for liquid waste collection.   
2. Liquids in canisters may be solidified utilizing a medical waste encapsulation and treatment 
product and disposed of in regular trash.     
 
 
Sharps Disposal 
1. Sharps container will be available in all OR rooms/areas where sharps are used.  These 
containers are for sharps only. 
a. Sharps container can be utilized for more than one case.  Discretion should be 
utilized in this case as to discarding these boxes when 3/4 full. 
b. If container becomes 3/4 full during case, a new container should be provided for 
remainder of case. 
2. Needles/Syringes should have safety mechanism activated (when using safety device) then 
discard intact, uncut and unsheathed (uncapped) into the needle box (sharps container).  If 
re-capping is necessary, it should be done carefully with sheath sitting on level surface.  
Hand to hand re-capping should be avoided. 
3. Other sharp objects (i.e., scalpels, and broken glass, disposable instruments) will be placed 
into sharps containers. 
4. Sharps containers will be securely closed prior to disposal and are to be placed in the 
biohazard storage areas for pick up and disposal by hospital contracted disposal services.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 REFERENCE:  St. Elizabeth Environmental Services Policy: STELEVS255.   
 
 REVIEWED 
 1/2011; 1/2012; 1/2013; 1/2014; 1/2015, 1/2016;4/2016; 7/2017; 7/2018; 7/2019; 9/202; 9/2022; 9/2023; 
10/2024; 1/2025 
 
 
 
REVISED: 12/2015 to include unused medications disposal 10/24 Deleted and added Liquid       
waste #2      
 
 
 