 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Surgical Services Section: Endoscopy 
Title: Reprocessing of Flexible Scopes Policy Reference #: SYA007 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 02/23/2015 Last Date Reviewed: 01/10/2025 
Last Date Revised: 01/10/2022 
 
PURPOSE: To define the process for pre-cleaning, transport, leak testing, manual cleaning, high-
 level disinfection, and storage of endoscopes.   
  
POLICY: 
Cleaning and decontamination should begin immediately after use. All endoscopes will be cleaned, 
transported, reprocessed, and stored according to these policies. When transport to the decontamination 
area is going to be delayed, endoscopes will be encapsulated in Intercept foam per IFU.  
  
A. PROCEDURE: Personal Protective Equipment (PPE): All personnel who work in the 
endoscope reprocessing room must wear PPE (personal protective equipment). Gloves, liquid-
resistant gown/face mask, eye protection, shoe covers, head covers, and a surgical mask if risk of 
splash or aerosols is present. Jewelry and wristwatches should not be worn in decontamination 
area.  Before leaving the decontamination area, PPE should be removed taking care not to 
contaminate skin or clothing followed by thorough hand washing.  
 
B. Pre-cleaning: Pre-clean flexible endoscopes and reusable accessories by following the device 
manufacturer’s instructions for use (IFU). Perform pre-cleaning immediately following 
completion of the endoscope procedure to help prevent the formation of biofilm. When the 
precleaning process will be delayed (e.g. endoscope is used for intubation and remains in the 
procedure room for  potential reuse), designated personnel (eg, RN circulator, scrub person) 
should  wipe the external surfaces with a soft, lint-free cloth or sponge saturated with  utility or 
sterile water and should suction water through the channels.  
 
Precleaning steps 
1.  Use provided enzymatic/surfactant and follow IFU on package.  
2. If using a specialty scope such as ERCP/EBUS, flush and manipulate forceps elevator 
per manufacturer’s IFU.  
3. Depending on model scope being used, flush air and water channels using AW channel 
cleaning adapter (MH-948) in accordance with the endoscope manufacturer's IFU.  
4. If applicable, flush the auxiliary water channel per manufacturer’s instructions.   
5. Detach the endoscope from the light source and suction pump.   
6. Attach protective video cap if using video endoscope.    
 
C. Transport: All endoscopes are to be checked out and retrieved from Endoscopy Dept. Preform 
hand hygiene. Gloves must be worn when accessing endoscope cabinet. Endoscopes will be 
transported in a bag lined (clear) transport container. Clean endoscopes will be concealed with a  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 5 
green (“CLEAN”) cover. Dirty endoscopes will be concealed with a red 
(“DIRTY/BIOHAZARD) cover. All transport containers will utilize rigid plastic lid.  
 
1. Contaminated flexible endoscopes and accessories should be transported to the 
endoscopy processing room as soon as possible after use. 
2. When it is not possible to initiate the cleaning process within the endoscope 
manufacturer’s recommended time to cleaning, the manufacturer’s instructions for use 
(IFU) for delayed processing should be followed.  
3. Intercept foam may be utilized per IFU. 
 
D. Leak testing: For endoscopes that require leak testing, perform the leak test 
using manufacturer’s IFU after each use and prior to manual 
cleaning. Leak testing detects damage to the external surfaces and internal channels of 
the endoscope that can lead to inadequate disinfection and further damage of the endoscope.   
 
1.  Remove and discard disposable suction valves, air water valves, and biopsy valves. 
Multi-use valves (for EUS) will remain with endoscope throughout entire reprocessing.  
2. Attach the leak tester and pressurize the scope. 
4. When prompted by Veriscan, flex the distal portion of the scope in all directions. 
Depress and release all buttons. 
5.  If a leak is detected or if the endoscope appears damaged, continue to manual cleaning 
leaving leak tester on. Notify charge nurse/manager and follow manufacturer’s IFU on 
how to proceed. Remove endoscope from sink or basin. Turn off leak tester. Dis-
connect leak tester from video cap. Allow endoscope to depressurize. Ensure video cap 
is secure and has not loosened with removal of leak tester. Continue with reprocessing 
steps when test is complete unless a leak is detected. When an endoscope fails a leak 
test, it should be removed from service and repaired or replaced. 
 
E. Manual cleaning: Perform meticulous manual cleaning including brushing 
and flushing channels and ports consistent with the manufacturer’s IFU before performing high-
level disinfection (HLD) or sterilization. Perform manual cleaning within the 
timeframe specified in the manufacturer’s IFU. Manual cleaning is the most critical step in 
the disinfection process since residual organic material can reduce the effectiveness of HLD and 
sterilization.  
 
1. Fill a sink or basin with freshly made solution of water/enzymatic and ensure proper 
temperature.   
2. Ensure video cap is secure (if applicable)  
3. Wash all debris from the exterior of the endoscope by brushing and wiping the 
instrument while submerged in the detergent solution. Pay special attention to the 
air/water nozzle opening and objective lens, thoroughly cleaning all portions of distal 
end. Refer to specific manufacturers IFU for ERCP, EBUS, and double channel 
endoscopes.  
4. Brush all channel openings also until free of debris. Brush all accessible endoscope 
channels with appropriately sized brushes until free of debris.  After each passage, rinse  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 5 
the brush in the detergent solution, removing any visible debris before retracting and 
reinserting it.   
5. Attach the endoscope manufacturer’s cleaning adapters for suction, biopsy, air, and 
water channels. To achieve adequate flow through all lumens, various adapters or 
channel restrictors may be required. Refer to the manufacturer's instructions.  
6. The elevator channel of duodenoscopes will be flushed and manipulated according to 
specific manufacturers IFU.  
7. Flush all channels with the detergent solution to remove debris.   
8. All reusable buttons/parts should be cleaned, and high level disinfected per IFU. 
9.If manual cleaning has been delayed, soak the endoscope and its internal channels for 
the period specified by the label. Refer to specific manufacturers IFU for delayed 
cleaning and reprocessing.  
 
F. Flush/Rinse:  Per endoscope IFU, thoroughly rinse all channels, exterior of endoscope, and all 
removable parts (if applicable) with clean water to remove residual debris and detergent. Dry the 
exterior of the endoscope with a soft, lint-free cloth to prevent dilution of the liquid chemical 
germicide used in later steps.   
 
G. Bio-burden Testing: Use bio-burden testing system according to manufacturer’s IFU. If protein 
test passes, proceed. If test fails, manually clean scope over again.  
 
H. Visual Inspection: After manual cleaning, visually inspect the endoscope and its accessories. 
Visual inspection provides additional assurance that the endoscope and its accessories are clean 
and free of defects. Complex devices such as flexible endoscopes may require the use of lighted 
magnification or additional methods to assist with the inspection process.  
 
I. High-level disinfection: Following cleaning and visual inspection perform HLD or 
sterilization in accordance with the manufacturer’s IFU. Carefully review and adhere to the 
endoscope manufacturer’s reprocessing instructions and to the IFU for chemicals or sterilant and 
any equipment (e.g., automated endoscope reprocessor) used for reprocessing to help ensure that 
effective disinfection occurs. In case of AER failure, follow endoscope manufacturer’s IFU’s for 
manual high level disinfection. 
 
1.  Processing personnel should verify compatibility between the endoscope and the AER 
before processing. 
2. Flexible endoscopes and accessories should be positioned within the AER in a manner 
that ensures contact of the processing solutions with all surfaces of the endoscope. 
3. Processing personnel should ensure all connectors between the endoscope and the AER 
are connected correctly. 
4. Processing personnel should monitor mechanical processing cycles to verify they are 
completed as programmed. If a mechanical processing cycle is interrupted, the entire 
cycle should be repeated. 
5. After mechanical processing, the exterior surfaces of the endoscope should be dried 
with a soft, lint-free cloth or sponge. The endoscope channels should be dried by 
purging with instrument air or mechanically dried with a mechanical processor drying 
system. Removable parts and endoscope accessories should be dried.  Policy Reference Number 
Page 4 of 5 
 
J. Storage of Endoscopes:  After reprocessing is complete, store endoscopes and accessories in a 
manner that prevents recontamination, protects the equipment from damage and promotes 
drying. Gloves must be worn when accessing cabinet. Store processed flexible endoscopes in 
a cabinet that is either:  
 
1. of sufficient height, width, and depth to allow flexible endoscopes to hang vertically 
without coiling and without touching the bottom of the cabinet OR  
2. designed and intended by the manufacturer for horizontal storage of flexible 
endoscopes  
3. Flexible endoscopes should be stored with all valves open, and removable parts should 
be detached but stored with the endoscope. 
4. Flexible endoscopes should be clearly identifiable, with a distinct visual cue, as 
processed and ready for use. 
5. Endoscopes will be reprocessed after use or every seven days (per specified date on 
tag), whichever comes first.  
6. Mechanical endoscope cabinets used and maintained per IFU’s.  
7. Endoscope cabinet will be cleaned weekly or per IFU’s with cleaning log present.   
8. Any endoscopes that is not being used will be removed from service and stored 
according to manufacturer’s IFU. 
 
 K. Documentation: Maintain documentation of adherence to these essential steps each time an 
endoscope is reprocessed. Documentation is essential for quality assurance purposes and for 
patient tracing in the event a look back is necessary. Records should include: 
1. Date, time, patient ID, MD name 
2. Endoscope model/serial number 
3. Minimum effective concentration results 
4. Leak test pass or fail 
5. Person performing 
6. Lot numbers of reprocessing solutions. 
7. Water system maintenance should be maintained as well as PM’s for AER’s and 
endoscopes. 
 
REFERENCE:  
 
Standards of Infection Control in Reprocessing of Flexible Gastrointestinal Endoscopes, Society of 
Gastroenterology Nurses and Associates, Inc. (SGNA), 2016  
  
Steris System 1E Operator Manual, Steris Corporation, 2015  
  
OER-Pro Operation Manual, Olympus Medical Systems Corp, 2012  
  
Evis Exera II, Reprocessing Manual, Olympus Medical Systems Corp, 2009  
  
CDC, Essential Elements of a Reprocessing Program for Flexible Endoscopes – Recommendations 
of the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee  
   Policy Reference Number 
Page 5 of 5 
 AORN, Guideline Summary: Processing Flexible Endoscopes 
 