 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Endoscopy 
Title: Room Clean-Up, Endoscopy Policy Reference #: SYE004 
Supersedes #: 1985;09/02/1991 
Date of Origination: 01/25/1988 Review Date: 02/14/2024 
Revision Date: 03/10/2020 
 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define process, procedure room clean-up. 
 
POLICY: 
Every patient is a potential source of communicable disease which may not be identified before, 
during, or after the procedure. Anytime blood and body fluids are encountered, gloves, gowns, 
safety glasses or face shield should be worn by all personnel.  EPA registered hospital approved 
disinfectants wipes are used to decontaminate equipment and surfaces in procedure room per IFU. 
Bleach wipes will be used to clean the room after caring for patients with C. diff and or TB per 
IFU. Terminal cleaning will also take place after caring for patients with C. diff and or TB. The 
concept of cleaning from “clean to dirty” shall be utilized during all room and equipment 
decontamination procedures. Daily terminal cleaning is performed by the Housekeeping 
Department. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
The following definitions should be used to determine what constitutes regulated waste and, 
therefore, should be contained in a red/biohazard trash bag for disposal and what items are 
considered sharps and should be contained in a red sharps container. 
 
A. Regulated waste is a waste capable of producing an infectious disease.  For a waste to be 
considered infectious it must contain pathogens with sufficient virulence and quantity so 
that exposure to the waste by susceptible host may result in an infectious disease. 
 
The following are recognized as regulated waste:   
 Liquid or semi-liquid blood or blood products; semen; vaginal secretions; cerebrospinal, 
synovial, pleural, pericardial, peritoneal, or amniotic fluid; any body fluid visibly  
contaminated with blood; contaminated items which would release any of the above 
materials when compressed, must be disposed of in a red biohazard bag. 
 
B. Sharps must be discarded in the designated red sharps container.  Sharps may be defined as 
needles, syringes, scalpels, scalpel blades, staplers, etc. 
 
  2 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
The following procedures should be followed: 
 
1. PRE-PROCEDURE PERIOD 
a. All horizontal surfaces should be damp dusted prior to the first case of the day and 
supplies brought into room. 
b. The procedure room should be inspected prior to start of case to ensure appropriate 
cleaning after previous case. 
c. Using EPA registered hospital-approved disinfectant solution and a cleaning cloth 
should immediately clean up organic debris prior to bringing in any supplies.  
       2.  INTRAPROCEDURE 
a. The room should be kept tidy; all soiled articles should be contained in proper 
containers. 
b. When functioning in circulating capacity, handwashing or using alcohol foam 
should be carried out following patient contact or contact with soiled article 
c. The outside of specimen containers passed from the field should be disinfected with 
EPA registered hospital-approved disinfectant prior to labeling 
 
        3.POST- PROCEDURE 
a. Appropriate PPE is worn by all personnel during room clean up. 
b. Irrigation:  
1) Solutions remaining on the cart should be contained in the suction system. 
2) Solidifier should be placed in suction containers and all ports are closed off and 
canister placed in red bio-hazardous labeled bags. 
c. Needles, knife blades, biopsy forceps and any other sharps should be discarded in 
sharps container. 
d. Sharps disposal box, if 3/4 full replace. 
e. Disposable items contaminated with blood and/or tissue that would release in a 
liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed or items with caked blood/body fluids 
should be disposed of in designated bags. 
f. Scopes should be placed in the appropriate container for transport. 
1) Brought to the clean-up room. 
g. Reusable anesthesia equipment should be bagged for transport and removed from 
the room by an Anesthesia Tech to be cleaned and processed in the Anesthesia 
workroom.  Disposable items are discarded in the appropriate trash bag. 
h.  Bleach wipes will be used to clean the room after caring for patients with contact 
plus and airborne precautions per IFU.  
    i. The procedure cart surfaces should be cleaned with an EPA registered hospital-
 approved disinfectant.  Any other pieces of furniture or equipment that have been  
  soiled should also be wiped clean with an EPA registered hospital-approved 
 disinfectant.  
j. All high touch surfaces, mobile & fixed equipment, and cables should be wiped. 
 k. Trash and soiled linen is bagged, removed and placed in appropriate receptacle.  3 
l.  Surgical gowns and gloves should be removed inside-out and placed in the 
appropriate hamper.  
 m. The room should be prepared for the next case after all contaminated articles are  
  removed: 
1) Suction Container 
2) Fresh trash and linen bags should be placed in hampers. 
3) The room should be inspected to ensure that it is ready for the next case. 
 
4. DAILY TERMINAL CLEANING 
a. Housekeeping Department should perform terminal cleaning daily during the 
3-11 shift. 
b. Housekeeping should perform duties according to procedures established by 
Housekeeping Service and Infection Control offices. 
c. Terminal cleaning will also take place after caring for patients with contact 
plus or airborne precautions 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
AORN: Recommended Practices for Perioperative Nursing, 2024 
Crothal: Housekeeping Operations Manual 10/1/2019 
 