 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Endoscopy 
Title: Evacuation of Endoscopy Policy Reference #: SYE003 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 09/13/1990 Review Date: 11/15/2024 
Revision Date: 08/01/2012 
 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To outline steps for safe and efficient patient care in the event an evacuation is ordered for the 
Endoscopy staff, OR, patients, and visitors. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event an internal disaster occurs requiring evacuation, the staff should have knowledge of all 
evacuation routes, evacuation procedure, and how to evacuate patients in a safe, efficient, and 
orderly manner. In the event of a fire, elevators must not be used. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A. Patient Evacuation from Endoscopy 
1. The order to evacuate should be given by the Fire Marshall or the Chief 
Administrative Officer of the hospital. 
2. The Director of Surgical Services, or in his/her absence, a Team Leader or designee, 
in that order, should direct the evacuation of the surgical/procedural patients. 
a. An ambu bag is provided in each Procedure Room. 
b. Additional patient equipment will be provided as appropriate (02, transport 
monitors) 
c. If immediate evacuation is required, patients undergoing procedure should 
  be: 
1) Stabilized as quickly as possible 
d. Patients not yet anesthetized should be transported on a stretcher or 
wheelchair. 
e. If ground level exits are obstructed, patients should be evacuated through the 
walkway to the parking garage, to Medical Plaza or Emergency Room exit 
on 2nd floor. 
f. If these exits are obstructed, patient should be evacuated by way of the stairs 
to the first floor. 
1) Anesthetized patients should be moved using the blanket carry. 
2) Non-anesthetized patients should be escorted. 
B. Employees should be placed in strategic locations by Director, Nurse Manager or designee. 
1. To give assistance turning corners.  2 
2. To open doors. 
3. To convey information as needed. 
 
 
 
 
 
  