ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0001 Revision: 5Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Jun 23, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Jun 1, 2019Title: Could Not Locate (CNL)
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 1 of 4
1.PURPOSE -- SCOPETo ensure equipment that cannot be found for scheduled maintenance is accounted for and managed in a timely manner.2.REFERENCE DOCUMENTS2.1. Disposition of Equipment TMX-SOP-00913.DEFINITIONS3.1.Could Not LocateType of equipment Work Order Task (WOT) sub-status where the equipment could not be found for scheduled maintenance and/or annual inventory revalidation.3.2.Work Order Task Task where work is completed in the computer maintenance management system (CMMS) and where the workflow of CNL is marked and tracked through completion of the process.3.3.Monthly occurring once per calendar month.4.ABBREVIATIONS4.1.CNL Could Not Locate4.2.WOT Work Order Task4.3.HAA Hospital Authorizing Agent5.RESPONSIBILITIES5.1.Field Operations Management5.1.1. Analyze the data from CNL equipment to identify trends, corrective actions, and training needs.5.1.2. Monitor and direct technician activities in searching for missing CNL equipment.5.1.3. Communicate in writing to the affected Hospital Department heads, a list of CNL equipment, requesting their assistance in locating the missing equipment on a monthly basis, documenting when and who the report was sent to. This list should also be provided to the Hospital's Regulatory Oversight Committee or equivalent committee during each scheduled meeting.5.1.4. Ensure that monthly searches for CNL equipment are properly documented within the WOT.5.1.5. Document and seek approval from the HAA for the disposition of equipment after 90 days.ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0001 Revision: 5Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Jun 23, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Jun 1, 2019Title: Could Not Locate (CNL)
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 2 of 4
5.2.TRIMEDX Associates and TRIMEDX Managed Associates5.2.1. Continue to search for CNL equipment until the equipment is either found or work to disposition the equipment after 90 days.5.2.2. Document searches within the Work Order Task (WOT) on a monthly basis until device is found, or the device is dispositioned, and the actions are taken to address CNL.5.3.TRIMEDX Quality and Regulatory Compliance5.3.1. Periodically audit for compliance to policy and procedure.5.4.Customer Hospital Department(s)5.4.1.5.4.2. Ownership of identifying if a device potentially has protected health information (PHI).6.PROCEDURE6.1. For equipment that cannot be located, the assigned technician shall update the PM WOT to Could Not Locate (CNL) by selecting the CNL button at the upper-righthand side of a Preventative Maintenance (PM) WOT. Once selected, the WOT will change to a -status.6.1.1. The CNL Service Level Agreement (SLA) under Related Links tab will now generate and will be located on the WOT for a duration of 90 days total. Email reminders are sent out via the system every 30, 60, and 90 days. Notes of the reminders are automatically documented within the work notes of the WOT. This does not count as the manager/technician attempted search.6.1.2. Searches should be documented monthly. There should be no fewer than 3 documented searches.6.1.3. The SLA starts the day that the WOT is put into a CNL sub-status.6.1.4. Reminders will continue to generate every 30 days until CNL is resolved.6.1.5. A WOT cannot be completed in an Open Could Not Locate (CNL) status/sub-status.
ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0001 Revision: 5Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Jun 23, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Jun 1, 2019Title: Could Not Locate (CNL)
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 3 of 4
6.2. Non--status.6.3.Investigation and Management of CNL Equipment6.3.1. Technicians shall continue to search and document, at a minimum monthly, any efforts while searching for missing equipment until the equipment is either found or work to retire after 90 days.6.3.2. Documentation should include search attempts in what unit/department they searched for the equipment and who the technician talked to in attempt of finding the equipment.6.3.3. Labor6.4. After 90 days, technician shall work with the TRIMEDX Site Manager or Leader and Hospital Department leader to disposition equipment from inventory.6.5.Hospital before the 90 days has concluded, the device may be dispositioned by using the Retirement of Equipment Policy and Procedure.6.6. The TRIMEDX Site Manager or Leader shall monitor and direct technician activities to locate CNL equipment on an ongoing and vigilant basis.6.7. The TRIMEDX Site Manager or Leader shall monitor and analyze trends related to CNL equipment and develop corrective actions, and conduct training as needed.6.8.not be located.6.9. The TRIMEDX Site Manager or Leader will record who the report was sent to and when, they will keep these records indefinitely.6.10. The TRIMEDX Site Manager or Leader shall produce a report that has all the device in a -6.11.CNL Equipment is Located6.11.1. When CNL equipment has been located, select the Device Found button on the CNL WOT.
ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0001 Revision: 5Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Jun 23, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Jun 1, 2019Title: Could Not Locate (CNL)
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 4 of 4
6.11.2. This will move the WOT back into an Open Remediation Underway status. Documentation of when and where the equipment was found should be added in work notes.6.11.3. The PM WOT(s) shall be completed within a week of the device being found.7.QUALITY RECORDS7.1. N/A8.PROCESS FLOWCHARTRevisionRevision history5 Updated definitions to include monthly. Changes to required documentation frequency previously indicated as 30 days to monthly. Addition of flowchart. Format numbering changes for Procedure section.END OF DOCUMENT
