ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0088 Revision: 10Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Dec 19, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Apr 20, 2018Title: Preventive Maintenance (PM)
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 1of 9
1.PURPOSE -- SCOPEIt is the policy of TRIMEDX that all devices managed by TRIMEDX will have an Operation Verification Procedure (OVP) Performance Verified performed prior to initial use and have Preventive Maintenance at periodic intervals as defined by an assigned Preventive Maintenance (PM) Schedule based on Risk Evaluations, Regulatory Requirements, Contractual Requirements or Manufacturer's Recommendations.2.REFERENCE DOCUMENTS2.1. Could Not Locate (CNL) TMX-SOP-0001 2.2. In Patient Use Policy and Procedure TMX-SOP-00672.3. Equipment Repairs TMX-SOP-0087  2.4. PM Schedule Assignment TMX-SOP-00362.5. Alternative Equipment Management (AEM) TMX-SOP-00583.DEFINITIONS3.1.(100%) PM Managed- Sum of Timely PM Completion + CNL + In Patient Use + Out to Vendor (Documentation of all activities in the CMMS are required to meet this standard).3.2.Could Not Locate- Type of equipment work order task status where the equipment is unable to be located at the site. Work Order Task documentation is required. (Refer to Could Not Locate (CNL) procedure)3.3.Evidence Based Maintenance (EBM) / Predictive Maintenance Type of PM program that replaces normal PM Scheduling. EBM uses service engineer visual inspections, analyzer cycle counts, time between service calls, access to historical databases and part replacement history to make the best instrument reliability decisions for the medical device.3.4.In Patient Use- Type of work order task status where the equipment is in patient use. Work Order Task document is required. (Refer to In Patient Use Policy and Procedure)3.5.Operational Verification Procedure- An inspection that verifies the device is operating correctly. This includes but is not limited to; visual, auditorial, or operational inspections.3.6.Servicing The FDA defines servicing as the repair and/or preventive or routine maintenance of one or more parts in a finished device, after distribution, for purposes of returning it to the safety and performance specifications established by the original equipment manufacture (OEM) and to meet its original intended use.3.7.Rework The FDA defines rework as an action taken on a nonconforming product so that it will fulfill the specified Device Master Record requirements before it is released for distribution.  Rework is an obligation of the manufacturer.ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0088 Revision: 10Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Dec 19, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Apr 20, 2018Title: Preventive Maintenance (PM)
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 2of 9
4.ABBREVIATIONS4.1.AEMAlternative Equipment Management4.2.CNLCould Not Locate4.3.CMMSComputerized Maintenance Management System4.4.EBMEvidence Based Maintenance4.5.IPUIn Patient use4.6.OVPOperational Verification Procedure4.7.PMPreventive Maintenance4.8.SMSite Manager5.RESPONSIBILITIES5.1.TRIMEDX Field Operations Management5.1.1. Verify that an appropriate PM Schedule has been assigned to each device. Determine if the assigned PM Schedules are appropriate for each device (refer to PM Schedule Assignment TMX-SOP-0036.5.1.2. Ensure appropriate documentation submitted when requesting changes of the assigned PM Schedules (Refer to policy/procedure PM Interval Change).5.1.3. Ensure that discrepancies with assigned PM Schedules are resolved in an expeditious manner.5.1.4. When changes are made to the PM schedule, ensure the device PM stickers are updated as well to reflect the new PM schedule due date.5.1.5. Ensure that PM work order tasks are adequately updated to include relevant notes about the work completed before closing the work order.5.1.6. Verify that quality of data such as time entries, close questions, service notes, measurements completed or values (readings) obtained, Test Equipment Used, and labor lines are correctly entered and selected before closing work order.5.1.7. Ensure that technicians performing the work are qualified to do the work.5.1.8. Ensure that PM Work Orders are appropriately and promptly closed.5.1.9. Schedule a periodic meeting (recommended on a quarterly basis) with the Hospital Laboratory Manager/Director to obtain all service records for any devices that are on Predictive/Evidence Based Maintenance.5.1.10. When able to, the site leader should communicate upcoming PMs to the client to align on equipment availability.ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0088 Revision: 10Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Dec 19, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Apr 20, 2018Title: Preventive Maintenance (PM)
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 3of 9
5.2.TRIMEDX Technicians5.2.1. Review the Manufacturer's recommendations for PM frequency and procedure at the time of the Initial Inventory and entry into CMMS database.5.2.2. Technicians will ensure they have the training, experience, and qualifications to perform PM on devices. Communicate any gaps in training, experience, and qualifications to the Site Manager immediately.5.2.3. Verify that the manufacturer's schedule is in the CMMS.5.2.4. If the manufacturer's schedule is not in the CMMS, send the Manufacturer's Maintenance Manual electronically to Quality & Regulatory Compliance through CMMS or physically (hard copy) to the Central Office, with attention to Quality & Regulatory Compliance.5.2.5. When performing PMs, if the manufacturer's procedure was followed, attach the document to the work order task if in the event the document is not available in the CMMS or reference manual/ checklist that was used (manual reference number, manual type, manual version/ date). This document needs to be presented, upon a request, to Surveyor or to Quality & Regulatory Compliance during internal audits.5.2.6. When performing PMs, if a generic procedure was followed, this procedure should be attached at the work order task, or all steps documented in the CMMS. This document needs to be presented, upon a request, to Surveyor or to Quality & Regulatory Compliance during internal audits.5.2.7. Technicians will manually generate PM work order tasks by frequency/procedure if not automatically generated. If the PM does not generate submit an IT ticket to report the issue.5.2.8. Document the PM work completed including the steps and results from various PM outputs, in the measurable outputs (preferred) or service notes fields and complete the close questions. Exception reporting, such as only documenting is not sufficient.5.2.9. Complete and document the Electrical Safety Inspection (ESI) results. The exception to completing ESI only applies to 2-pronged devices where visual inspection will be conducted to ensure that cord is double insulated and intact.5.2.10.Perform Preventive Maintenance (PM) activities in a timely and effective manner.PMs are due by the last day of the month for which the system has auto generated.5.2.11.Perform Unscheduled Inspection activities after every Repair. (Refer to TMX-SOP-0087 Equipment Repairs)5.2.12.Responsible for capturing and maintaining CE CYBER data elements. (Security, Software, and Networking)5.2.13.Review device history for open WOTs and complete as appropriate.ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0088 Revision: 10Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Dec 19, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Apr 20, 2018Title: Preventive Maintenance (PM)
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 4of 9
5.3.Quality & Regulatory Compliance Associates5.3.1. Quality & Regulatory Compliance team and AEM Committee assess equipment risk and assigns an Alternative Equipment Management (AEM) Schedule (Refer Alternative Equipment Management (AEM) TMX-SOP-0058.5.3.2. Collect Manufacturer's Maintenance Manuals and store in PM Procedure Repository.5.3.3. Change PM Schedules when requested by fields operations within a compliant window.5.3.4. Responsible for periodic audits to ensure compliance with this procedure.6.PROCEDURE6.1. TRIMEDX Managers and technicians will review and prioritize all auto generated PM Work Orders Tasks each month.PMs are due by the last day of the month for which the system has auto generated.PM Work Order Tasks are generated for each frequency and procedure.6.2. Preventive Maintenance Work Orders/Work Order Tasks are required to be 100% Managed for all medical equipment. The PM is considered managed according to the following formula: (100% Managed PMs = Timely completion + CNL + In Patient Use + Out to Vendor).6.3. PM Work Order Tasks will be assigned on the first calendar day of the Month. Technicians will manually generate PM Work Order Tasks if not automatically generated.6.4. Technicians must attempt to locate the device addressed in the PM Work Order Tasks.6.5.If the device is being used in patient treatment during scheduled service:6.5.1. Use the 'In Patient Use' button on the WOT until the service can be completed.6.5.2. Follow In Patient Use Policy and Procedure TMX-SOP-00676.5.3. Service notes will clearly describe the reason that the device is unavailable for scheduled service, and what efforts were made to correct the situation. Effort should be continuously made and documented to receive the device as soon as it is available.6.5.4. Labor hours and service notes describing the labor activities should be added.6.5.5. Follow scheduled inspection process when equipment becomes available.6.6.If device cannot be located:6.6.1. Use the 'Could Not Locate' button on the WOT to indicate the device as CNL.6.6.2. Follow Could Not Locate TMX-SOP-0001 Policy and Procedure and document all efforts to locate the equipment.6.6.3. Labor hours and service notes describing the labor activities should be added each time an attempt is made to locate the device.6.6.4. Follow scheduled inspection process when equipment is located.6.7.If the equipment has been dispositioned:6.7.1. Follow Disposition of Equipment TMX-SOP-0091 Policy and Procedure.6.7.2. SM approves the disposition WOT.6.7.3. Technician appropriately cancels the PM WOT by selecting Incomplete WOT.6.8.If Vendor Service is Required:ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0088 Revision: 10Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Dec 19, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Apr 20, 2018Title: Preventive Maintenance (PM)
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 5of 9
6.8.1. Follow the Vendor Service Request RSQ job aid KB0011071. If one vendor service request is being utilized for multiple devices, follow the Bulk Vendor Service Request Process.6.8.2. PM's requiring vendor service should be identified by the assigned technician on the first business day of the month. The technician should issue a PO# no later than 5 business days after the 1st business day of the month to accomplish PM management.6.8.3. At the completion of vendor service, the technician will attach a copy of the FSR to the Vendor Service Request (see Vendor Service Request Job Aid) and appropriately document the work completed by the vendor.Note: FSR is copied to the WOT through the successful completion of the Vendor Service Request process.6.8.3.1. The FSR should be reviewed to ensure documentation of the work completed by the vendor.6.8.3.2. If Bulk Vendor Service Request, FSR should be attached directly to PM WOT.6.8.4. The Technician will complete the PM Work Order Documentation according to the steps below.6.8.5. The Technician will attach the PM Sticker according to the directions below.6.8.6. Note: The Substatus 'Out to Vendor' is applicable when the device has been sent out from the facility to the vendor for PM. If the vendor is coming to the facility to perform the PM, the PM WOT is to remain open and on-site vendor service should be requested.6.9.If Device Status is Temporary:Note: See Temporary Equipment procedure (TMX-SOP-0011) for full details on temporary equipment inventory management.6.9.1. If the PM WOT has a short description of 6M:00-INV this indicates that we are validating that the equipment is still in the facility and still has the designation of temporary.6.9.1.1. Once the device is found, the service notes should indicate that the device was found, and a visual inspection was performed.6.9.1.2. The close notes should be answered as followed:Answer is NoAnswer is GenericNote: Selecting Generic in this case indicates that there is no generic procedure to be followed as this specific PM procedure is to verify the device is still in inventory.Answer is NoAnswer is No6.9.2. If the PM WOT has a short description that does not contain INV;6.9.2.1. Work with hospital/rental company to let them know maintenance is due and collect documentation of completed maintenance if device is to remain in inventory.ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0088 Revision: 10Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Dec 19, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Apr 20, 2018Title: Preventive Maintenance (PM)
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 6of 9
6.10.Delayed Work Order Status:6.10.1. If the work order task cannot be completed due to a delay; you may select the 6.10.2.PartsVendor ServiceSite (Customer)6.10.3.6.10.4. Delayed Work Order Status is not used for any metrics or standardized reporting. This is only to help provide reasoning behind the work order task not being completed.6.11.If the PM was completed outside the PM Schedule's window:6.11.1. If the PM was completed outside the PM schedule window, then PM WOT shall not be closed as completed to reference a date in the past. Please contact Quality & Regulatory Compliance if this situation arises.6.11.2. Submit the PM as Not Needed to Quality & Regulatory Compliance via CMMS.6.11.2.1. The request will first go to your manager for approval. Once the Manager has Your manager has 14 days to approve the request. If it is not approved within 14 days, the request will be closed incomplete. If still needed, the request will have to be resubmitted. See the PM Not Needed Job Aid for further instructions.6.11.2.2. Include PM documentation of the last PM or indicate where the documentation is located.6.12.If the device is on a metered schedule and has not met the metered/cycle requirements:Technician to submit the PM as Not Needed. The request must have a photo of the metered number/cycle before it will be approved. 6.12.1. PMs will continue to generate until the PM has reached its hours.6.13.If the device is on Predictive/Evidence Based Maintenance6.13.1. Device is set to an annual schedule. If vendor states that no maintenance is due, Technicians will review the repairs/service calls from the previous year to confirm. If the documentation supports EBM was performed, the PM WOT can be completed with documentation in the Service Notes stating the date EBM was performed and attaching the FSR. PM month should then be updated in the Equipment Record to ensure subsequent PM WOT generation occurs in the appropriate month.ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0088 Revision: 10Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Dec 19, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Apr 20, 2018Title: Preventive Maintenance (PM)
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 7of 9
6.14 WOT Completion Steps6.14.1 If the PM has not been completed within the month it was generated, the PM WOT should not 6.14.2 Once the device is located, Technicians will accurately fill out the PM Work Order Task 6.14.3 Inspect equipment per procedure (OEM; in the event there are no documented OEM procedures available, then utilize like-and-kind or generic procedures). If OEM procedure manual is available, provide to Quality & Regulatory Compliance via CMMS.6.14.4 Document within the measurable outputs (preferred) or service notes fields, acceptable ranges and actual results, RPM's, running temperatures, calibration data, over-temperature alarm verification, ESI, and similar information indicative of PM activities for specific equipment.6.14.5 All Laboratory equipment and blood warming devices must have all recordable outputs and ranges documented within the WOT.6.14.6 Document test equipment's CEID(s) used in the indicated close question on the PM WOT.6.14.7 Final action is to ensure proper system performance, which may include such steps as: visually inspect, perform safety tests, clean, adjust, calibrate, or verify calibration.6.14.8 If scheduled inspection is completed without deficiencies, the Work Order Task is completed. 6.15 In the event where an unexpected issue or failure is found during scheduled maintenance:If a problem is determined to be minor, the preventive maintenance procedure CAN BE completed and device cannot be returned to service (e.g., a power cord has a cut in covering), technician should do the following: Perform the PM procedure.Complete the PM WOTComplete and affix the PM label.Initiate a repair WOT, notify the user of slight delay in return to service and complete the repair WOT.6.15.1 If a problem is determined not to be minor, the preventive maintenance procedure cannot be completed, and the device cannot be returned to service. 6.15.1.1 Repair WOT will be opened to complete the repair - refer to Equipment Repairs procedure TMX-SOP-0087.6.15.1.2 User department will be notified of the delay in return to service.6.15.1.3 Repair WOT will be referenced in PM work order task, and PM work order task will remain open until the repair is completed.6.15.1.4 Once the repair is completed, the PM process will resume and be completed using the process outlined above.ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0088 Revision: 10Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Dec 19, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Apr 20, 2018Title: Preventive Maintenance (PM)
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 8of 9
6.16 Technicians will complete the PM sticker detailing the next due date by entering the month and using the correct year found in the top right corner. 6.16.1 Example for Month: 05 for May6.16.2 If the device has multiple next PM dates due to a multifaceted PM schedule, then use the nearest upcoming PM date.6.17 Note: The color of the sticker will change annually. It is acceptable to use only the format of the sticker as shown above. Application of the stickers needs to be performed properly -previous PM stickers need to be removedand the area cleaned before applying new PM stickers. PM stickers are only a visual queue, CMMS is the source for all PM history.6.18 If calibration was performed; the appropriate calibration sticker should be updated.6.19 If the device is test equipment and has been calibrated by an external calibration group (i.e., BC Group, Tektronix, etc.) then the vendor calibration sticker may be acceptable in place of a TRIMEDX calibration sticker.6.20 In situations where the device PM schedule is justifiably changed from PM to PAAR, PM stickers will need to be removed and appropriate Approved for Use stickers must be applied. No device should have outdated stickers. (Refer to PM Schedule Assignment TMX-SOP-0036)6.21SMreviews all Work Orders to ensure appropriate intervention and documentation before WO closure.6.22SMclosed Work Order.7 QUALITY RECORDS7.15 Documentation shall be retained as specified in QMS-SOP-0003 Record Control.8 PROCESS FLOWCHART-See next page
ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0088 Revision: 10Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Dec 19, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Apr 20, 2018Title: Preventive Maintenance (PM)
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 9of 9
RevisionRevision history1-8 See Change History in ETQ9 Addition of Evidence Based/Predictive Maintenance language. Clarification of documentation requirements for PM completion. For the purposes of training, the entire document is considered revised.10Section 3.6 and 3.7 Added definitions for servicing and reworkEND OF DOCUMENT
