1.

N | Approved
(/ T R | M E DX » Standard Operating Procedure

: Document #: . TMX-SOP-0089 Revision: S 12
. Document Type: | TMX | Effective Date: Jul 18, 2023
. Department: . CE Operations Origination Date:

Title: Alerts and Recalls Management

PURPOSE -- SCOPE

TRIMEDX will comply with TRIMEDX and the Facility's policies and procedures when
managing hazard alerts and equipment recalls for TRIMEDX covered equipment.

3.2

3.3.

3.4.

3.5.

REFERENCE DOCUMENTS

DEFINITIONS
3.1

Affected? Yes: Condition/issue addressed in the alert pertains to the equipment and
can be rectified by the TRIMEDX Technician, Site Manager, or OEM.

Affected? No: Condition/issue addressed in the alert does not pertain to the
equipment or equipment is not affected.

Affected? Investigating: Technician is assessing the device to determine if it is affected
by the alert.

Alert Review Committee: The Alert Review Committee will be comprised of the Senior
QRC Medical Device Safety Specialist, Directors, Quality & Regulatory, the Vice
President, Quality, member(s) of TRIMEDX Operations Senior Leadership and
representatives from the following departments: Supply Chain, Supplier Quality.
Additionally, the Vice President of Supply Chain and the Chief Operating Officer will be
invited to join.

Alert Types:

3.5.1. Standard Alert — ALTOOXXXX — Each device must be investigated. A WOT is opened

for each potentially affected device and each device must be investigated.

3.5.2. Recall — RCLOOOXXX — The device is recalled by the MFR. A WOT is opened for each

potentially affected device and each device is investigated and removed from
service if affected.

3.5.3. Generic Alert — ALTOOXXXXG — Remediation from the MFR is not yet available.

One WO/WOT is opened per site possessing the potentially affected models.
Information is reviewed and any “end user” instructions should be passed on.

3.5.4. Informational Alert — ALTOOXXXXI — Notification that is informational ONLY and

will NOT require remediation at the device level. Information is reviewed and any
“end user” instructions should be passed on.

3.5.5. Alert Update — ALTOOXXXXU — An update to a previously released alert that

requires a change in the initial remediation instructions. The same ALT# prefix will
be used as the originally released alert and a “U” will be added to the end.

3.5.6. Multifaceted Alert - ALTOOXXXXMX— Multiple remediations that will be released

for the same device correction. The same ALT# prefix will be used for each facet.

3.5.7.  FYI—An Urgent Medical Device Correction has not yet been issued by the MFR -

no current action required. The FYI story is posted on Conxion page.

3.6. Anticipated Service Provider — In House: Condition/issue addressed in the alert

pertains to the equipment and can be resolved by the technician or manager in house.

This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.

Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.

Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to

TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDX

Page 1 of 7


N | Approved
(/ T R | M E DX » Standard Operating Procedure

: Document #: . TMX-SOP-0089 Revision: S 12
. Document Type: | TMX | Effective Date: Jul 18, 2023
. Department: . CE Operations Origination Date:

Title: Alerts and Recalls Management

3.7.

Anticipated Service Provider — Manufacturer: Condition/issue addressed in the alert
pertains to the equipment but needs to be resolved by the Manufacturer (waiting on
parts, documents, or service).

4. ABBREVIATIONS

4.1.
4.2.
4.3.
4.4.
4.5.
4.6.
4.7.
4.8.
4.9.
4.10.
4.11.
4.12.

CNL - Could Not Locate; equipment could not be found
CMMS — Computerized Maintenance Management System
CO - Corporate Office

FDA — Food and Drug Administration

FSR — Field Service Report

OEM - Original Equipment Manufacturer

PM - Preventive Maintenance

QRC - Quality & Regulatory Compliance Department
RTP — Request to Purchase

SM - Site Manager

WO - Work Order

WOT — Work Order Task

5. RESPONSIBILITIES

5.1
5.

5.

5.

5.
5.

5.2.

TRIMEDX Managers

1.1. Communicate and provide Alert/Recall notice and relevant documentation to
hospital and QRC Department. Documentation is maintained within the CMMS.

1.2. Ensure that appropriate investigation is conducted based on the Alert WO/WOT
opened prior to approval.

1.3. Review all Alert WO/WOTs to ensure appropriate intervention and documentation
prior to approval.

1.4. Submit Bulk Update Alerts Requests to QRC Department if applicable.

1.5. If applicable, ensure Business Reply Form attached to the alert (or provided by
manufacturer) is accurately filled out and is returned to manufacturer.

TRIMEDX Managed Technicians

5.2.1. Locate the device addressed in the Alert/Recall WOT.
5.2.2. Verify that the problem identified in the Alert/Recall applies to the device.

5.2.2.1 If a Recall, communicate to the customer immediately that the device is being
removed from service. If device is determined affected, remove from clinical
use within 48 hours and indicate on the WOT that the device has been removed
from clinical use.

5.2.3. Accurately fill out Alert/Recall WOT with the required information.
5.2.4. Leave all Alert/Recall WOTs open until they are remediated.

This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.

Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.

Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to

TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDX
Page 2 of 7


N | Approved
(/ T R | M E DX » Standard Operating Procedure

: Document #: . TMX-SOP-0089 Revision: S 12
. Document Type: | TMX | Effective Date: Jul 18, 2023
. Department: . CE Operations Origination Date:

Title: Alerts and Recalls Management

5.2.5. Address Alert/Recall WOTs within 30 days of receipt of the notice which includes
completing the “Affected?” question and adding work notes.

5.2.6. ldentify and monitor Alert/Recall WOTSs that require Manufacturer Service or will
remain open past 90 days. Continuing contacting OEM every 30 days until you
receive a remediation date.

5.3. QRC Department

5.3.1. Perform an inventory search of the CMMS to identify devices potentially affected
by the hazard alert or equipment recall received from the Recall Management
Database, TRIMEDX Managers, or from the FDA.

5.3.2. Open Alert/Recall WO/WOTs for all equipment potentially affected by the alert for
equipment less than 1,000 in quantity.

5.3.3. Escalate Alert/Recall to Vice President, Quality & Regulatory and Directors, QRC
Department if the equipment count is 1,000+ and/or the remediation work will
need to be completed In House. The Alert Review Committee will be initiated in
these scenarios to determine next steps and provide visibility to TRIMEDX Senior
Leadership.

5.3.4. Provide a copy of the hazard alert or equipment recall to the affected sites.

5.3.5. Complete Bulk Update Alerts Requests.

5.3.6. Monitor open Alert/Recall WO/WOTs and provide Compliance Reports to TRIMEDX
Leadership as requested.

5.3.7. Review closed Alert/Recall WO/WOTs periodically to ensure appropriate actions
and documentation.

6. PROCEDURE
6.1. QRC receives Alert/Recall notice from Recall Management Database, TRIMEDX
Manager, or FDA.

6.2. QRC determines if the impact of the alert work orders will exceed 1,000 in quantity
and/or the remediation work will need to be completed In House. If so, the alert is
escalated to the Vice President, Quality & Regulatory and Directors, Quality &
Regulatory prior to any actions being taken. The Vice President and Directors will
initiate a meeting with the Alert Review Committee to determine the next steps in the
process. This meeting should occur within 5 business days following TRIMEDX's receipt
of the alert/recall.

6.3. QRC investigates Alert/Recall notice, creates notification of Alert/Recall, and opens
Alert/Recall WO/WOT if devices are found to be in inventory.

This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.
Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.

Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to
TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDX

Page 3 of 7


N | Approved
(/ T R | M E DX » Standard Operating Procedure

: Document #: . TMX-SOP-0089 Revision: S 12
. Document Type: | TMX | Effective Date: Jul 18, 2023
. Department: . CE Operations Origination Date:

Title: Alerts and Recalls Management

6.4. SM ensures that an appropriate investigation is conducted based on the Alert WO
opened by QRC.

6.5. Technician locates the device addressed in the Alert/Recall WOT.
6.6. Technician verifies that the problem identified in the Alert/Recall applies to the device.

6.7. Technician accurately fills out Alert WOT.
6.7.1. In the Affected? Field, select Yes, No, or Investigating from the drop-down list and
add work notes as applicable.

6.8. Technician selects Start Work when ready to service the equipment.

6.9. If Manufacturer service is required (likely to remain open past 90 days)
6.9.1. Inthe Close Fields tab — select Manufacturer Remediation next to Who performed
the remediation?
6.9.2. Select what actions were taken to remediate the alert.
6.9.3. Select what actions were taken to ensure the device was ready for patient use.
6.9.4. Attach an FSR from the Manufacturer to the WOT.

6.10. If In House service is an option

6.10.1. Determine whether parts need to be ordered. Note: Parts should typically be
ordered from the OEM ONLY and not sourced.

6.10.2. SM approves part order if cost exceeds tech permission level. Typically, parts
orders related to an alert or recall should be $0 if ordered correctly.

6.10.3. Receive ordered parts in the CMMS; if replaced part is eligible for Core exchange,
notify return of exchange in the CMMS and ship part.

6.10.4. Complete alert actions based on Manufacturer notice.

6.10.5. In the Close Fields tab — select In House next to Who performed the remediation?

6.10.6. Select what actions were taken to remediate the alert.

6.10.7. Select what actions were taken to ensure the device was ready for patient use.

6.11. If Repair or PM pertaining to the Alert is needed;
6.11.1. Address the Alert WOT as described above.
6.11.2. If Repair is needed — open a Repair WOT and follow the steps in the Equipment
Repairs Policy (TMX-SOP-0087).
6.11.3. If PM is needed — Open a Manual PM and follow the steps in the Preventive
Maintenance (PM) Policy (TMX-SOP-0088).

This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.
Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.

Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to
TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDX
Page 4 of 7


N | Approved
(/ T R | M E DX » Standard Operating Procedure

: Document #: . TMX-SOP-0089 Revision: S 12
. Document Type: | TMX | Effective Date: Jul 18, 2023
. Department: . CE Operations Origination Date:

Title: Alerts and Recalls Management

6.12. Within 30 days, all alerts should be, at a minimum, addressed with the Affected? field
completed, and work notes documented.

6.13. If applicable, completed Business Reply forms in the alert should be returned to the
manufacturer or provided to Hospital Alert Management representative.

6.14. Not Affected alerts should be closed.

6.15. Affected alerts that required Manufacturer service:
6.15.1. SM schedules service directly with the manufacturer.
6.15.2. Open past 90 days should be monitored (contact Manufacturer/vendor on status)
and notes entered every 30 days until you receive a remediation date.

6.16. Affected alerts that can be serviced by in-house staff:
6.16.1. Should be closed as soon as possible.
6.16.2. Open past 90 days should be monitored, and notes entered every 30 days until
resolved.

6.17. Affected alerts that will not be remediated due to device dispositioned/returned to
OEM OR customer has decided NOT to move forward with remediation/upgrade:
6.17.1. Selected “Yes” to “Has remediation been completed?” and selected “Device
Disposition” or “Customer Declined” to “What was done to remediate?” Attach
documentation of the customer declination to the WOT.

6.18. Delayed Work Order Status
6.18.1. If the work order task cannot be completed due to a delay; you may select the
‘Delayed’ check box on the WOT.
6.18.2. Once checked, you are required to answer, ‘What is Delayed?’:
6.18.2.1. Parts
6.18.2.2. Vendor Service
6.18.2.3. Site (Customer)
6.18.3. If there is an additional reason that they are delayed, then the option for ‘Delay
Reason’ is available.
6.18.4. Delayed Work Order Status is not used for any metrics or standardized reporting.
This is only to help provide reasoning behind the work order task not being
completed.

6.19. SM/Technician can request a bulk update of Alert WO/WOT Notes, Affected?, Close
Fields, and labor lines by submitting the following to QRC in a Bulk Update Alerts
request in the CMMS. Note: Bulk Update Alerts requests DO NOT close the WOT.

This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.
Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.

Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to
TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDX
Page 5 of 7


N | Approved
(/ T R | M E DX » Standard Operating Procedure

: Document #: . TMX-SOP-0089 Revision: S 12
. Document Type: | TMX | Effective Date: Jul 18, 2023
. Department: . CE Operations Origination Date:

Title: Alerts and Recalls Management

6.19.1. Filter your WOT list to Alert WOTs to be updated, filtering to one reference number
atatime.
6.19.2. Once satisfied with the filtered list, go to the Related Links at the bottom and click
Bulk Update Alerts.
6.19.3. Complete the Bulk Update of Alert Work Order Tasks form:
6.19.3.1. Answer the question of Affected?
6.19.3.2. Answer the Close Fields questions
6.19.3.3. Enter Work Notes and Service Notes
6.19.3.4. If applicable, enter labor information. Ensure that the correct labor type is
selected (i.e. labor, courtesy, etc). This will create a labor expense line for the
“On behalf of” user.
6.19.4. Add attachments if applicable
6.19.5. Press Submit in the lower right corner of the form
6.19.6. QRC will review the request. If the request is denied you will receive a notification
and someone from QRC will reach out to you.

6.20. Rental Equipment Process on Alerts

6.20.1. Technicians should notify department of use or equipment owner of the rental
relationship of the need for remediation.

6.20.2. If rental company has stated they will not remediate the alert, then CE
management team should inform customer champion that TRIMEDX can no longer
support the device due to patient risk.

6.20.2.1. Disposition device — follow steps in the Disposition of Equipment policy
(TMX-SOP-0091).
6.20.2.2. If customer will not sign disposition form, escalate through TRIMEDX site
operation leadership.
6.20.2.3. Incomplete the Alert WOT through the Disposition of Equipment process. If
Alert WOT is not Incompleted through the disposition process, it must be
Incompleted manually through the Alert WOT.
6.20.3. If rental company will complete remediation:
6.20.3.1. If Device is removed from site for remediation:
6.20.3.1.1. Disposition device —follow steps in the Disposition of Equipment policy
(TMX-SOP-0091).
6.20.3.1.2. Incomplete the Alert WOT through the Disposition of Equipment
process. If Alert WOT is not Incompleted through the disposition
process, it must be Incompleted manually through the Alert WOT.
6.20.3.2. If Device will remain on site for remediation:
6.20.3.2.1. Work with hospital/rental company to collect documentation of
remediation and document against the WOT.

This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.
Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.

Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to
TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDX
Page 6 of 7


N I Approved |
(JTRIMEDX Standard Operating Procedure

Document | TMX-50P-0089 12

i Alerts and Recalls Management

7. QUALITY RECORDS
8. PROCESS FLOWCHART

Revision Revision history
11 Addition of section 6.21 Rental Equipment process. General clarification throughout
responsibility sections.
12 Major changes to process throughout document. Addition of alert type definitions and

changes to required documentation frequency. For training purposes, consider entire
document updated.

END OF DOCUMENT

This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.
Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.

Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to
TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDX

Page 7 of 7


