ECLS-012 (SMAT, cost center 6217) 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: St. Mary’s Admission Tower 
(SMAT) Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for SMAT 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 6217 SMAT 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 01/25/2018 Review Date: 06/03/2024 
Revision Date: 06/03/2020 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• The exit sign on SMAT are located one by Bay 11, one towards the back hallway down from 
Bay 12, another one outside the Nurse’s station by double doors.  
• The adjacent smoke compartments door is accessible by Bay 11 to Tower Waiting Room & 
outside SMAT into Tower OR hallway.  
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response ECLS-012 (SMAT, cost center 6217) 
Page 2 of 3 
The hours of operation are Monday-Friday, 500am to 1330pm.  
 
• The CNA will clear the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving them to the Clean Utility 
room.  
• The CSR will close doors.  
• The charge nurse will confirm automatic fire doors closed (doors held open by magnetic locks 
are to release and close upon activation of the alarm) 
• The nurses working on SMAT will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital 
is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety.” 
• The charge nurse will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities 
o The Manager or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
o The Supervisor or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for  
o The Manager or designee will ensure each room is empty 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
The Medical Gas shut off valves are located: 
• In the Tower OR hallway outside of SMAT.  
• The shut off valves located on the wall outside the Tower PACU are for Bays 8-14 
• The shut off valves for Bays 1-7 are located in the hallway by the push pad access for SMAT.  
• Any staff person has the authority to shut off the valves if instructed to by Plant Services or 
Respiratory. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• For horizontal evacuations, we will use wheelchairs and stretchers for those that are not 
ambulatory.  
• For vertical evacuations, we will use equipment such as stretcher mattresses and sheets. 
Additional sheets are in the linen cart in the Clean Supply room. 
• We anticipate most patients to be partially ambulatory. If assistance is needed, the Manager or 
designee will seek help from the OR. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguisher is located:   
o In the hallway outside the soiled utility room 
• Manual pull station is located in the Nurse’s station next to the tube station. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint. N/A 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route will be towards the Tower waiting area.  
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route will be towards the Tower OR hallway towards the 
escalators.  
• The primary vertical evacuation route is to exit the building via bridge to Parking Garage 2. ECLS-012 (SMAT, cost center 6217) 
Page 3 of 3 
• The secondary vertical evacuation route is to exit the building via the stairwell by the old 
Pediatric PACU.  