ECLS-012 (Tower PACU, cost center 6218) 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Tower PACU Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Tower PACU 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 6218 Tower 
PACU 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 01/25/2018 Review Date: 06/03/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• The exit signs in Tower PACU are over the doors adjacent to Bay 4 and Bay 14. 
• The adjacent Smoke Compartment through the exit by Bay 4 is Tower OR. 
• The adjacent Smoke Compartment through the exit by Bay 14 is Tower waiting.  
 
 
 ECLS-012 (Tower PACU, cost center 6218) 
Page 2 of 2 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• CNAs or designee will clear the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving them to the back 
corner by the supervisors office 
• CSRs or designee will close all doors 
• Charge Nurse or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed 
• Nurses working in PACU will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Nurse caring for the patient, or designee, will assist those with Limited English Proficiency 
(LEP) and those with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Nurse Manager or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• Supervisor or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for 
• Manager or designee will ensure entire room is empty. 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
The medical gas shut off valves are in the OR hallway, through the doors by Bay 4, directly to the 
right.  The manager or designee will notify either Plant Services or Respiratory to turn off the medical 
gas. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• For horizontal evacuations, we will use the stretcher or bed the patient is on. 
• For vertical evacuations, we will use equipment such as stretchers and sheets. Additional sheets 
are located on the linen cart in the Clean Supply room. 
• We anticipate to be partially ambulatory. If assistance is needed, the Manager or designee will 
seek help from the OR. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguisher is located in the OR hallway directly outside Bay 4. 
• Additional fire extinguisher is located outside door by Bay 14, to the right between Procedure 
Rooms 14 & 15.  
• Manual pull station is in the nurses stations directly opposite Bay 9. 
• Additional manual pull station is outside door by Bay 14, down the hall, to the right next to the 
stairwell. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Special patient populations may include intubated patients or non-ambulatory patients due to 
anesthesia, specific surgery, or pain medication.  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route will be to Tower Waiting. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route will be to Tower OR. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is to exit the building via bridge to Parking Garage 2. 
 