OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical  Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Administration 
Title: 
Request for Biological implants (human 
and non-human cellular based 
implantable and transplantable products).   
 
Policy Reference #: VEN107 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 7/1/09 Review Date: 12/3/2024 
Revision Date: 11/15/2023 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To assure compliance with Joint Commission and FDA established regulations and 
standards for the transport, receiving, storage and tracking of all biological implants 
(human and non-human cellular based implantable and transplantable products).   
 
POLICY: 
Every biological implant will comply with regulatory standards for receipt, inspection, 
storage, and traceability from point of receiving until implantation.  
 
PROCEDURE:  
1. Product must be an OLOLRMC approved product, ie, approved by Service Line 
Committee,  
OR Supply committee & CQVA OR PAC. 
2. If a product is needed prior to approval by the appropriate committees, the MD 
must receive interim approval from the Service Line Administrator or Divisional 
Director Surgical Services or Director Operating Room.  Approval will be given 
for a limited time period or specific number of cases. Once interim approval is 
obtained, the product will be handled through the same process as approved items.   
3. The Vendor must complete a “Supplier Qualification form” and provide a letter, 
on company letterhead, stating the shipping process of the biological product 
(how shipped, if validated shipping container will be used and the approved time 
frame for maintaining required temperature). 
4. FMOL Purchasing Department issues a purchase order. 
5. All products must be shipped to OLOLRMC Recieving Department from the 
manufacture/vendor.   
6. No products will be accepted directly from a sales representative. 
7. OLOL will not pay for any product that does not have a purchase order number.  
8. Upon receipt by the department receiving/processing the tissue,  staff  must: 
• Validate the integrity of the shipping container 
• Verify that the recommended controlled temperature has been 
maintained.  If tissue shipped in a validated shipping container, 
requires only documentation that container received undamaged 
and within stated time frame. • Tissue requiring only ambient temperature for transport and 
storage do not require temp verification on receipt 
• Record In house storage temps 
• Verify recipient and implant info match. 
9. The department receiving/processing the tissue will be responsible for ensuring all 
required information is entered into the tracking system. 
10. If upon inspection the product does meet all requirements for shipping and pack 
integrity, it will be rejected and returned to the Vendor.   
 