 Procedure 07 
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual:  Mental and Behavioral Health  
Title: Transport of Patient from ED to 
EMBH Section: 
Emergency Mental 
and Behavioral 
Health (EMBH) 
Date of 
Origination: June 29, 2015 Procedure   
Reference #: 07 
Last Revised 
Date: January 2019 Supersedes #:  
  Last Reviewed Date: January 14, 2025 
 
PURPOSE: 
This procedure will outline the process by which patients with a probable mental and behavioral 
health diagnosis will be transferred to EMBH in a safe and efficient manner to prevent 
elopement and promote the safety of the patient and staff.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
 Following is the procedure for transporting patients from the main emergency room to EMBH: 
A. Upon completion of triage and determination of medical stability, the ER nurse will call 
EMBH to inform them there is a patient ready for transfer. 
B. The ER nurse will call Security for an escort. Security and another team member trained in 
CPI will transport the patient to from the ER to EMBH 
a. If the patient is agitated or verbalizing intention to elope, additional staff or Security 
will be requested in order to transport the patient to EMBH 
C. The ER nurse will ensure all of the patient’s belongings are transported with the patient. At 
times, this may require a third person to assist.  
a. Patient belongings will remain secured by staff throughout transfer process.  
b. Patient should not be allowed to access belongings for any reason.  
c. At times an additional staff member may be requested to assist with belongings 
D. All patients will be transported by wheelchair or stretcher.  
E. Team members will explain to the patient where they are going and why. Team members will 
engage in conversation with the patient while transporting to keep the patient calm. 
F. The Team member will push the patient as the Security Guard walks to the side of the 
patient. 
G. The Radiology Hall behind Trauma and the Pediatric ER will be utilized for the transport of 
patients from the ER to EMBH. 
H. If the patient becomes agitated or aggressive, the Security Guard may utilize his/her radio for 
assistance, or the team member may press his Versus badge to electronically alert Security 
and staff that assistance is needed immediately.  
I. If an elopement occurs, staff will follow OrgClin/047 Elopement policy.  
 