 1 
OUR LADY OF LAKE RMC  
 
CARE MANGEMENT 
POLICY 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
June 2012 
Reviewed  
10/1/2024 
POLICY #: 
 
CM 01 
 
SUBJECT: 
 
Condition Code 44 
 
PAGE 1 OF 1 
 
APPROVED BY: 
Nicole Telhiard 
 
I. PURPOSE: 
 
 The purpose of Condition Code 44 is to ensure that all Utilization Review (UR) 
activities, including the review of medical necessity of hospital inpatient admission and 
continued stays, are fulfilled as described in 42 CFR 482.30. 
  
II. APPLIES TO: 
 All Physicians, Care Management, Utilization Review Nurse, HIM, revenue integrity 
  
III POLICY: 
 Condition Code 44—Inpatient Admission changed to Outpatient:  This code is used 
when a physician has ordered inpatient services, but upon internal utilization review 
performed before the claim is submitted, the hospital determines that the services do not 
meet inpatient criteria for medical necessity. 
 
The hospital must ensure that all UR activities, include the review of medical necessity 
of hospital inpatient admissions and continued stays are fulfilled. As the Department of 
Health and Hospital (DHH) State Operation Manual states, a non-physician cannot make 
a final determination that a patient’s stay is not medically necessary or appropriate; 
however, there is an expectation that case management staff, while utilizing hospital 
admission protocols and /or criteria will facilitate the communication between 
practitioners and the UR Committee. 
 
CMS has established the policy for the use of Condition Code 44 to address those 
infrequent occasions such as a late-night or weekend admission when no case manager 
(or hospital personnel) is on duty to offer guidance. When an internal review determines 
that, and inpatient admission does not meet hospital criteria and the patient should have 
been registered as an outpatient it would be appropriate to use Condition Code 44. 
 
Services billed under Condition Code 44 are covered and reimbursed on the same terms 
and conditions as if they had been provided in the outpatient setting, as long as all of the 
following criteria are met:  The decision to change patient status must be made by the 
hospital’s UR Committee 
• one member of the UR Committee with attending physician’s 
concurrence  2 
• in all other cases, the decision must be made by two physician members 
of the UR Committee 
• the attending physician’s concurrences must be documented in the 
patient’s medical record 
• the change in status must be made prior to discharge or release of the 
patient, and 
• the hospital has not submitted a claim for the inpatient admission. 
 
 
IV. RESPONSIBILITY: 
 Care Management, Utilization Review Nurse, Attending Physician, UR Committee 
 
V. PROCEDURE: 
 1. Care Management Staff- The Care Manager / Utilization Review Nurse will 
conduct medical record review to ensure medical necessity and appropriate level 
of care assignment, justification of treatment, and quality of care. The Care 
Manager / Utilization Review Nurse will contact the attending physician and the 
UR Committee or designee (Care Management Physician Advisor) when there is 
a question for whether the inpatient admission is appropriate. 
 
UR Committee 
The determination that an admission or continued stay is not medically necessary must 
either be made by: 
• One member of the UR Committee if the attending physician responsible 
for the care of the patient either concurs with the determination or fails  
to present their views when afforded the opportunity, or  
• Two Member of the UR Committee in all other cases 
The UR committee consults with the attending physician and allows them to present their 
views before making the determination.  If the UR committee determines that the 
admission is not medically appropriate for Inpatient status, and the attending physician 
does not provide additional information or still disagrees with the physician representative 
from the UR committee, the UR committee must give written notification of change in 
status from the inpatient to outpatient to the hospital responsible for the care of the patient 
not later than 2 days after the determination. 
 
Upon written notification by the UR committee that the admission is not medically 
necessary the following steps will occur: 
1.  All entries in the medical record will be maintained in their original format; 
2. If the patient’s status changes in accordance with the requirements for the use of 
Condition Code 44, the change must be fully documented by the physicians in the 
medical record, complete with orders and notes that indicate why the change was 
made, the care that  was furnished, and the participants in making the decision to 
change the patient’s status including physician signature. 
3. Notify the Manager/Director of Care Management, Administration. 
4. Present the patient/family with the MOON document.  Ensure signed letter gets 
scanned into EPIC  3 
5. Care Management Department will ensure the status change order is entered and 
will document code 44 information into the electronic medical record. 
6. The Manager /Director of Care Management or assigned staff  will review and 
report Condition Code 44 cases to the UR committee as requested 
 
REFERENCE 
CMS Manual System, Pub 100-04 Medicare Claims Processing, Transmittal 1803, August 
2009 
 
VII REVISED DATE: 
 4/2017 Changed approver,2/2019 revised, changed approver 
VIII REVIEWED DATE: 
 2/2015, 4/18,10/1/2024 
 
 
 