 
 
  
To ensure that ALL ICD/AICD procedures 
performed at Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center meet the standards for 
medical necessity as outlined  by the Center 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) 
and Local Coverage Determination or as 
required by third party payer specific 
criteria. 
ICD Medical 
Necessity  
Compliance 
process 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
E. Michael Avaritt, MSN, RN 2017 ICD Policy for Medical Necessity Compliance Process.docx 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT:  
Cardiovascular Lab – NCDR Registry Division 
 
  
SUBJECT: Implantable Automatic Cardioverter  
Defibrillator/Implantable Cardioverter 
Defibrillator (AICD/ICD) Medical Necessity 
Compliance Process 
NUMBER OF PAGES:   3 
 
REPLACES POLICY (Number/Date): 
N/A 
 
Date of Origination:  10/25/17 
Date of Last Revision:  06/25/2021 
Date of Review:   7/31/17, 5/31/18, 5/31/20 
 
 
 
  
 
SCOPE: All implantation procedures of AICD’s/ICD’s performed as either Inpatient or Outpatient in an 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) facilities.  
 
PURPOSE: To ensure that Cardiac Cath Lab and Surgery procedures to implant an Implantable 
Automatic Defibrillator, or Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator (AICD or ICD) meet the standards for 
medical necessity as outlined in the Center of Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) National and 
Local Coverage Determination (NCD), or as required by other third party payer specific criteria. 
 
POLICY: OLOLRMC will maintain procedures to ensure that implantation of AICD’s/ICD’s are 
implanted when condition of the patient indicates that the procedure is medically necessary 
according to established criteria in the NCD, and is conducted in a manner that considers the safety of 
the patient and the provision of quality care.  
 
Documentation defined as “hard stop form”  will be maintained that supports medical necessity, 
shared decision making, and other pertinent clinical data.  This information will be maintained in an 
electronic format in the medical record (EPIC) for access.  This documentation will be retained no less 
than ten (10) years and in accordance with Compliance Retention schedules. 
 
Monitoring programs will be developed and conducted by the Cardiovascular Lab Leadership and 
Cardiovascular Quality Department to ensure continuous compliance with policy and procedure. 
Results of this monitoring as well as any resulting change of practice or other corrective action will be 
reported to the EP Committee on a regular basis.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
AICD/ICD:  Implantable Automatic Cardioverter Defibrillator; an electronic device designed to 
monitor, detect and treat life-threatening abnormal heart rhythm (tachyarrhythmia).  
 
2017 ICD Policy for Medical Necessity Compliance Process.docx 
 
PROCEDURE: 
Note: This process is not intended to approve or deny a physician’s ability to implant an AICD/ICD that 
is found to be medically necessitated. 
 
1. Cardiovascular Quality Department will check the Epic Electronic Schedule daily for scheduled 
Initial ICD Procedures. They check in early a.m. and again in the p.m. This information is then 
logged daily in the T:Drive/Data/Cardiovascular Quality Dashboard/2015 ICD Tracking Folder 
by team members.  
2. Team member checks the Epic Anesthesia schedule daily for Initial ICD procedures A.M. and 
P.M. and log in the T:Drive folder.  
3. Team member reviews the EMR to evaluate Hard Stop status. (See below). The following 
questions are asked:  
a. Is this an Initial Implant? If YES – the form needs to be completed. If NO – proceed with 
scheduling the procedure.  
b. Has this patient had a CABG surgery within the past 90 days? YES or NO 
c. Has this patient had a PCI procedure within the last 90 days? YES or NO 
d. Has the patient had an MI within the last 40 days? YES or NO 
     If ANY answer is YES (Questions b,c,d) STOP!! Procedure does NOT meet the criteria   
     For implant/Needs further review. Case CANNOT be put on the schedule book until  
     Further review/approval completed by the Physician Quality Review Committee.  
4. If there is an OUTLIER – that record is brought to the Physician Quality Review Committee 
(Joseph Deumite, MD, FACC; Henry Patrick, MD, FACC; Steven Gremillion, MD, FACC) for review 
and clearance for the implant to proceed. Cath Lab is notified then by Reg istry Office of case 
status. 
5. Team Member  inputs every initial ICD Implant into the ICD Log located on the T:Drive 
(T:Drive/Data/Cardiovascular Quality Dashboard/2015 ICD Tracking Folder).  Hard stop 
questions are reviewed prior to the procedure for compliance . If compliance is met, the 
procedure is performed.  If there is a question regarding compliance, the Cardiovascular Quality 
Department notifies the Cath Lab and the ICD Physician Review Committee.  The procedure is 
put on hold until a member of the ICD Physician Review Committee reviews the case and/or 
speaks to the physician performing the procedure. 
6. Cath Lab will contact the Cardiovascular Quality Department (via text or phone) regarding the 
Initial ICD procedures that are added on and may fail the Hard Stop thereby requiring further 
review prior to implant.  
7. Team member checks the completed Master Daily Schedule the next day to ensure all Initial 
ICD Implants have been evaluated for Hard Stop and logged into the T:Drive. 
8. Implanting MD/Nurse calls Cath Lab to schedule procedure. Team member will complete the 
ICD Pre-Op Scheduling Checklist by asking the following questions: 
a. Is this an Initial Implant?  If YES – the form needs to be completed. If NO –form does not 
need to be completed, proceed with scheduling.  
b. Has the patient had a CABG procedure within the past 90 days?  
c. Has this patient had a PCI procedure with the last 90 days? 
d. Has this patient had an MI within the last 40 days? 
If ANY answer is YES (Questions b,c,d) – STOP!! Does not meet criteria for implant/Needs 
further review. Case cannot be scheduled until further review is completed.   
         9. Upon patient discharge, there is a follow -up check on the Coding Summary to make sure                  
the Principal Procedure Coding Summary is completed and provides appropriate documentation. 
      2017 ICD Policy for Medical Necessity Compliance Process.docx 
 
 
FOR QUESTIONS please contact Cardiovascular Disease Management Department located in Medical 
Plaza 2, Suite 8001, 8th floor: 
 
Noel D’Amico, BSN, RN               Jennifer Viator, BSN, RN               E. Michael Avaritt, MSN, RN 
W: 225-765-8645                         W: 225-765-7935                           W:  225-765-8691 
 C:  225-963-0424                         C: 225-921-9351                             C:  225-252-9294 
Noe14290@ololrmc.com                         Jennifer.viator@ololrmc.com                   Michael.avaritt@ololrmc.com  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 