AA-OR-0007 
Page 1 of 10 
 
PURPOSE 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOL or Institution) and Investigators engaged in any research 
including, but not limited to, human subject research each have appropriate roles in ensuring that financial 
interests and/or conflicts of interest do not compromise the protection of research subjects or the integrity of 
research findings.  It is the policy of OLOL that an individual has an obligation to avoid any financial 
conflict of interest for which an approved management plan cannot or has not been developed and 
approved, through the Office of Research, and implemented by the individual and all involved parties. 
 
The purpose of this policy is to promote objectivity in research in accordance with Title 42 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Part 50 Subpart F and 45 CFR Part 94 to promote objectivity in research by establishing 
standards that provide a reasonable expectation that the design, conduct, and reporting of research funded 
under federal grants or cooperative agreements will be free from bias resulting from Investigator financial 
conflicts of interest. 
 
Institutional Conflicts of Interest as a whole or its officials who make decisions with Institution wide 
implications are addressed in the OLOL Institutional Policy: OrgOps/ET/002. 
 
OLOL Office of Corporate Compliance in conjunction with the designated IRB will provide guidance to 
the Office of Research as it relates to managing conflicts of interest.  
 
This policy applies to Institution, Investigators and Sub Investigators, as defined by the regulations, 
employees, staff, fellows, residents, students, collaborators, consultants and any other persons at OLOL 
planning to participate or participating in the research, including their spouses and dependent children 
(Individuals): 
▪ who are responsible for the design, conduct or reporting of research or educational activities 
funded or proposed for funding by private or a federal agency; or 
▪ who are directly involved in the treatment or evaluation of research subjects for research that is 
regulated or conducted by any federal agency, including, but not limited to Department of 
Human Services (“HHS”), National Science Foundation (“NSF”), Public Health Services 
(“PHS”) and the Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”). 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
  
When used in this policy these terms have the following meanings:  
 
Compensation: Any payment including salary, bonus, fees, honorarium, royalties, or in-kind products or 
services including royalties from OLOL, but excluding:  
1) salary and other non-royalty compensation from OLOL;  
2) income from seminars, lectures, or teaching engagements sponsored by public or nonprofit entities; 
3) income from service on advisory committees or review panels for public or nonprofit entities; 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Academic Affairs Section: Office of Research 
Title: Financial Conflict of Interest – Promoting 
Objectivity in Research  
Policy Reference #: AA/OR/022 
Supersedes #: AA/OR/007 
Date of Origination: June 2015 Last Review Date: August 20, 2019 
Last Revision Date: August 20, 2019  
Page 2 of 10 
4) income from investment vehicles such as mutual funds and retirement accounts, providing the 
Investigator does not directly control the investment decisions made by such vehicles. 
Entity:  Any domestic or foreign, public or private, for profit or not for profit legal entity or organization 
other than Institution, or the federal government. 
Equity Interest: Any stock, debt obligation, or derivative thereof, including options, exclusive of diversified 
mutual funds (e.g., stocks, stock options or other ownership interests).  
Financial Interest: Anything of monetary value, whether or not the value is readily ascertainable.  
Financial Conflict of Interest (FCOI) for PHS funded research: A Significant Financial Interest related to 
Public Health Service (PHS) funded research that could directly and significantly affect the design, conduct 
or reporting of funded research, as determined by the Institution’s Office of Research and in consultation 
with the Office of Corporate Compliance.  
Investigator: Any person, regardless of title or position, who is responsible for research design, conduct or 
reporting, including but not limited to, the principal investigator, project director, co-principal investigator, 
clinical research associates, collaborators or consultants.  The primary factors to be used in determining 
who is an Investigator are the significance of the tasks assigned to the individual with regard to the design, 
conduct and reporting of the Research and the degree of independence that individual may have in 
performing such Research-related tasks.  
Immediate family: An individual’s spouse, domestic partner, and dependent children.  
Intellectual property rights: Patents, copyrights, trademarks, or the right to royalties from such rights. 
Institutional responsibilities: An investigator’s professional responsibilities on behalf of OLOL, which 
include but are not limited to activities such as research, research consultation, teaching, professional 
practice, institutional committee memberships, and service on panels such as Institutional Review Boards 
(IRB) and/or Data and Safety Monitoring Boards.  
Management Plan:  Written plan for the purposes of managing, reducing or eliminating Financial Conflict 
of Interest. 
Principal Investigator (PI):  Any person designated with the title of “Principal Investigator” of a Research 
or other sponsored project or otherwise having primary responsibility for the management and conduct of a 
Research or other sponsored project, including a project director.  
Public Health Service of the Department of Health and Human Services (PHS): Includes any PHS 
awarding components to which authority may be delegated, including without limitation the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH).    
Reimbursed Travel:  Travel activity for which the travel expenses are paid directly by the Investigator who 
is then reimbursed by an Entity for such travel expenses.  Reimbursed travel shall not include travel 
expenses that are reimbursed by the Institution, a federal, state or local government agency, an Institution of 
Higher Education, an academic teaching hospital, a medical center, or a research institution that is affiliated 
with Institution of Higher Education. 
Research:  Systematic investigation, study or experiment designed to develop or contribute to generalizable 
knowledge or to be presented in support of regulatory applications.   The term includes any such activity for 
which research funding is available from a PHS Awarding Component through a grant or cooperative 
agreement, whether authorized under the PHS Act or other statutory authority, such as a research grant, 
career development award, center grant, individual fellowship award, infrastructure award, institutional 
training grant, program project, or research resources award. 
Senior/key personnel: These are the program director/principal investigator and any other person identified 
as senior/key personnel by the Institution in the grant application, progress report, or any other report 
submitted to the PHS by the Institution.  
Significant Financial Interest (SFI): A Financial Interest held by the Investigator (or his/her Immediate  
Page 3 of 10 
family) that reasonably appears to be related to the Investigator’s Institutional Responsibilities.  
1. With regard to an Entity whose Equity securities are publicly-traded, a Significant Financial Interest 
exists if the aggregate value of one or more of the following exceeds $5,000:  
a. any Compensation received during the twelve (12) months preceding the date of SFI 
Disclosure 
b. any Compensation reasonably anticipated to be received in the twelve (12) months 
following the date of SFI Disclosure 
c. the value of any Equity interest in the Entity as the date of the SFI Disclosure 
2. With regard to any Entity whose Equity securities are not publicly-traded, a Significant Financial 
Interest exits if :  
a. the value of any Compensation received from the Entity in the twelve (12) months 
preceding the date of SFI Disclosure and/or reasonably anticipated to be received in the 
twelve (12) months following the date of SFI Disclosure, when aggregated exceeds $5,000, 
or 
b. the Investigator holds any Equity interest (e.g. stock, stock option, or other ownership 
interest). 
3. With regard to any Entity, a Significant Financial Interest exists if the Investigator has received 
income related to any Intellectual Property during the twelve (12) months preceding the date of SFI 
Disclosure and/or reasonably anticipated to be received in the twelve (12) months following the date 
of SFI Disclosure which, when aggregated with other Financial Interests in the Entity, exceeds 
$5,000 
Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR Program):  Extramural federal program providing 
financial sponsorship or support for small business through PHS awarding components and certain other 
federal agencies established under Public Law 97-219, the Small Business Innovation Development Act, as 
amended.  For purposes of this policy, SBIR Program also includes the Small Business Technology 
Transfer Program, established under Public Law 102-564. 
Sponsored Travel:  Travel activity, the travel expenses for which are paid directly by an Entity on behalf of 
an Investigator and not reimbursed to the Investigator so that the exact monetary value may not be readily 
available to the Investigator.      
Sub-recipient: A sub-recipient relationship is established when federal funds flow down from or through an 
awardee Institution to another individual or entity and the sub-recipient will be conducting a substantive 
portion of the PHS-funded research project and is accountable to the awardee institution for programmatic 
outcomes and compliance matters.  
U.S. Public Health Services includes the following components:  National Institute of Health (NIH); 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); Food and Drug Administration (FDA); Substance 
Abuse and mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA); Office of Assistant Secretary for 
Preparedness and Response (ASPR); Office of Global Affairs (OGA); Agency for Toxic Substances and 
Disease Registry (ATSDR); Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA); Indian Health 
Services (HIS); Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) and Office of the Assistant Secretary 
for Health.  
 
POLICY 
 
A.  PHS Funded Projects as defined by 42 CFR Part 50 Subpart F 
1. OLOL will post and maintain Institution’s up-to-date Financial Conflict of Interest policy related 
to PHS-Funded Research on a publicly accessible website (42 CFR § 50.604.)  
Page 4 of 10 
2.  OLOL will inform each PHS Investigator of the Institution’s policy on financial conflicts of 
interest and provide Investigator with:  
a. the Institution’s financial conflicts of interest policy;  
b. the Investigator’s responsibilities regarding disclosure of significant financial interests;  
c. the required financial conflict of interest disclosure form. 
3. If the following Significant Financial Interests exist consisting of one or more by the Investigator 
(and those of the Investigator’s spouse and dependent children) that reasonably appear to be 
related to the Investigators’ Institutional responsibilities, the Office of Research and the Office of 
Corporate Compliance will review PHS-funded research for compliance with its FCOI policy:  
a. With regard to any publicly traded Entity, a Significant Financial Interest exists if the 
value of any remuneration received from the Entity in the 12 months preceding the 
disclosure and the value of any equity interest in the Entity as of the date of disclosure, 
when aggregated, exceeds $5,000. Remuneration includes salary and any payment for 
services not otherwise identified as salary (e.g., consulting fees, honoraria, paid 
authorship); equity interest includes any stock, stock option, or other ownership interest, 
as determined through reference to public prices or other reasonable measures of fair 
market value.  
b. With regard to any non-publicly traded Entity, a Significant Financial Interest exists if the 
value of any remuneration received from the Entity in the 12 months preceding the 
disclosure, when aggregated, exceeds $5,000, or when the Investigator (or the 
Investigator's spouse or dependent children) holds any equity interest (e.g., stock, stock 
option, or other ownership interest)  
       c.   Intellectual property rights and interests (e.g., patents, copyrights), upon receipt of  
             income related to such rights and interests.  
4. Investigators on PHS-funded projects must also disclose the occurrence of any Reimbursed or 
Sponsored Travel related to their Institutional responsibilities; provided, however, this disclosure 
requirement does not apply to travel that is reimbursed or sponsored by a Federal, state, or local 
government agency, an Institution of higher education, an academic teaching hospital, a medical 
center, or a research institute that is affiliated with an Institution of higher education.  
a. Travel Disclosures at the time of the application for PHS Funded Research occurring in 
the preceding twelve (12) months 
b. Sponsored Travel that occurred since the time of the application 
c. Thereafter, during the course of the Investigator’s participation in PHS Funded Research 
i. no more than thirty (30) days after the occurrence of any Sponsored Travel or 
Reimbursed Travel, and 
ii. an updated disclosure of all Sponsored and Reimbursed Travel annually 
d. If a PHS Investigator is reasonably able to anticipate the occurrence of Sponsored Travel 
or Reimbursed Travel, the Investigator may elect to submit Travel Disclosures up to 
twelve (12) months in advance of the anticipated travel.  Unless an advance Travel 
Disclosure becomes materially inaccurate, no further disclosure of such travel shall be 
required. 
e. All Travel Disclosures by PHS-Funded Investigators shall include the following: 
i. purpose 
ii. identify of the sponsor/organization 
iii. destination 
iv. duration  
Page 5 of 10 
v. additional information may be needed to determine if travel constitutes a financial 
conflict of interest 
5. Financial interests which do not require review include (42 CFR § 50.603):  
a. salary royalties, or other remuneration paid by OLOL to the Investigator if the             
    Investigator is currently employed or otherwise appointed by OLOL;  
   b. intellectual property rights assigned to the Institution and agreements to share in   
                            royalties related to such rights; 
                       c.  income from investment vehicles, such as mutual funds and retirement accounts, as   
                            long as the Investigator does not directly control the investment decisions made in  
                            these vehicles;  
             d. income from seminars, lectures, or teaching engagements sponsored by a Federal, state  
    or local Government agency, an institution of higher education, an academic teaching  
    hospital, a medical center, or  a research institute that is affiliated with Institution of   
    higher education;   
e. income from service on advisory committees or review panels for a Federal, state, or  
    local government agency, an institution of higher education, an academic teaching  
    hospital, a medical center, or a research institute that is affiliated with Institution of  
    higher education.  
6. Each Investigator will be required to complete training prior to engaging in research related to  
      any PHS-funded grant, at least every four years, and immediately when: 
a. Institution substantively amends the policy in a manner that affects requirements of 
Investigator; 
b. Investigator is new to Institution; 
c. when Institution finds an Investigator is not in compliance with the Institution’s conflict 
of interest policy or management plan. 
7.  OLOL will take reasonable steps to ensure that any Sub-recipient Investigator complies with 
FCOI regulations by:  
a. Incorporating as part of a written agreement or subcontract, terms that establish whether  
the policy or that of the Sub-recipient will apply to awardee Institution or that of the   
sub-recipient will apply to the sub-recipient’s Investigators.  
b. If the sub-recipient's Investigators must comply with the sub-recipient's financial  
conflicts of interest policy, the sub-recipient shall certify as part of the agreement  
referenced above that its policy complies with this subpart. If the sub-recipient cannot  
provide such certification, the agreement shall state that sub-recipient Investigators are  
subject to the financial conflicts of interest policy of the awardee Institution for  
disclosing significant financial interests that are directly related to the sub-recipient's  
work for the awardee Institution. 
c. Alternatively, if the sub-recipient's Investigators must comply with the awardee  
Institution's financial conflicts of interest policy, the agreement referenced above shall  
specify time period(s) for the subrecipient to submit all Investigator disclosures of  
significant financial interests to the awardee Institution. Such time period(s) shall be  
sufficient to enable the awardee Institution to comply timely with its review,  
management, and reporting obligations under this subpart. 
d. Providing FCOI reports to the PHS awarding component regarding all Financial  
Conflicts of Interest of all Sub-Recipient Investigators prior to the expenditure of funds  
and within 60 days of any subsequently identified FCOI is required.   
Page 6 of 10 
8. Conflicts of interest will be managed by the Office of Research in consultation with the Office 
Corporate Compliance and as required by the development and implementation of a 
Management Plan and if necessary, a retrospective review and a mitigation report pursuant to the 
specifications as outlined in 42 CFR § 50.605(a).   
9. Investigators are required to disclose to the Office of Research:  
a. the Investigator’s SFI and those of the Immediate Family no later than the time of 
application for PHS-funded research; 
b. an updated disclosure of SFI at least annually during the period of the award; 
c. an updated disclosure of SFI within thirty days of discovering or acquiring (through 
purchase, marriage or inheritance) a new SFI. 
10. The Office of Research will respond to any requestor within five business days of the request, 
information concerning any Significant Financial Interest that meets all of the following criteria   
[42 CFR § 50.605((a)(5)(i)(A-C)]: 
i. The Significant Financial Interest was disclosed and is still held by the senior/key 
personnel as defined in 42 CFR § 50.605((a)(5)(i)(A-C); 
ii. The Institution determines that the Significant Interest is related to the PHS-
funded research; and 
iii. The Institution determines that the Significant Financial Interest is a Financial 
Conflict of Interest. 
b. The response to a request will include the following information:  
i. Name of Senior/Key Personnel Investigator(s) 
ii. Title and role of the Senior/Key Personnel Investigator(s) 
iii. Name of Entity giving rise to the SFI and FCOI 
iv. Nature of the SFI; and 
v. Approximate dollar value of SFI.  
c. The information concerning the SFI will be updated at least annually and in any event 
within sixty (60) days of the identification of a new FCOI of a Senior/Key Personnel 
Investigator. 
d. The information concerning the SFI shall remain available for responses to written 
requests for at least three (3) years from the date the information was most recently 
updated. 
11. In the course of on-going PHS funded research project, if a new Investigator discloses a 
Significant Financial Interest or an existing Investigator discloses a new Significant Financial 
Interest to the Institution, the Office of Research with consultation from the Office of Corporate 
Compliance within sixty days will review and  determine if the Significant Financial Interest is 
related to PHS-funded research; and if so implement a Management Plan that shall specify the 
actions to manage the conflict of interest.  
12. Restrictions that might be imposed to manage conflicts of interest include, but are not limited to: 
a. Public disclosure of significant financial interests; 
b. Disclosure of FCOI to research participants; 
c. Disclosure of FCOI in publications and articles; 
d. Monitoring of the research by independent reviewers; 
e. Modification of the research by independent reviewers; 
f. Modification of the research plan; 
g. Divestiture of significant financial interests; 
h. Severance of relationships that create actual or potential conflicts;  
Page 7 of 10 
i. Disqualification of Investigator/Key Personnel from participation in all or a portion of the 
research, which may include, but not limited to: 
i. Not enrolling possible research participants in the study 
ii. Not administering the informed consent, 
iii. Not being involved in subjective assessments of eligibility criteria and 
intervention outcomes 
13. If a Significant Financial Interest was not disclosed timely for whatever reason, or  
      managed in a timely manner or the Investigator failed to comply with a Financial Conflict of  
      Interest Management Plan, the Institution shall, within 120 days of the Institution’s  
      determination of noncompliance, complete a retrospective review of the Investigator’s activities  
and the PHS-funded research conducted during the time period of the noncompliance, to    
determine if the Significant Financial Interest biased the design, conduct, or reporting of such 
research.   
a. The Institution shall document the retrospective review and adhere to the required  
elements as specified  in 42 CFR § 50.605. 
b. If bias is identified in the retrospective review, the Office of Research shall notify and 
submit a mitigation plan to the PHS funding agency.  The mitigation plan shall include a 
description of any impact of the bias on the Research and the plan to mitigate the effect 
of the bias. 
c. In the event a PHS-funded research project of clinical research whose purpose is to 
evaluate the safety or effectiveness of a drug, medical device, or treatment has been 
designed, conducted, or reported by an Investigator with a FCOI that was not managed or 
reported by the Institution as required by the regulation, the Institution shall require the 
Investigator to: 
 i.  Disclose the FCOI in each public presentation of the results of the research, and 
 ii. Request an addendum to previously published presentations. 
14. Reports.  Initial, annual and revised FCOI will be sent to NIH for the Institution and its sub-
recipients, if applicable, in accordance with the regulation: 
a. Prior to expenditure of funds, but if the Office of Research determines that no conflict of 
interest exists or eliminates it, the determination will be documented and no report will be 
sent; 
b. Within 60 days of identification of an Investigator who is newly participating in the 
project; 
c. Within 60 days for new, or newly identified, FCOIs for existing Investigators; 
d. Annually provide the status of FCOI and any changes to the Management Plan, if 
applicable, until the completion of the project. 
e. Following a retrospective review to update a previously submitted report, if appropriate. 
f. Promptly if bias is found with the design, conduct or reporting of NIH-funded research. 
  
B. Records. The Office of Research will maintain the records of all Investigator disclosures of financial 
interests and the Institution’s review of, and response to, such disclosures (whether or not a 
disclosure resulted in the Institution’s determination of a FCOI) and all actions under the 
Institution’s policy or retrospective review, if applicable, in accordance with all applicable federal, 
state and local statutes and regulations governing research; specifically they will maintain the 
records for all financial disclosures and all actions taken to resolve conflicts of interest for at least 
three years from the date of submission of the final expenditures report or, where applicable from  
Page 8 of 10 
other dates specified in  45 C.F.R. 74.53(b) and 92.42(b) for different situations, or until the 
resolution of any action involving those records, whichever is longer. 
PROCEDURE 
1. All Investigators involved in PHS-funded research will complete the Financial Conflict of 
Interest Disclosure Form (See Appendix A) at the time of application and annually, in 
accordance with the specific time period prescribed by the Institution and during the period of 
the award. 
2. The Office of Research in consultation with Office of Corporate Compliance will convene on an 
ad hoc basis to review disclosures of potential financial conflicts by an Investigator. 
3. The committee will determine the likelihood that the financial interest could directly and/or 
significantly affect the design, conduct, or reporting of the research. 
4. If the committee determines that the reported financial interest cannot directly and/or 
significantly affect the design, conduct, or reporting of the research, no further action is required.  
5. If the committee determines that the reported financial interest can affect the research, a 
Management Plan must be developed with specific actions to be taken.  The Investigator must 
agree in writing to accept the plan prior to initiating the research.  The Office of Research and 
Office of Corporate Compliance will comply with 42 CFR § 50.605 in managing and reporting 
Financial Conflicts of Interest. 
6. If the Office of Research finds that they are unable to satisfactorily manage a conflict of interest, 
they will not allow the research to be conducted and the appropriate Entity will be notified. 
7. The Office of Research will require the disclosure of the conflict of interest in each public 
presentation (oral or written) of the results of the research in any case where a financial conflict 
of interest was not managed or reported by the Institution as required for any funded project of 
clinical research whose purpose is to evaluate the safety or effectiveness of a drug, medical 
device, or treatment which was designed, conducted, or reported by an Investigator. 
8. Failure to comply with this policy will result in appropriate disciplinary action and possible 
termination of the funded research.  Violations may also result in civil or criminal liability.    
 
References: 
National Institutes of Health Office of Extramural Research (2011).  Financial Conflict of Interest 
(FCOI) module.  Retrieved from http://www.grants.nih.gov/grants/policy/coi/tutorial2011/fcoi.htm  
 
U.S. Government Publishing Office (2015).  Electronic Code of Federal Regulations Part 50 Subpart F- 
Promoting Objectivity in Research.  Retrieved http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-
dx?rgn=div5&node=42:1.0.1.4.23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCIAL CONFLICT OF 
INTEREST DISCLOSURE FORM 
Appendix A  
Page 9 of 10 
Title of the Research Study:        
Name of Investigator:       
 
To be completed and signed by the Investigator 
 
For you the Investigator, your spouse/partner and dependent children, identify Significant 
Financial Interests (SFI) that are reasonably related to the sponsored research, and meet any of 
the following criteria:  (A) any remuneration received from an external entity at present or in the 
12 months preceding the disclosure that totals or exceeds $5000 (the $5000 threshold applies to 
salary, royalties, and other payments aggregated for the individual, one’s spouse/partner and 
dependent children; (B) publicly-traded equity if the value of the equity (plus any remuneration ) 
meets or exceeds $5000; (C) any level of ownership of privately -held equity regardless of the 
dollar value.  You do not need to disclose any financial interests from your employer, from a U.S. 
Federal, state or local government agency, from a U.S. institution of higher education, a U.S. 
academic teaching hospital, medical center or a U.S. Research institute affiliated with a U.S. 
Institution of higher education.   
  I do not have any SFI (proceed to and complete certification section below) 
  I disclose the following SFI (complete the table below and complete certification section below) 
Name: 
Institution: 
Mail Address: 
Telephone number: 
Email Address: 
 Approximate value of the financial interest 
Name of Earned Income 
Source(s) 
Income Recipient 
(Investigator, 
Spouse/Partner, 
Dependent Child, or 
combination) 
SFI Type 
(salary, 
royalty, equity, 
stocks, 
consulting fees, 
honoraria, etc.) 
$5000- $19,999 
increments of $5000 
(e.g. $5000 to 
$10,000) 
$20,000- $100,000 
increments of 
$20,000 
$100,000 and above 
by increments of 
$50,000 
      
      
      
      
 
 
     
For Travel disclosures, please provide the following additional detail (Only PHS awards)  
Sponsor Destination Start/End Date Purpose  
Page 10 of 10 
    
    
    
    
 
Prior to submitting this form, please review your entries for accuracy then sign and date the form. 
 
Certification:  By signing this form, as the  Investigator, I certify that the above entries are true 
and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief, and that I have reviewed the organizational 
policy and completed COI training.  I understand and agree that it is my responsibility to update 
this information promptly if my Significant Financial Interests related to this study’s research 
activities change and at least annually during the period of the award.  I understand and agree 
with the Travel reporting requirements as outlined in th e organizational policy .  I will report  
Travel to the Office of Research within 30 days of the conclusion of the trip. 
 
 
Name (Please Print):______________________________________________________ 
Signature:_________________________________________________________________ 
Date (MM/DD/YY):_______________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 