AA-OR-018 
Page 1 of 1 
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish procedures for informing the Office of Research of any protocol amendments, continuing 
reviews, or study closure that occur while a study is active at OLOL. 
 
RESPONSIBILITY: Applies to all key research personnel involved in conducting research at OLOL, 
including the Principal Investigator (PI), Co-Investigators, research nurses, research coordinators, or 
research assistants, with the PI bearing the ultimate responsibility for informing the OLOL Office of 
Research of any protocol amendments, continuing reviews, or study closures. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Protocol Amendment: Includes any changes to the research study that must be approved by the study’s 
IRB of record, such as changes to the research protocol, changes in personnel, or changes in the informed 
consent. 
Continuing Review: Federally mandated re-evaluation of a study conducted by the IRB of record at 
intervals appropriate to the study’s degree of risk, but not less than once a year.    
Study Closure: Report to the IRB on the conduct and outcomes of a research study and includes any new 
risks, safety issues, or problems since the last continuing review.  
 
POLICY: 
Investigators must notify the Office of Research Regulatory Manager of all protocol amendments, 
continuing reviews, or study closures within 30 days of IRB approval. The Office of Research Regulatory 
Manager must be notified of all changes in research personnel at least annually at the time of the 
continuing review.  
 
Investigators must submit to the Office of Research Regulatory Manager all documents reviewed by the 
IRB, including: 
• Updated protocol 
• Updated informed consent and HIPAA forms 
• Data & Safety Monitoring Board reports 
• Investigator’s Brochures 
• Conflict of Interest forms 
 
In addition, investigators must submit the IRB approval notice to the OLOL Office of Research Regulatory 
Manager. 
 
REGULATORY REFERENCES 
• US Department of Health and Human Services (2016). 21 CFR 56 Institutional Review Boards. 
Available from: 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=56  
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Academic Affairs Section: Office of Research 
Title: Internal Review of Ongoing Research 
Policy Reference #: AA/OR/018 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 1, 2012 Last Review Date: January 15, 2024 
Last Revision Date: May 24, 2018 