AA-OR-008 
Page 1 of 7 
 
PURPOSE: The purpose of this policy is to: 
1) Define unanticipated problems (UP) involving risk to subjects, adverse events (AE), and 
serious adverse events (SAEs) and 
2) Establish a procedure for reporting of UPs and SAEs by: 
a. Specifying the types of UPs and AEs that must be reported by the principal 
investigator (PI) to the Office of Research and to the Institutional Review Board 
(IRB) of record, as well as how this reporting is to occur; 
b. Delineating the steps necessary for the Office of Research and the appropriate 
institutional administrators to review reported UPs and SAEs and report them to 
the appropriate regulatory agencies (e.g., the Office of Human Research 
Protection) and funding agencies in a timely fashion, as required.  
 
SCOPE: Applies to all human participant research conducted using OLOL facilities, patients, 
or staff. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Unanticipated Problem (UP) involving risk to subjects or others– Any incident, 
experience, or outcome that meets all of the following criteria: 
1. Is unexpected (in terms of nature, severity, or frequency), given (a) the research 
procedures that are described in the protocol-related documents, such as the IRB-
approved research protocol and informed consent document; and (b) the 
characteristics of the subject population being studied;  
2. Is related or possibly related to participation in the research ("possibly related" means 
there is a reasonable possibility that the incident, experience, or outcome may have 
been caused by the procedures involved in the research); and 
3. Suggests that the research places subjects or others at a greater risk of harm (including 
physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously known or 
recognized.  
 
Events which are described in the protocol-related documents, such as the investigator 
brochure, IRB-approved research protocol and informed consent document, are not 
considered to be unanticipated problems.   
 
Adverse Event (AE) – Any untoward or unfavorable medical or psychological occurrence 
in a human subject, including any abnormal sign, (for example, abnormal physical exam or 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease, temporally associated with the subject’s 
participation in the research, whether or not considered related to the subject’s 
participation in the research (http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Academic Affairs Section: Office of Research 
Title: Adverse Events and Unanticipated 
Problems  
Policy Reference #: AA/OR/008 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 1, 2012 Last Review Date: January 15/2024 
Last Revision Date: May 18, 2018  AA-OR-008 
Page 2 of 7 
policy/guidance/reviewing-unanticipated-problems/#Q1).  Adverse events may be anticipated 
or unanticipated. 
 
In multi-center trials, there are two kinds of adverse events: 
1. Internal adverse events – are those which are experienced by subjects enrolled by the 
investigator in a research study at OLOL. 
2. External adverse events – are those which are experienced by subjects enrolled by 
investigators at other clinical sites.  
 
An Adverse Event is considered to be Serious (SAE) when it: 
1. Results in death 
2. Is life-threatening (places the subject at immediate risk of death from the event as it 
occurred) 
3. Results in inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization 
4. Results in a persistent or significant disability/incapacity 
5. Results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect; or  
6. Based upon appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize the subject’s health and may 
require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in 
this definition.  
 
To summarize,  
• All adverse events are not necessarily unanticipated problems    
• All unanticipated problems are not necessarily adverse events  
• Some events may be both. 
 
See Appendix B for additional general guidance 
 
RESPONSIBILITY: The PI is responsible for reviewing all AEs to determine if they were 
anticipated and/or related to the subject’s participation in the research study. The PI is 
responsible for reporting UPs and SAEs to the IRB of record, as required by FDA 
regulations and the IRB’s guidelines.  The PI is also responsible for reporting to the study 
sponsors, if required under the monitoring provisions described in the IRB-approved protocol. 
In addition, the PI is responsible for reporting UPs and all SAEs that are reported to the IRB 
and/or the sponsor to the Office of Research.  
 
POLICY: Reporting at all levels will be done in accordance with the following procedures, 
which are compliant with applicable regulations from the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), Office of Human Research Protection, and the Department of Health and Human 
Services (45 CFR 46, “The Common Rule”).  According to the FDA, “In general, an AE 
observed during the conduct of a study should be considered an unanticipated problem 
involving risk to human subjects, and reported to the IRB, only if it were unexpected, 
serious, and would have implications for the conduct of the study (e.g., requiring a 
significant, and usually safety-related, change in the protocol such as revising AA-OR-008 
Page 3 of 7 
inclusion/exclusion criteria or including a new monitoring requirement, informed consent, 
or investigator’s brochure).”  In accordance with the FDA regulations, the PI is responsible 
for reporting unanticipated problems involving risks to human subjects or others to the 
IRB, and shall also report to the Office of Research, and, if required by the Sponsor, to the 
study Sponsor.  The PI should refer to the study’s IRB-approved protocol and the policies of 
the study’s IRB of record for further guidance to determine whether an UP or event should 
be reported to the IRB.  
 
The PI is also responsible for reporting to the IRB any serious or continuing noncompliance 
with The Common Rule or the requirements or determinations of the IRB; any suspension 
or termination of IRB approval; and any reports of IRB actions that require forwarding to 
OHRP and/or any Department or Agency head. 
 
It is the policy of Our Lady of the Lake Hospital to notify the IRB of all communications to 
the FDA, OHRP, or other government regulators regarding human subject research. 
 
PI Reporting 
The PI will prepare and submit complete, accurate, and timely reports to the Office of 
Research, the IRB of record, and any project sponsors regarding: 
• UPs meeting the three criteria under the definition of UPs no later than five (5) 
business days of the PI becoming aware of its occurrence. 
• All internal SAEs that occur during a study or within thirty (30) days of study 
closure no later than five (5) business days of the PI becoming aware of its 
occurrence. (In accordance with CRF 312.64b, non-serious AEs must be recorded 
and reported to the sponsor according to the study’s protocol).  
NOTE: PIs are often informed about external AEs by the study’s sponsor.  External AEs do 
not need to be reported to the Office of Research and the IRB of record unless the PI or 
study sponsor considers the event to be an unanticipated problem. In such case, they must 
be reported to the Office of Research and to the study’s IRB of record within five (5) 
business days of the PI becoming aware of the event. A copy of the report must also be 
maintained in the PI’s regulatory binder.  
 
A report of an UP submitted to an IRB should contain, at least, the following: 
 
• appropriate identifying information for the research protocol, such as the title, 
investigator’s name, and the IRB project number; 
• a detailed description of the adverse event, incident, experience, or outcome; 
• an explanation of the basis for determining that the adverse event, incident, 
experience, or outcome represents an unanticipated problem; and 
• a description of any changes to the protocol or other corrective actions that have 
been taken or are proposed in response to the unanticipated problem. 
 AA-OR-008 
Page 4 of 7 
All UPs or events reported to an IRB must be reported to the Office of Research within five 
(5) business days. 
 
Office of Research Reporting 
Within five (5) business days of the Office of Research receiving a report of an UP or 
unanticipated serious adverse event from the PI (See Appendix A for report content), the 
Office of Research will send the report to the appropriate institutional administrators, such 
as the Grants Office, the VP of Medical Staff Services, the Medical Director of Quality and 
Patient Safety, and Risk Management, describing the event.  The institutional 
administrators will notify the appropriate regulatory and funding agencies, including OHRP 
and others, as required. 
 
 
 AA-OR-008 
Page 5 of 7 
REGULATORY REFERENCES: (45 CFR 46.103) 
 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  (2012). Guidance for IRBs, clinical investigators, and 
sponsors. Available from: 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM294558.pdf  
 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  (2009). Guidance for IRBs, clinical investigators, and 
sponsors. Available from: 
http://osp.od.nih.gov/sites/default/files/resources/OC2008150fnl.pdf  
 
US Department of Health and Human Services. (2007). Guidance on reviewing and reporting 
unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others and adverse events. Available 
from: http://osp.od.nih.gov/sites/default/files/resources/advevntguid_0.pdf  
US Department of Health and Human Services. (2007). Unanticipated Problems Involving 
Risks and Adverse Events Guidance. Available from: http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-
and-policy/guidance/reviewing-unanticipated-problems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  AA-OR-008 
Page 6 of 7 
  
APPENDIX A: Adverse Event Reporting Chart  
 
The chart below is presented as general guidance.  The PI should refer to the study’s IRB-
approved protocol and the policies of the study’s IRB of record for further guidance to 
determine whether an UP or event should be reported to the IRB.  
 
 
 
AA-OR-008 
Page 7 of 7 
APPENDIX B: Content of Event Reports 
 
 
Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects and Others, 
the report will include: 
• Name of the Institution 
• Title of the research project in which the problem occurred 
• The name of the PI on the protocol 
• The protocol number and grant number (where applicable) 
• A detailed description of the problem 
• An explanation indicating why the problem is reportable 
• Common actions being taken to address the problem may include: a) revise the 
protocol, b) suspend subject enrollment, c) terminate the research, d) revise the 
informed consent document, e) inform enrolled subjects, f) increase monitoring of 
subjects 
 
Serious or Continued Non-Compliance with this policy or the requirements or 
determinations of the IRB, the report will include: 
• Name of the Institution 
• Title of the research project in which the problem occurred 
• The name of the PI on the protocol 
• The protocol number and grant number (where applicable) 
• A detailed description of the non-compliance 
• Action taken to address the non-compliance such as: a) educate the investigator, b) 
educate the research staff, c) suspend the protocol, d) suspend the investigator, e) 
conduct random audits of the investigator 
 
Suspension or Termination of IRB Approval, the report will include: 
• Name of the Institution 
• Title of the research project in which the problem occurred 
• The name of the PI on the protocol 
• The protocol number and grant number (where applicable) 
• A detailed description of reason for suspension or termination 
• Action taken to address the suspension or termination of IRB approval.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 