 
RGA 02.001 Clinical Trial Participant Screening - Oncology 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Office of Research & Grant Administration 
SUBJECT:  
Clinical Trial Participant Screening - Oncology 
PAGES: 
1-3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE:  
3/11/2022 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
 
3/4/2024 
POLICY NUMBER:  
AAORG025 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOLH”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To describe the standard procedure for the steps in fulfilling the requirements involved in clinical trial participant 
screening. 
POLICY: 
1. This policy explains the process and procedure for screening patients seen at Our Lady of the Lake Cancer 
Institute for clinical trials. 
2.  All clinical research staff will review these instructions at least annually 
DEFINITIONS: 
Clinical Trials Management System (CTMS) means a software system used to manage clinical trials in clinical 
research.  The system maintains and manages planning, performing and reporting functions along with participant 
contact information, tracking deadlines and milestones. 
Screening means the process of assessing potential subjects’ eligibility for enrollment into a clinical trial. 
Screen Failure means a potential subject who did not meet one or more criteria required for participation in a clinical 
trial. 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. The clinic schedules of providers who are credentialed to participate in open trials with OLOL Cancer 
Institute Programs shall be reviewed daily to identify potential clinical trial participants.  Provider 
schedules shall be reviewed at least one (1) day in advance. 
 
B. Research nurses/clinical research coordinators shall review patients for eligible clinical trials listed in 
the clinical trial brochure/menu.  If a patient is eligible or potentially eligible for a clinical trial, the 
research nurse or coordinator should communicate the patient eligibility to the treating physician for 
consideration. 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
RGA 02.001 Clinical Trial Participant Screening - Oncology 
2 
C. The following patients with a diagnosis for which we have a study will be reviewed and added to the 
CTMS if not already present: 
 
1. Any new patient with a cancer diagnosis. 
 
2. Any patient who is getting “test results”.  
 
3. Any patient who is scheduled for a teaching visit. 
 
4. Any existing patient with a diagnosis for which we have recently opened a trial that they may 
now be eligible for. 
 
D. New patients with a hematological diagnosis do not necessarily have to be entered into the CTMS.  
Diagnoses which can be related to cancer need to be investigated further for clinical trial eligibility (i.e., 
thrombocytopenia, MGUS, monoclonal paraproteinemia, leukocytosis, etc.).  If the patient is being seen 
for coagulation defects, anemia, polycythemia vera, they do not need to be entered into the CTMS 
unless an applicable trial is open for accrual.   
 
E. If a patient is having a bone marrow biopsy and does not have an existing diagnosis, the patient should 
be entered into the CTMS with the following note: BONE MARROW BIOPSY. 
 
F. To enter a patient in the CTMS: 
 
1.          Sign into the application with username and password.  
 
2. Use the search feature in the menu bar to search for the patient in the Last Name, First Name 
format, then press Enter. If the patient’s name appears, verify with the birthdate and MRN. If no 
patient is found, then use the green “Add Patient’s” button in the menu bar to add the new 
patient in the same Last Name, First Name format. If available, add the middle initial. Do not 
add Sr, Jr, III, etc. as this makes it difficult to locate a patient in future searches. If you know the 
exact trial to be screened for, this can be added at this step or later in the process. 
 
3. Enter the following demographic information into the Patient Profile. 
 
a. Patient Tags: RN name and site. It is possible to have multiple nurses and sites tagged. 
b. Date of Birth 
c. Sex 
d. Primary Ethnicity 
e. Primary Race 
f. Medical Record Number  
 
4. If no specific trial was selected, during the Add Patient’s process, a study can be added by 
selecting the “+” tab located next to the Patient Summary. If there are no trials that the patient 
will be screened for, notes can be made in the Patient Timeline under the Patient Summary tab.  
 
Under each respective study being screened for, in the Patient Timeline, enter notes pertaining to 
eligibility. Update the Status, Patient Source and Subject ID as needed. If the patient is not 
Eligible, also update the Patient Log tab. This screen will require different information based on 
if the sponsor is linked with Study Teams. If the sponsor is not linked there will be a Pre-Screen 
Fail Comments and Patient Log Comments sections, please indicate in both why the patient was 
not eligible.  
RGA 02.001 Clinical Trial Participant Screening - Oncology 
3 
Complete any other relevant sections. 
 
  
G. Weekly, research nurses and clinical research coordinators shall review their incomplete screenings 
to identify patients remaining with open workups. Patients Tab, add Patient Tags Filter, select your 
name and enter. Trials listed with a blue square next to the study name are considered In Progress. 
Patients should continue to be followed and updated until resolution: Pre-Screening (after ICF), 
Actively Enrolled, Pre-Screen Failure or Screen Failure  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• N/A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
• N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by:  Chief Operating Officer  
 
TITLE:  Clinical Trial Participant Screening - Oncology 
 