AA-OR-011 
Page 1 of 3 
 
PURPOSE:  The purpose of this policy is to outline the maintenance and retention of complete, 
accurate and readily retrievable research records. The regulatory and subject files serve as 
documentation of compliance with the regulations governing human subject research (including 
good clinical practices), in addition to providing verification that the study was conducted 
according to the protocol, the data are authentic, and the findings can be verified and are 
accurately represented. Research records will be maintained and retained in a manner that 
ensures the security and integrity of the records in accordance with applicable federal, state and 
local regulations, guidelines, specific grant and contract requirements.   
 
This policy does not apply to hospital/medical records. See the Health Information Management 
Policy HIM.135.   
 
All research records must be accessible for inspection by authorized representatives from the 
Office of Research, the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Record, the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) or other governmental agency, sponsors/sponsor agents, or funding 
entities.  
 
SCOPE: Applies to the activities involved in maintaining and retaining the regulatory files and 
subject records for all studies conducted at Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL). 
 
RESPONSIBILITY: Applies to key research personnel involved in conducting research at OLOL, 
with the PI bearing the ultimate responsibility for the management of research files. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
Maintenance of Research Records 
•  Maintain complete subject records and regulatory files, in hard copy and/or electronic form, 
including all protocols and amendments, approved informed consent and authorization 
documents, IRB approvals, key personnel records, investigator’s brochures, correspondence 
(IRB, sponsor, or general), and other regulatory documents related to the study (laboratory 
information, shipping documents, dispensing logs, etc).  
• Store subject records, signed forms, and regulatory files in a secure, limited-access location to 
maintain confidentiality. In situations where signed forms such as consents, Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) authorizations, and privacy notices create the only 
link to a subject’s identity, one must maintain these signed forms separate from the subjects’ 
study data. 
Retention of Research Records 
All research must be archived at least three (3) years upon completion of the research study. 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Academic Affairs Section: Office of Research 
Title: Retention of Research Related Records 
Policy Reference #: AA/OR/011 
Supersedes #: AAOR020 
Date of Origination: February 1, 2012 Last Review Date: June 10, 2019 
Last Revision Date: June 10, 2019 AA-OR-011 
Page 2 of 3 
Research records must be archived according to the following guidelines: 
• Research that does not involve identifiable health information subject to HIPAA regulations: 
Archive regulatory files and subject records for a period of at least three years beginning at the 
time of study closure  
• Research that does involve identifiable health information subject to HIPAA regulations: 
Archive regulatory files and subject records for a period of at least six (6) years beginning at 
the time of study closure. 
• Research conducted for an Investigational New Drug (IND) application: Archive records least 
two (2) years after the approval of the marketing application, or if marketing application was 
not approved, at least two (2) years after shipment and delivery of the product/device for 
investigational use has been discontinued and the FDA notified. 
• Research conducted for an Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) application: Archive 
records for 2 years following the latter of the following two dates: The date on which the 
investigation is terminated or completed or the date that the records are no longer required 
for purposes of supporting a premarket approval application or a notice of completion of a 
product development protocol.  
• Industry-sponsored research: Archive research records for the period of time mandated in the 
contract or clinical trial agreement. 
 
If a research study corresponds to more than one of the above guidelines, the research records 
must be retained for the longest period of time mandated by the guidelines above.  
 
Electronic Storage of Files 
• The Office of Research can retain and maintain research records in electronic form to promote 
the efficient storage, retrieval, organization and retention of records.  
• For industry-sponsored research, the Office of Research must have written permission from 
the study sponsor to retain research records in electronic form upon completion of the 
research study.  
• If a document must be scanned to be stored electronically after the study closure, the 
document must be scanned using Optical Imaging and must comply with the Optical Imaging 
Policy (AA/OR/021).  
• Original hard copy records deemed not suitable for optical imaging shall be physically retained 
in accordance with written guidelines applicable to all research records.    
 
Destruction of Research Records 
• Records cannot be destroyed until written approval from the Office of Research has been 
obtained.  
• For industry sponsored research, written permission must be obtained from the sponsor prior 
to the destruction of the research records.  
• Destruction of human subjects’ research records should be performed in a fashion that 
protects the confidentiality of the research subjects. It is recommended that paper records 
be shredded, that physical tapes (audio and video) be erased and physically destroyed, and 
that electronic media used to store data be scrubbed after the files are deleted. AA-OR-011 
Page 3 of 3 
• Researchers may retain de-identified data for future analysis in the context of the project for 
which the data were collected. Data is considered to be completely de-identified when ALL 
links between individual identity and the data are destroyed. Research data are not considered 
de-identified simply because names have been removed if they still contain information that 
might identify the participants such as date of birth, address, etc.  
 
REGUALTORY REFERENCES 
• US Department of Health and Human Services (2013).  21 CFR 312.60 General Responsibilities 
of Investigators.  Available from: 
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=312.60  
• US Department of Health and Human Services (2013).  21 CFR 312.62 Investigator 
Recordkeeping and Record Retention.  Available from: 
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=312.62  
• 21 US Department of Health and Human Services (2013).  21 CFR 312.68 Inspections of 
Investigator's Records and Reports.  Available from: 
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=312.68 
• US Department of Health and Human Services (2007). 45 CFR 164.528 Accounting of 
disclosure of protected health information.  Available from: 
http://privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov/.  
• OLOL policy OrgOps/GN/031 – Records Management  
• OLOL policy AA/OR/021 – Optical Imaging of Research Records 
 
 