 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Clinical Policies Section: Assessment Documentation 
100 Referral Procedures 
Title:     Therapy Referrals 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/AD/101 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: Feb 1, 2001 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 4, 2024 
Last Date Revised: April 5, 2022 
 
PURPOSE:  
This policy outlines the Process for appropriate utilization of evaluation and treatment upon receipt of orders for  
patients of the Acute Care Physical Medicine Department. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
 
POLICY:  
 
It is the policy of the Acute Physical Medicine Department that Physical Therapy, Speech Therapy, Occupational  
Therapy services will be administered only following the receipt of a physician’s order or order by authorized  
mid-level provider. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. Referrals are received from physicians to initiate patient evaluations and/or treatment.   
2. All orders shall be confirmed by viewing the Computerized Physician Order Entry (CPOE) by a licensed 
therapist prior to evaluation and treatment. 
3. Those orders that only specify “evaluation” or “recommendation” shall not proceed to patient treatment 
unless additional orders stating such are received from a physician.  Evaluations/Recommendations may be 
documented in the patient’s electronic chart to be reviewed by physicians or information may be 
communicated directly to physicians.  Orders specifying “Treat” shall include a treatment plan, which will be 
initiated following evaluation. 
4. Request for changes or additions to patient’s order(s) must be approved by the referring physician. 
 
Functional screening may be performed, without a physician referral, by a licensed Physical, Occupational, and/or 
Speech therapists at the request of nursing or other consulting providers.  Based on the results of the screening, 
the therapists will either: 
1. Recommend to the physician or other mid-level provider that a referral be made to Physical, 
Occupational, and/or Speech therapists (PT, OT, ST). 
2. Recommend that no referral for PT, OT, ST is needed at this time. 
 
REFERENCES: 
None 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
None 