 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Clinical Policies Section: Assessment Documentation 
500 Discharge Criteria 
Title:     Therapy Services Discharge Criteria  
Policy 
Reference #: AC/AD/502 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: Feb 1, 2001 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 4, 2024 
Last Date Revised: April 5, 2022 
 
PURPOSE:  
This policy outlines the Criteria for discharging therapy services for patients of the Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Department. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
 
POLICY:  
 
It is the policy of the Acute Physical Medicine Department that Discharge Criteria will be developed for each 
patient to facilitate the evaluation of his or her progress toward discharge and to ensure that every effort is made 
for the patient to be safe in his/her environment. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1.    Every effort will be made to ensure that the primary caregiver is a key participant in the patient’s discharge 
planning.  Family conferences, training, and teaching sessions may all involve the primary caregiver.   
2.      It is important for the Case Manager to involve all professionals working with the patient in the discharge 
plans for the patient.  When appropriate these will include outside agencies that can ease the transition from 
Acute Care Rehab. 
3.      Adequate preparation for discharge requires early and active involvement of the patient, family, referral 
source, and other community agencies that will be involved with continuity of care. 
4.   Discharge planning begins on admit or in the case of therapy at the time of the initial evaluation. 
5.   Discharge Criteria/Long term goals may be based on: 
 a.    patient age 
 b.    disability 
 c.     treatment setting 
 d.     patient condition 
 e.     physician order 
 
6.       Therapy services Discharge Criteria may include the following conditions: 
a.       The patient achieves the long term goals of the interdisciplinary treatment plan  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
b.       The patient refuses to continue therapy 
c.       The patient is transferred to another level of care 
d.       The patient is not making progress, and there is no further benefit to continued treatment 
e.       The patient is regressing and collaborative team efforts recommend discharge from service 
f.        The physician discontinues treatment 
7.     Documentation within the Electronic Medical Record shall include the following: 
 a.     Reason for discontinuation of care 
 b.     Degree of goal achievement 
 c.     Current level of function 
 c.     Discharge plan, to include any additional services and/or equipment patients may need  
  
 
 
REFERENCES: 
None 
 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
None 
 