 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Operational Policies Section: Departmental Orientation 
300 Staff Education 
Title: Staff Training and Education 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/DO/301 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: Feb 1, 2001 Last Date 
Reviewed: 
March 5, 2024 
 
Last Date Revised: April 29, 2021 
 
PURPOSE:  
This policy establishes guidelines for educational opportunities that will be provided for all professional and 
support staff in order to further the knowledge and skills necessary for acute patient care provided by the Acute  
Care Physical Medicine/Rehabilitation Department. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
 
POLICY:  
It is the policy of the Acute Care Physical Medicine Department that all staff are provided with 
educational opportunities as determined by their job description and job duties. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. Mandatory Hospital Educational Event 
All staff of Physical Medicine/Rehabilitation Division are responsible for attending the mandatory 
hospital Initial Orientation upon hire per hospital policy.  This event covers all safety, emergency, and 
infection control topics. 
2. CPR Training 
 CPR training is mandatory for all staff members listed below: 
  Licensed Physical Therapist/Physical Therapy Assistant 
  Occupational Therapist/Occupational Therapy Assistant 
  Speech Therapist 
3. In service Education/Training 
a. All Physical Medicine/Rehab Staff are eligible to attend educational programs offered by the 
department and the hospital as staffing permits. 
b. Professional staff is encouraged to attend clinical seminars each year with approval of departmental 
administration.  Support is provided for funding and workshop days per funding availability and 
staffing levels.  All funding must have approval at least thirty (30) days prior to seminar date. 
c. Training and education needs are identified by the following criteria: 
(1) individual staff member needs 
(2) program needs 
(3) patient population served and the type/nature of care provided by OLOL and the PMR 
Division 
(4) information from quality assessment and improvement activities 
(5) hospital and departmental plant, technology, and safety programs 
(6) infection control activities 
(7) findings from performance appraisals of department staff  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
4. Orientation 
a. All staff will be oriented to the department policies and job responsibilities as specified in the 
orientation policy. 
5. Continuing Education 
a. Departmental Commitments 
(1) An annual needs assessment will be performed to coincide with the annual departmental 
goals/budget process 
(2) All discipline CEU requirements will be considered 
b. Courses eligible for funding by OLOLRMC 
(1) Location – conferences that will be considered for payment by OLORMC will primarily be 
courses hosted by OLOLRMC (i.e. Trauma and Joint Symposiums, specific therapy courses) 
(2) Courses not hosted by OLOLRMC may be paid for by the individual or OLOLRMC based on 
the department needs. 
c. Eligibility 
(1) To be eligible for funding for continuing education by OLOLRMC, an employee must be a 
fulltime benefitted staff member or part time benefitted staff member.  PRN and non 
benefitted employees may not be eligible for funding for continuing education. 
(2) Attendance of more than one employee of the same discipline at the same conference is at the 
discretion of the department manager. 
(3) After 6 months of employment, employees may be eligible for a maximum of five (5) 
workshop days annually (per managerial approval). If workshop days are not granted, an 
employee may request to take PTO hours. If an employee is asked by the organization to 
attend an educational course or event, they may be granted workshop days regardless of 
length of employment. 
(4) Workshop hours will only apply to LIVE in person and LIVE online courses.  Workshop 
hours will NOT be granted for online pre-recorded/on demand courses.  
(5) NO workshop hours will be granted for courses attended on a weekend or outside of the 
employee’s normal weekday working hours. 
(6) Workshop hours granted will not exceed the number of CEU hours approved for any given 
course up to 8 hours maximum per day. 
(7) Full and Part-time employees may be eligible for tuition reimbursement for certification 
courses.  Please refer to FMOLHS policy HR-4-007. 
d. Process 
(1) For all non OLOLRMC sponsored courses, eligible employees must submit a fully completed 
Continuing Education Request form and attach course syllabus outlining approved CEU 
hours or a copy of the schedule for such things as a conference where CEUs may not be 
provided.  This must be done prior to course in order to be considered for approval. 
(2) If approved, the Department Supervisor or Manager will provide employee with the written 
approval and designate the approved use of workshop hours vs PTO. 
(3) Staff may be required to pay a nominal fee for continuing education hosted or approved by 
OLOLRMC. 
e. All of the above requirements are subject to modification at the discretion of the manager and/or 
department director.  
 
REFERENCES: 
None 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
None 