 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Operational Policies Section: Departmental Orientation 
600 Daily Operations 
Title:  Weekend Therapy Procedure 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/DO/607 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: Feb 1, 2001 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 25, 2024 
Last Date Revised: March 25, 2024 
 
PURPOSE:  
To establish specific guidelines for the treatment of patients on the weekends (Saturday and Sunday) by the staff  
of the Acute Care Physical Medicine Department. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
 
POLICY:  
It is the policy of the Acute Care Physical Medicine Department that patients will be treated on Saturday  
and Sunday by the Acute Care Physical Medicine Team according to care plan set by the patient’s weekday  
therapist. 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
I. General Guidelines:  Physical and Occupational Therapy 
New orders are that are received by 12:00pm on Saturdays and 12:00 pm Sundays will be 
honored as staffing allows. 
 The following are set-up to assist the weekend team in accomplishing their 
goals. 
 
1. The Friday staff therapist should designate the weekend status of each patient and 
record weekend patient assignments on the weekend lists. 
2. Any out of the ordinary treatment or special requests should be highlighted and 
written on the card.  These treatments should also be started with the weekend 
staff by Friday, if at all possible, to ensure appropriate follow through. 
3. Treatment Order: Patients should be seen based on the plan of care. The 
following is a guideline for the order in which patients should be seen. The 
Charge Therapists will be responsible for assigning caseloads to scheduled 
therapists based on these guidelines BUT will also modify these assignments 
based on immediate patient and department needs or special circumstances. 
a. New Evaluations: Will attempt to honor on the day they are received, if 
received by the deadlines for Saturday and Sunday schedules. 
b. Wounds: Based on MD order and established frequency needed 
c. Splint Check Patients  
d. Lymphedema with wounds or pin site care 
e. Program Hips, Knees, and Spines  
f. Other Orthopedic Patients  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 3 
g. CABG Patients   
h. Patients with known discharge plans for Saturday, Sunday, or 
Monday morning AND needing further treatment or education prior 
to planned discharge. 
 
*Patients may be added to the “2nd Priority” list when falling out of the 
above guidelines but felt to be appropriate for treatment to prevent 
functional regression and not safe for mobilization by nursing staff. 
II. Weekend Procedure / Weekend Therapists Responsibilities 
A. Charge therapists will identify new orders and possible discharge needs (Morning and 
Lunch). 
B. Each weekend day, the Charge therapists will review and combine new orders with those 
patients that were placed on the weekend list.  They will then designate caseloads for 
scheduled staff, which may include any combination of evaluations and treatments. 
C. The Charge Physical Therapist will assign themselves the role of “Charge” in Voalte for 
each shift that they are Charge. 
D. Additional Weekend Rules 
1. New orders must be assigned by the charge therapist only. 
2. Once completed, all therapy cards will be filed in the appropriate folder in the PT 
or OT file cabinet by the end of the shift. 
3. All therapists, by the end of their shift, shall initial the weekend list and 
evaluation list for patients that they have addressed. 
4. A therapist must remain in the department at all times that a patient is present. 
5. All therapists must complete computer documentation, charges, and a stat sheet                               
prior to leaving for the end of their shift. 
6. A manager or therapist is on call each weekend and may be contacted for patient  
            care or staffing issues. 
 
 General Guidelines for Speech Therapy 
 
On the weekends, Speech Therapy performs evaluations/treatments in the following order:  
 
1. Pharyngograms 
2. Swallowing Evaluations (prioritize by time of the order, NPO status, or by special 
instructions within the MD order) 
3. Speech/language evaluations 
4. Therapy patients  
 
• Pharyngograms 
• Complete pending; Identify new orders and priority patients; Split patients between 
scheduled therapists. 
• Call Radiology in the am (#5-8204) to inform radiology who is working and confirm 
when Pharyngogram is scheduled. 
• Pharyngograms will be completed upon radiology and PA availability. 
• Make and document results on green card and Chart results electronically in EMR. 
• Propose diet order in EMR or Voalte physician. 
 
• Bedside Swallow Evaluations and Speech/Language Evaluations  
• Make Card and Tag 
• Evaluate Patient, document results in EMR  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 3 
• Propose diet order in EMR or Voalte physician. 
 
• Therapy patients 
• Patients are treated according to the therapist’s plan of care. 
                           
Weekend Guidelines for speech therapy are as follows: 
 
• All orders received before 12 pm on Saturday should be completed on Saturday.  
 
• All additional orders received between 12 pm on Saturday and 12 pm on Sunday should 
be completed on Sunday.  
 
• If you are unable to complete the caseload or if you have ANY questions please call 
Clinical Specialist or department Manager/Supervisor. 
 
• Weekend hours are as follows: 
o Saturday –8 hour schedule 
o Sunday – 8 hour schedule 
 
REFERENCES: 
None 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
None 