 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Operational Policies Section: Departmental Orientation 
600 Daily Operations 
Title:  Reporting to Work 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/DO/602 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: Feb 1, 2001 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 5, 2024 
Last Date Revised: March 14, 2019 
 
PURPOSE:  
This policy establishes attendance guidelines for PMR staff and to supplement the existing OLOL Attendance  
Policy. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
 
POLICY:  
It is the policy of the Acute Care Physical Medicine Department Each employee is responsible for reporting  
to work on time according to the assigned work schedule.  The following guidelines are designed to provide clear  
instructions for employees to follow in planning their time off. It is understood the legitimate and unavoidable  
employee absence may occur. Frequent unscheduled absences may also limit opportunities for promotion. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. Call-ins are required one hour prior to scheduled shift.  A call-in to the department manager/supervisor is 
required.  Call-ins are defined as an absence for any excuse other than bereavement, jury-duty, etc. (e.g. – 
employee illness, taking care of sick child, car trouble, family issues, personal issues, etc.) 
2. Call-ins will require make up during the 40-hour workweek at the needs of the department and/or the 
manager’s discretion.  Weekend call-ins will be made up during the following weekend or at the discretion of 
the manager/supervisor. 
3. Repeated absences will be reviewed by the department manager and disciplinary action may result in 
accordance with OLOL attendance policy. 
4. A doctor’s excuse may be required at any time at the discretion of the manager for absences related to 
employee illness. 
5. Any call-in of employee illness on the weekend/holiday, the Friday prior to, or the Monday after the weekend 
or holiday/vacation will be requested to submit a physician’s excuse at the manager’s discretion.  
6. Medical and preventive appointments and scheduled surgery should be approved in advance by the 
department manager/supervisor.  Failure to request in a sufficient time frame may result in such requests 
being denied.  Appointments are not to be made on scheduled work time unless prior arrangements have been 
made with the department manager/supervisor. 
7. Illnesses exceeding three consecutive days require return clearance through employee health prior to the 
beginning of work shift. 
REFERENCES: 
None 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
None 