 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Clinical Policies Section: Interdisciplinary Services 
100 Physical Therapy 
Title:      Edema Management 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/IS/104 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: April 1, 2010 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 5, 2024 
Last Date Revised: April 5, 2022 
 
PURPOSE:  
This policy ensures that therapists are instructed in a safe procedure for edema control and management  
of acute care physical medicine patients. 
 
DEFINITIONS:  
Complete Decongestive Therapy (CDT): A treatment program which is used to manage Lymphedema. 
Complete Decongestive Therapy Consists of (1) Skin Care, (2) Manual Lymph Drainage, (3) Compression, (4) 
Exercise. 
Lymphedema: Abnormal accumulation of protein rich fluid in the interstitial space.  
Manual Lymph Drainage (MLD):  MLD is a gentle manual treatment technique that improves the activity of 
the lymph vessels by mild mechanical stretches on the wall of lymph collectors. MLD re-routes the lymph flow 
via tissue channels and lymph vessels around the blocked areas into more centrally located lymph vessels that 
eventually drain into the venous system. 
 
POLICY:  
It is the policy of the Acute Care Physical Medicine Department that patients with edema and/or  
lymphedema and meet the criteria for treatment with Complete Decongestive Therapy be treated by therapist in  
Acute Care Physical Medicine. 
  
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. Amount of edema in extremity is measured with circumference measuring  
2. Complete Decongestive Therapy is performed based on the therapist’s plan of care. 
3. Bandages will be ordered through the Central Supply Department and can be deliver to 
the unit where the patient is housed or picked up the therapy treatment team. 
4. Treating therapists will perform necessary wound care and dressing changes during each 
CDT treatment.  If therapy department is not performing CDT treatment, then the 
therapist will notify the patient’s nurse so that nursing can perform necessary daily 
wound care and dressing changes. 
5. Family will be given a home exercise program and instructed in basic techniques of skin 
care, manual lymph drainage, compression wrapping and exercise. 
 
REFERENCES: 
Academy of Lymphatic Studies Course Manual 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
See Online Patient Education Documents for Home Exercise Program 