 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Clinical Policies Section: Interdisciplinary Services 
200 Occupational Therapy 
Title:  Occupational Therapy Philosophy 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/IS/201 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: Feb 1, 2001 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 5, 2024 
Last Date Revised: April 5, 2022 
,  
PURPOSE:  
This policy outlines the Occupational Therapy Philosophy of the Acute Care Physical Medicine Department  
regarding patient care. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
 
POLICY:  
 
It is the policy of the Acute Care Physical Medicine Department that occupational therapy is a vital part of the  
total care of patients who have temporary or permanent disabilities due to illness, injury, or disease.  The  
occupational therapists work in conjunction with physicians and other health care professionals in an effort to  
assist each patient to achieve maximal performance so that he/she may assume a useful role in society while  
learning to live within the limits of his/her physical capabilities. 
 
Occupational therapy is a holistic approach used to ensure that a patient reaches his/her maximum functional level 
after a disability occurs.  When a person suffers a disability, the occupational therapist evaluates its affects 
cognitively, perceptually, emotionally, and physically.  Then, in an effort to progress the patient back to his/her 
functional level prior to injury/illness, exercise, therapeutic activities, activities of daily living retraining, 
splinting, and physical modalities are used.  Adaptive equipment is recommended, if necessary, to increase 
independence and ensure safety. 
 
Facilities within the Acute Care Department are also used for patients to perform/practice home-simulated tasks 
such as a kitchen for meal preparation, and tub for bathing. 
 
It is the occupational therapist’s intent to provide high quality care to meet the individual needs of each patient, 
and increase the quality of life through independent living.  The scope of service extends to patient/family and 
staff with emphasis on coordinating efforts with team members to meet team and patient goals. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
None 
  
REFERENCES: 
None 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
None 