 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Clinical Policies Section: Interdisciplinary Services 
300 Speech Therapy 
Title:     Inpatient Pharyngograms 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/IS/303 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: Feb 1, 2001 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 19, 2024 
Last Date Revised: March 19, 2024 
 
 
PURPOSE:  
This policy outlines the Speech Therapy Process for performing inpatient pharyngograms for patients of the    
Acute Care Physical Medicine Department. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
 
POLICY:  
 
It is the policy of the Acute Physical Medicine Department’s Speech Pathology Division to conduct a formal  
evaluation of the swallowing function, make appropriate dietary and therapeutic recommendations, and to devise  
a treatment program to remediate the patient’s swallowing deficits according to the standards and regulations of  
the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association and the Louisiana Board of Examiners for Speech  
Pathology and Audiology.  Pharyngogram procedures are performed in conjunction with OLOLRMC Radiology  
Department. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. The pharyngogram is an elective procedure, which is available Monday through Friday between the hours of 
8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.  Speech pathology will contact Radiology Monday through Friday before 9 am to 
schedule all pending orders.  Radiology will contact the speech pathologist or vice versa via phone or Voalte 
for all orders received on Saturday and Sunday.  
2. A pharyngogram may be ordered by the attending and/or consulting physician/physician assistant. 
3. Upon receiving the pharyngogram order, the speech pathologist schedules the procedure with Radiology.  If 
there is a change in the time agreed upon, radiology would contact the speech pathologist to arrange a 
different time.   
4. All patients will be transported to Radiology by the hospital or radiology transporter. 
5. All pharyngograms will be performed with the patient in an upright or reclined sitting position. Exceptions to 
this will be dealt with individually by the radiologist and speech pathologist. 
6. All pharyngograms are performed by the radiologist or radiology physician assistant, the speech pathologist, 
and radiology tech according to the policy and procedure of the Radiology Department.   
Barium mixtures will be used before the barium expiration date.  Supplies for the procedure will be kept in 
Radiology Pyxis or Radiology department.  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
 
7. The speech pathologist will position and feed the patient during the procedure.  Assistance from the radiology 
tech may be utilized as needed.  The speech pathologist will perform the procedure in direct collaboration 
with the radiologist or radiology physician assistant so that discussion of diagnoses and plan of care can occur 
simultaneously with the procedure. 
8. The results of the procedure will be reported as follows: 
a. The radiologist/radiology physician assistant evaluates the patient’s swallowing mechanism and 
reports his findings. The results may be called-in to the attending physician. 
b. The speech pathologist interprets the patient’s swallowing functioning and makes appropriate 
therapeutic and dietary recommendations.  The report is entered in the computer system within 24 
hours and may be called-in to the attending physician as needed. 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
None 
 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
None 