OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Acute Care Physical Medicine 
Clinical Policies Section: Interdisciplinary Services 
100 Physical Therapy 
Title: Wound Evaluation and Treatment 
Technique 
Policy 
Reference #: AC/IS/110 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: Feb 1, 2001 Last Date 
Reviewed: March 5, 2024 
Last Date Revised: April 12, 2022 
 
PURPOSE:  
This policy outlines the process for the treatment of wounds with Acute Care Physical Medicine patients. 
 
DEFINITIONS:  
None 
 
POLICY:  
It is the policy of the Acute Care Physical Medicine Department to use sterile or clean techniques during 
wound care treatment sessions requiring selective or non-selective debridement. Any patient requiring 
wound care from the Physical Medicine Department must have an order from a physician or mid-level 
provider. Hydrotherapy via whirlpool is no longer performed in concurrence with updated patient care 
practices; bedside syringe irrigation is now offered for patients in need of wound care. If debridement is 
not warranted, the patient must have a need for skilled interventions (i.e., splinting, ROM, strengthening) 
in order for therapy to perform wound care services. If the patient does not require debridement or other 
skilled therapy intervention, it will then be the responsibility of the nursing staff to provide dressing 
changes. This will be communicated on a patient-by-patient basis. 
 
PROCEDURE:  
 
 
1. Clean Field/Technique: for inpatient Acute Care Physical Medicine wound care, clean technique 
is sufficient and includes: 
a. Using clean gloves for each patient as well as clean, unopened dressings/materials 
b. If treating multiple wounds on same patient, attend to most contaminated wound last and 
change gloves if cross-contamination is a possibility 
c. Use sterile instruments for debridement 
d. Don appropriate PPE if potential for contact with bodily secretions/fluids exists (or if 
patient is under isolation precautions) 
 
2. Wound Evaluation:  
a. Including, but not limited to: gathering subjective history, cleansing/debriding wound 
bed, measuring wound dimensions, noting wound bed coloring/tissue quality, assessing 
periwound area, determining functional limitations, and designating appropriate dressing 
regiments to facilitate moist wound healing  
 
3. Debridement: 
a. Used to remove nonviable tissue present in wound bed that could delay wound healing or 
harbor bacteria. b. Selective debridement: includes tweezers/scissors, scalpel, forceps, and curettes 
c. Non-selective debridement: soft abrasion, hydrotherapy, irrigation, wet-to-dry dressings  
d. No specific order is required; physician need only dictate “Evaluate and treat wound”, 
and therapist will use clinical judgment to debride using appropriate methods 
 
4. Syringe Irrigation: 
a. Indicated for clean wounds, small infected wounds, wounds with loose slough 
b. Irrigation using 20 mL syringe + 18-gauge IV catheter tip provides appropriate pressure 
(~12 psi) to safely cleanse wound bed and remove loose nonviable tissue 
c. Irrigation should be performed using sterile water or normal saline in a clean field. Proper 
PPE should be worn in the even of splash back from irrigation treatment. 
d. Procedure: 
i. Chosen solution is drawn up through 20 mL syringe 
ii. 18-gauge IV catheter tip should be removed from retractable needle tip, and then 
attached to syringe (retractable needle should be discarded in sharps container) 
iii. Tip of IV catheter is placed as close as possible to wound surface to ensure 
appropriate irrigation pressure reaches wound bed 
iv. Therapist applies maximal force through syringe plunger to cleanse/debride 
wound bed  
v. Process should be repeated until loose debris is removed and wound bed appears 
clean (or to patient tolerance) 
vi. IV catheter can be inserted into wound cavity if necessary to rinse 
tracts/tunnels/undermining present 
vii. Materials should be considered single-use and discarded appropriately after 
wound care treatment  
 
 
REFERENCES: 
Irion, Glenn. Comprehensive Wound Management. SLACK Incorporated, 2010. Print.  
 
McCulloch, Joseph M., and Kloth, L. Wound Healing: Evidence-based Management. Philadelphia: F.A. 
Davis, 2010. Print. 
 
Shetty R, Paul M, Sreekar H, Barreto E, Dawre S. Syringe-based wound irrigating device. Indian Journal 
of Plastic Surgery. 2012;45(3):590. doi:10.4103/0970-0358.105996 
 
Stevenson, T., Thacker, J., Rodeheaver, G., Bacchetta, C., Edgerton, M. and Edlich, R. (1976). Cleansing 
the traumatic wound by high pressure syringe irrigation. Journal of the American College of 
Emergency Physicians, 5(1), pp.17-21. 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
None 
 