 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Srvs. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   
Subject:  Discharge of Patients from the Emergency Department Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  April 15, 1988 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed: 
January 8, 2024 
January 9, 2025 
Serial Code:  AD-02 
  
PURPOSE: 
To formulate a policy governing the discharge process of Emergency Department (ED) patients. 
-Reference: ENA Position Statement September 2019 
      -Reference: MH-O2 Care and Observation Monitoring of Behavioral Health Patients within the ED. 
POLICY: 
1. After  Emergency Department medical and nursing treatment has been completed, the provider will 
review the patient's medical record and determine if the patient is ready for discharge.  The provider 
will change the disposition status to discharge.   
2. At that time the physician will discuss with the patient and/or family the patient's diagnosis, 
recommended treatment, possible complications, and necessary follow -up care.  The nurse will 
reinforce the treatment plan presented by the physician. 
3. The patient will be instructed verbally and given an opportunity to verbalize back their 
understanding of the instructions.  I f there are no further questions and they demonstrate an 
understanding of their discharge instructions, the patient or family will be asked to sign the discharge 
instruction sheet.  The signed instruction sheet is maintained as a permanent part of the patient's 
medical record.  A copy of all discharge instructions is given to the patient or their designee.  The 
discharge instruct ion sheet is generated from ED Chart.  In the event of computer downtime, 
preprinted sheets are used. 
4. The Emergency Department does not routinely provide follow-up care on patients; however, in some 
instances, the Emergency Department p rovider may request that the patient return.  This should be 
noted on the discharge instructions. 
5. All discharge planning will be documented on the chart, as well as nursing documentation of the  2 
information presented to th e patient, and the patient has acknowledged understanding of the 
discharge instructions. 
6. At discharge, the chart documentation will include: 
a. Time of Discharge 
b. Focused nursing reassessment of clinical stability/condition    
c. Mode of Transportation 
d. Disposition of Clothing and Valuables (when appropriate) 
e. Education given to patient/family representative as appropriate 
7. Patients unable to ambulate without assistance will be placed in a wheelchair and escorted to the 
Emergency Room's front entrance.   
8. Patients under the influence of narcotics, sedatives, alcohol, or other chemicals that may impair their 
judgement or their ability to care for themselves, will not be discharged until such time as to  
a. When a responsible person can provide them transportation  
b. Provider  assessment that the patient can safely be discharged. 
9. Patients receiving antibiotic treatment or narcotics will remain in the Department for at least thirty 
(30) minutes after the administration of the medication and a response to administered medication 
documented in the Nurse's Notes. Patients receiving immunization will remain in the Department for 
at least fifteen (15) minutes after administration.  
10. If patient requires ambulance transport, an appropriate ambulance service is to be called. 
Discharge/Transfer: 
1. The behavioral patient discharge plan will include the number to the National Suicide    
Prevention Lifeline and location specific resources.  
 
2. Safety/Crisis Prevention planning and follow up care to be included at discharge for patients  
identified as at risk for suicide. 
  3 
3. If the physician determines either through his/her own assessment or through a psychiatric 
consult that the patient is no longer a threat to self or others, the physician will document the 
change in the patient’s status in the medical record and the interventions outlined above may be 
discontinued.  If a Physician’s Emergency Certificate (PEC) has been completed prior to this 
assessment, the physician should write an order to disc ontinue the PEC/CEC or other applicable 
legal status.  
 
4. Transportation of MBH Patient to area outside of ED area or upon discharge will require 
Security and one additional BLS/Crisis Prevention Intervention (CPI) Trained staff member to 
escort.  The patient should be placed in wheelchair or on stretcher for the transfer.   
 
 
 
 
 
 