 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   
Subject:  Inpatient Admission of an Emergency Department 
Patient  
Section:  Administrative 
Date of Origination:  October 17, 1994 Supersedes:  
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed: 
 January 5, 2023 
 January 8, 2024 
Serial Code:  AD-04 
 PURPOSE: 
Primary Medical : To provide guidelines for the conversion of an Emergency Department patient to 
inpatient status.   
Primary Psychiatric: To provide guidelines for psychiatric patients waiting for inpatient psychiatric 
placement while in the emergency department. 
DEFINITION: 
Primary Medical Boarder Patient –  
a. A patient that has active, signed inpatient admission orders and remains in the Emergency 
Department for four hours or more. 
b. A patient that ED provider determines need for /requests transfer from off-site ED and remains in 
the Emergency Department for four hours or more.   
c. COPE – Community Oriented Psychiatric Evaluation 
d. EMBH – Emergency Mental and Behavioral Health Unit  
POLICY: 
Primary Medical: Once the determination has been made that a patient is to be admitted to Our Lady of 
the Lake Regional Medical Center as an inpatient, the bed coordinator/house supervisor will be notified 
electronically.  
Patient name, admitting physician, service and status type, and admit diagnosis are provided for review. 
Upon entry of inpatient admission orders, a bed request will generate for patient placement through the 
electronic medical record.  
 
Primary Psychiatric:  Once a patient has been deemed medically stable by a medical provider, and 
psychiatric placement is necessary, the COPE team will follow policy C – 001: Coordination of 
Inpatient Psychiatric Placement. The patient shall remain an active Emergency Department patient 
throughout the duration of time in the Emergency Department or EMBH until transferred to a higher  2 
level of care or discharged.  
 
If the disposition of the psychiatric patient is to an Our Lady of the Lake inpatient psychiatric unit, the 
COPE team will : 1) contact the psychiatrist on call for acceptance of the patient. The psychiatrist will 
place sign and hold orders to be initiated once the patient arrives on the inpatient unit, 2) complete pre-
authorization and appropriate admissions paperwork with the patient, 3) notify the patient’s nurse with 
unit and a number to call report.  
 
If the patient is accepted by an outside facility, the COPE team will notify the patient’s nurse, who will 
ensure that the EMTALA form is completed by both the RN and a physician. The patient’s nurse will 
then arrange for ambulance transport and call report to the RN at the receiving facility. The MD will 
document appropriately for discharge from OLOL with transfer by ambulance to the receiving facility.  
 
NURSING REPORT 
 
Primary Medical and Primary Psychiatric:  
 
The Emergency Nurse will provide a report of the patient's presentation, legal status (where applicable), 
medical history, treatments and response to treatment, therapeutic interventions, medications, vital sign 
history and a general summation of the patient's condition to the receiving clinical team. 
 
The Emergency Nurse will ensure appropriate documents are transported with the patient to the 
accepting unit. Patients admitted to inpatient areas will have the original copy of the PEC/CEC/OPC if 
applicable.  
 
TRANSPORT OF PATIENTS 
 
Primary Psychiatric: Security should  assist with safe transport of the Emergency MBH patient within 
the Regional Medical Center, Ascension, and Children’s H ospital, including transport from acute ED to 
disposition placement within the hospital.  Qualified team members may also transfer EMBH patients as 
appropriate for testing or discharge from the EMBH unit.  
 
Transfer of MBH patients from off-site EDs utilize emergency medical service transport for patient 
safety. Security team may be on standby for assistance/escort to /from the EMS transport vehicle.  
 
MBH patients transferring from the Regional Medical Center to the TAU Center will be transported by 
the OLOLRMC psychiatric safe van and will be escorted by no less than two qualified team members. 
When the OLOLRMC psychiatric safe van is not available, the patient will be transferred to the Tau 
Center by ambulance.  
 
Primary Medical: An ACLS certified nurse or PALS certified nurse (as appropriate ) will accompany 
critical care patients  within hospital . Transport of critical care patients from off-site EDs utilize 
appropriate EMS transport as determined by ED physician.  
 
The Registered Nurse will determine appropriate mode of transfer of non -critical patients  within  3 
hospital.   Transport of patients from off-site EDs utilize appropriate means of transport as determined 
by ED physician.    
 
Boarder Patient:  
 
Inpatient Orders:  
 
Four hours after the admission order has been placed, the Emergency Department will manually release 
all signed and held orders. 
 
Orders requiring timely interventions (urgent, stat) prior to the four hours are to be initiated accordingly. 
 
1.  Admit order immediately changes the patient’s class. 
2.  Four hours after admit order is signed, patient automatically changes tracking board status to “ED  
     Boarder”. There is also an alert in the patient narrator showing “ED Boarder”.  
3.  ED Nurse manually releases all signed and held orders, initiating any relevant orders. 
4.  Initiate care for patient (I&O, Repeat VS, Diet, ADL, etc.) 
5.  Icon on the tracking board shows any new sign and held orders and alerts nurse to new orders. 
6.  Nurse will need to release these orders, and potentially act on them. 
7.  Continue this process until patient is departed from the Emergency Department. 
 
Documentation: Plan of Care.   
 
Documentation of Patient Care Plan by Emergency Department Nursing Team is ongoing.   The 
Patient’s plan of care must be completed within 24 hours of inpatient status  and may be completed by 
the receiving unit within timeframe .  The communication to the receiving unit of ED plan of care 
supports ongoing and seamless continuity of care.     
 
References: Policy C-001 
 
 
 
 
 