POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Access Services  
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:    
Subject:  Offender/Prisoner Care ER Registration Section:    
Date of Origination: Sept 2015  Supersedes: n/a 
Date Last Revised:  Aug2016; Oct 2016; 
01/23/2018 
 Serial Code:    
 
PURPOSE:    
The purpose of this Standard Policy and/or Procedure is to establish guidelines under which Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center agree to provide treatment to patients who are in the 
custody of federal, state, parish, or local law enforcement agencies or detention facilities. 
 
 
POLICY: 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center will make available prompt treatment to all 
prisoners referred to its ER for services.  All treatment given to the offender/prisoner will be 
consistent with established standards of care.  All team members shall treat offender/prisoner 
patients with respect and dignity afforded all patients receiving treatment and services at the 
Medical Center. An insurance plan will be used to identify those cases that should be billed to 
the prison agency. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Security will meet the ambulance and escort the patient to the ER check-in desk. 
 
2. The Patient Access Staff will perform an ED Quick Registration 
 
3. At the time of full registration, the Patient Access Rep (PAR) will ask the officer for a 
completed Offender Status Verification.  (If the officer refuses to provide the form, the 
PAR will get a supervisor involved and document the lack of cooperation in the account 
notes.) 
 
• If the officer indicates on the form that the patient is “Arrestee Not Booked,” the 
PAR will register the patient with his/her insurance, unless the patient is a 
Medicare beneficiary, in which case the patient will be responsible for the bill 
and registered as self pay.  The CorrectCare plan code will not be used.  If the 
patient is uninsured, they will be listed as self pay.  
 
• If the officer indicates on the form that the patient is “Federal Offender,” the PAR 
will register the patient with an insurance plan specifically for that federal facility (via 
the Department of Justice).  The federal facility will be billed.  The CorrectCare plan 
code will not be used.  
  
• If the patient is listed as anything other than arrestee not booked or federal 
offender, the PAR will register the patient as follows: o If the patient has Medicare or commercial health insurance, e.g. Blue 
Cross, the PAR will list CorrectCare as the primary insurance and the 
patient’s health insurance as secondary.  NOTE: We are indicating the health 
insurance as secondary in the event Correct Care is not responsible for the bill. 
o If the patient has Medicaid, the PAR will list Medicaid as primary and 
CorrectCare as secondary. 
o If the patient is uninsured, the PAR will list CorrectCare as primary. 
 
4. If CorrectCare is listed as primary, the guarantor information will be listed as the facility 
and address with whom the offender is in custody.  
 
5. The completed and signed form will be faxed to the Department of Public Safety and 
Corrections to be used as verification that the offender was indeed in the custody of a law 
enforcement agency when he/she was brought to the health care facility.  See Appendix 
A:  State of Louisiana/Department of Public Safety and Corrections Offender Status 
Verification Form. 
 
 
COMMUNICATION WITH FAMILIES: 
• It will be the responsibility of the Custodial Agency to communicate with the prisoner’s 
families. 
 
• The offender’s name and/or room number is not to be given out by the switchboard to 
those inquiring as to whether they are presently patients in the facility. 
 
RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILIITES:  
Offenders (Prisoners) have the same rights concerning care decisions as any patient treated at 
OLOL.  The offenders are to receive informed consent and may sign their own consent for 
treatment forms.  While they do have the right to confidentiality, the officer/guard is to be 
present during all times including those times when the offender may be receiving a physical 
examination or procedure. 
  APPENDIX A:   OFFENDER VERIFICATION FORM 
 
 
