 
 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Srvs. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Section:  Administrative 
Subject:  TREATMENT AND TRANSFER OF INDIVIDUALS 
REQUESTING/IN NEED OF EMERGENCY 
MEDICAL SERVICES 
 
Date of Origination: 01.01.1987 
 
Date of last revision: August 1, 2024 
 
Date Last Reviewed:  August 1, 2024 
Supersedes: 
ADM-12 
ADM-29 
ADM-30 
ST ADMIN 
0525 
       
  
 
 Serial Code: 
ADM01 
 
    
 
 
 Purpose: To define prioritizing patients, initiating assessment, and treatment for patients seeking 
emergency services.  
          Page 
 
Triage and Medical Screening Exam-------------------------  2 
 
Emergency Medical Conditions ------------------------------- 3 
 
Medical Screening Exam--------------------------------------- 4 
 
RN Triage-------------------------------------------------------- 6 
 
Outgoing Transfers--------------------------------------------  6 
 
Incoming Transfers-------------------------------------------    9 
 
Off Site Campus ED Transfers--------------------------------  9 
 
Refusal by Patient for Treatment/ Transfer-----------------  10 
 
Signage---------------------------------------------------------- 11 
 
Non-Retaliation of EMTALA Reporting---------------------------- 11 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 2 
Triage and Medical Screening:  
 
Any patient requesting or presenting for emergency care on hospital property at Our Lady of the 
Lake Regional Medical Center  (OLOLRMC) or whose appearance or behavior demonstrate a 
need for examination or treatment of a medical condition will be triaged utilizing the Emergency 
Severity Index (ESI) and offered a medical screening exam (MSE) to determine if they have an 
emergency medical condition (EMC).   
 
In addition, if the individual arrives with Law Enforcement or becomes under Security / Law 
Enforcement custody, that individual must be offered an appropriate MSE. The MSE must  be 
completed prior to any Law Enforcement disposition / removal. 
 
Hospital Property shall include: 
 
1. Our Lady of Lake Regional Medical Center (Main Campus):  
 
a) The hospital’s Main Building, which is the hospital structure and St Mary’s Tower, 
and the areas   immediately adjacent to the hospital’s Main Building (Medical Office 
Buildings /MOB).  For EMCs arising in MOB, Policy OrgClin -003 on Code Blue / 
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation, in the Organizational Policies Manual applies.  
 
b) Other areas and structures that are not strictly contiguous to the Main Building but are 
located within 250 yards of the Main Building, and the parking lots and garages, 
sidewalks, and driveways.   
 
c) Hospital Property shall not include areas of the hospital’s campus which are not part 
of the hospital, such as physician offices, restaurants, shops, or other non -medical 
facilities.   
 
d) If a patient presents with an EMC on Hospital Property, but outside of the Emergency 
Department, hospital staff shall use their judgment and best efforts to assess, support, 
treat and/or stabilize the individual at that area while activating and arranging for 
appropriate transport of the patient to the Emergency Department where further 
treatment can be provided. 
 
2. OLOL Livingston Campus: 
 
a) The facility’s main building first floor and second floor administration office; parking 
lots 
 
b) Livingston campus leased tenant spaces call 911 for medical emergencies / transport 
to ED  
 
c) Livingston campus: if a patient presents with an EMC on property, but outside of   
Emergency Department, follow item #1 d., as described in this policy.   
 3 
 
3. OLOL North Campus: 
 
a) The facility’s building, including clinics and ancillary service areas, parking lots 
 
b) North Campus: If a patient presents with an EMC on property, but outside of 
Emergency Department, follow item #1d, as described in this policy. 
 
     4. OLOL Ascension Campus:  
 
a) The facility’s building s, anywhere in the Hospital, on the Hospital’s main campus, 
including on-campus provider based entities i.e. Ambulatory Surgery Center in 
Medical Plaza; The Hospital’s main campus is the physical area immediately adjacent 
to the  provider’s main building, or other areas and structures that are not strictly 
contiguous to the main buildings, but are located within 250 yards of the main 
buildings; including clinics and ancillary service areas, parking lots  
 
b) If a patient presents with an EMC on property, but outside of Emergency Department, 
follow item #1d, as described in this policy. 
 
    5. OLOL Children’s Hospital (CH) Campus: 
 
a) All areas housed within the main facility.   
*Code Blue will be called for any of the following: a pediatric in -patient, pediatric       
visitor, adult in-patient, adult outpatient, and adult visitor.  
 
b) Medical Office Building (MOB): basic life support will be initiated, 911 activated 
and House Supervisor notified.  
 
c) For areas on the hospital’s property not specified in this policy, personnel will follow 
the directives of the Emergency Services Policy, follow item #1 d., as described in 
this policy.  
 
Emergency Medical Condition: 
 
An EMC is a condition manifesting itself by acute symptoms of sufficient severity (including 
severe pain, psychiatric disturbances and/or symptoms of substance abuse) such that the 
absence of immediate medical attention could reasonably be expected to result in:  
 
• Placing the health of the individual (or, with respect to a pregnant woman, the 
health of the woman or her unborn child) in serious jeopardy, or  
• Serious impairment to bodily functions, or  
• Serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part.  
 4 
• In the case of a psychiatric emergency, the patient expresses suicidal or homicidal 
thoughts and is dangerous to himself / herself or others.  
 
With respect to a pregnant woman who is having contractions:  
a) there is inadequate time to affect a safe transfer to another hospital before delivery, or 
b) the transfer may pose a threat to the health or safety of the woman or her unborn child. 
 
“Labor” means the process of childbirth beginning with the latent or early phase and continuing 
through the delivery of the placenta.  A woman is in true labor unless a physician or Qualified 
Medical Person certifies, after a reasonable period of observation that she is in false labor. A 
woman who is not in true active labor may still have an emergency medical condition if the 
individual has a medical condition such that the absence of immediate medical attention will 
place her or her fetus in serious jeopardy.  
 
Medical Screening Exam: 
 
Each individual who comes to the Emergency Department seeking or appearing to need medical 
treatment will be provided an appropriate MSE to determine, within reasonable clinical 
confidence, whether an EMC exists.  The MSE will be conducted by a physician or a Qualified 
Medical Provider (“QMP”).  If the MSE is done by a QMP, the MSE must be verified and 
countersigned by a physician. 
 
The hospital will provide, without discrimination, care for emergency medical conditions to 
individuals who comes to the hospital or to an off-campus department of the hospital, regardless 
of whether they are Financial Assistance Policy (FAP)-eligible.  A MSE and provision of 
appropriate emergency services will be provided to any individual regardless of diagnosis, 
financial status, race, ethnicity, national origin, citizenship, religion, age, gender, handicap, 
sexual orientation, economic status, disability, or ability to pay for medical services in 
accordance with 42 CFR 489.24(d)(4) and (5).  
 
The patient may proceed through the hospital registration process so long as the patient’s MSE 
or treatment is not delayed, and the patient is not discouraged from remaining for further 
evaluation.  The following steps may be taken: 
 
• Demographic and identifying information may be obtained. 
• Information on whom to contact in an emergency may be obtained. 
 
Payment information will never be requested until after the patient has received an MSE and 
stabilizing treatment has begun.  The hospital will not engage in any actions that discourage 
individuals from seeking emergency medical care, such as demanding that emergency 
department patients pay before receiving treatment for emergency medical conditions or by 
permitting debt collection activities that interfere with the provision, without discrimination, of 
emergency medical care. 
  
 5 
An individual who comes to another (non-emergency department) area of the Hospital seeking 
treatment for an apparent emergency condition shall be immediately transported to the 
emergency department for the screening examination and necessary stabilizing treatment.  Such 
transport shall be by the method and with the personnel and equipment deemed appropriate 
under the circumstances by those who are with the patient, in accordance with applicable 
Hospital policies and procedures for intra-facility transport. 
   
Considerations:  
 
A minor child, who is unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian, may request an examination 
or treatment for an emergency medical condition and an MSE must be provided to determine if 
an emergency medical condition exists.  There should be no delay of the MSE to wait for 
parental consent.  If after screening the minor, it is determined that no emergency medical 
condition is present, parental consent should be obtained before proceeding with any further 
examination or treatment. 
 
For pregnant women, the MSE should include an ongoing evaluation of fetal heart tones, 
regularity and duration of uterine contractions, fetal position and station, cervical dilation, and 
status of the membranes (i.e., intact, ruptured, leaking). 
 
For patients with psychiatric symptoms, the MSE should include an assessment of suicide or 
homicide attempt or risk, orientation, or assaultive behavior that indicates a danger to self or 
others. 
 
When an individual requests medication for a medical condition, the MSE will be completed 
with a focus on determining whether the patient has not taken their medication and whether the 
nature of the medication requested make it likely that the patient has an emergency medical 
condition. If the patient requires medication to resolve or stabilize an emergency medical 
condition, then appropriate treatment should be provided. 
 
If an individual only requests services that are not for an emergency medical condition (such as 
preventative care immunizations, allergy shots, flu shots, etc. or completion of a physical fitness 
form), EMTALA does not apply, and documentation will be made to that effect. However, the 
Hospital will offer an MSE and treat the patient as medically appropriate.  
 
When law enforcement officials request hospital emergency personnel to provide clearance for 
incarceration, an MSE should be conducted to determine whether an EMC exists. 
 
For blood alcohol testing, if the only request made is for the drawing of blood from an individual 
and not for examination or treatment of a medical condition, a MSE is still offered. 
 
If the nature of the individual’s request makes it clear that the medical condition is not for 
emergency care, the MSE will reflect the nature of those complaints and symptoms. The MSE 
will be reflective of the individual’s complaints or symptoms and will range from a simple  
 6 
process involving only a brief history and physical exam to a complex process that involves 
multiple ancillary studies and procedures.   
 
For general cases, the MSE should include medically indicated screenings, tests, mental status 
examination, history and physical examination, impressions, and diagnosis. 
 
When a physician or Qualified Medical Person determines as a result of a medical screening 
examination that an individual does not have an emergency medical condition, the medical 
record will reflect, and the patient registration staff will be notified that financial information can 
be obtained from the patient. An individual may be transferred to another health care facility (if 
in need of further care) or discharged.  
 
Emergency Departments with an integrated campus that offer formal urgent care service will 
provide all patients with a MSE from a qualified medical provider.  If no medical emergency 
condition is assessed and the provider recommends a lower level of care such as urgent care or 
clinic follow-up, the QMP will give the patient options for appropriate care. The QMP will 
obtain a signature after the MSE is completed from the patient or his/her representative that 
confirms the completion of the MSE and education/options for follow-up. 
 
The MSE is ongoing. The medical record must reflect continued monitoring, according to the 
patient’s condition.  Monitoring must continue until the individual is stabilized or appropriately 
admitted or transferred.  The screening examination must be documented in the medical record. 
When determined that the individual has an emergency medical condition, the Hospital shall, 
Within the capability of the staff and facilities available at the Hospital, stabilize to the point 
where the individual is either “stable for discharge” or “stable for transfer”.  
 
RN Triage:  
 
Refer to ED Policy ADM 34 
 
Outgoing Transfers:  
 
The hospital will provide for an appropriate transfer (including an unstable individual) to another 
medical facility.  
 
Patient Request: 
   
When a patient  (patient representative) requests a transfer, the request must be documented  and 
prompts consultation with the Transfer Center and attending provider. The transfer may then 
occur if the individual or legal representative: (a.) makes a request for transfer to another medical 
facility, stating the reasons for the request (document reasons in medical record); and (b) 
acknowledges his or her request and understanding of the risks and benefits of the transfer, by 
signing the Certificate of Transfer . The patient will be informed of the risks and benefits of the 
transfer and of the hospital’s obligations under OBRA/COBRA to provide the patient with a  
 7 
medical screening examination and stabilizing treatment.  A refusal to sign the form will be 
documented in the medical record. 
Physician Certification:  
Physicians requesting a transfer (see above for patient request), from the emergency department 
to another acute care healthcare facility, will have the request reviewed by the Transfer Center. 
Further consultation with the requesting/attending physician/provider may be required.   If the 
review is in conflict with the physician’s request to transfer, the Chief Medical Officers (CMO) 
or the Administrator on Call (AOC) review may preclude the actual transfer.  
 
Outgoing ED transfers for Mental and Behavioral Health are reviewed and in consultation with 
the provider and COPE services, outside of transfer center process.   
 
If medical treatment has been provided within available capabilities and it is determined to be in 
the best interest of the patient to transfer to another facility: 
• Patient condition will be stabilized to the point that within reasonable medical 
probability, no material deterioration will occur during or as the result of transfer.  In 
the case of a woman in labor, this standard applies to the unborn child, and it will be 
determined whether, within a reasonable medical probability, there is adequate time 
to affect a transfer before delivery. 
• The patient (or person acting on the patient's behalf) will be informed by the 
physician of the hospital’s obligations under the OBRA/COBRA regulations, medical 
benefits associated with the transfer and risks if the transfer does not occur.  The 
patient (person) will sign the Consent to Transfer which will include the reason for 
the request and the patient’s awareness of the risks and benefits of the transfer. 
 
• The physician will sign a certification at the time of transfer that, based upon the 
information available at the time of transfer, the medical benefits reasonably expected 
from treatment at another medical facility outweigh the increased risks to the patient 
(including an unborn child) from being transferred.  The certification will contain a 
summary of these risks and benefits and will be included in the patient’s medical 
record.  The time and date of the certification should closely match the date and time 
of the transfer. 
• Once the decision to transfer has been made and the patient ( representative) has 
authorized treatment, it will be the responsibility of the physician to make 
arrangements for the transfer. The physician at the sending facility has the 
responsibility to determine the appropriate mode of transport, need for attendants, or 
qualified medical personnel as appropriate, and if any specialized equipment is 
needed. The physician will assure there is an accepting facility and an accepting 
physician for that facility. This information will be recorded and will include the date 
and time of the transfer request and the name of the person accepting the transfer.  
 8 
A patient transferring under a Legal Status such as a Physician’s Emergency Certificate 
(PEC), Coroner’s Emergency Certificate (CEC, or Judicial Commitment (JC) are  not 
required to sign the transfer form in the space designated for patient signature.    All other 
stipulations of this policy apply.   
The patient's transfer will be by ambulance, air ambulance, or other transportation as deemed 
appropriate by the transferring physician.  The attending physician has the responsibility to 
ensure that the transfer is effectuated through personnel with appropriate education, training 
and skill level, and appropriate equipment to maintain the designated level of care.  
Ambulance medical transportation is provided for legal status psychiatric patients leaving 
OLOL for outside psychiatric facilities. Legal status psychiatric patients transferring from 
OLOL off site EDs to either Reginal Medical Center OLOLRMC/OLOLCH or to outside 
psychiatric facilities will be transferred by Ambulance.  
 
The Emergency Physician or Registered Nurse caring for the patient should make the request 
for review as soon as possible in the transfer decision process. 
 
OLOLRMC will send cop y of medical records related to emergency condition that are 
available at time of transfer to the receiving facility. Record will include, but not limited to: 
a. Physician Notes, including preliminary diagnosis.  
b. Record of treatment provided. 
c. Nurses Notes and other documents that provide available history, observation, 
signs and symptoms, and vital signs. 
d. Results of any tests, including copies of radiologist films or telephone reports of 
the tests, as necessary and appropriate. 
e. Consent authorizing transfer and physician certification.  
f. Name of accepting physician and accepting facility. 
g. Other records, such as test results not yet available or old records not readily 
available from the hospital’s files, will be sent to the accepting facility as soon as 
possible after transfer. 
Nursing will give report to the receiving nurse at the accepting hospital. If the patient 
experienced any significant change in condition from the time the accepting physician consult 
occurred, the accepting physician would also be provided a supplemental verbal report. 
The nurse assigned primary responsibility for the care of the patient will assure that all 
documents are properly completed, copied, and available and in the care of the individual(s) 
transferring the patient prior to the patient departing the Emergency Department.  The nurse 
will notify the receiving facility with any test results that are received after the patient is 
transferred and will then send a copy of those results to the receiving hospital. 
 
  
 9 
Patient/Patient Representative notification of transfer:   
 
If the individual’s physical or mental condition is such that it is not possible to give them notice 
of the transfer decision, and the individual is unaccompanied, the Hospital shall make a 
reasonable effort to locate a legally responsible person in order to notify that person of the 
intended transfer.  
If there is no legally responsible person available to give consent to the transfer of an 
incompetent individual and the welfare of the individual will be jeopardized if the transfer is 
delayed, the individual may be transferred without consent, based upon the benefits/risks 
certification of the physician. 
 
Incoming Transfers from other facilities: 
 
To the extent that the Hospital has specialized capabilities or facilities not available at a 
requesting facility, acceptance of transfers is appropriate if the hospital has the capacity and 
capability to treat the patient. Hospital transfer center shall defer to the transferring MD 
judgment in regard to need for transfer. The transfer center will utilize the hospital definitions of 
capability and capacity to accept or deny the transfer. 
 
Capability: the ability of the hospital to accommodate the health care needs of the 
individual presenting to the facility for evaluation or treatment based on available 
physical space, equipment, supplies, services (medical, nursing and ancillary), and 
staffing, and on the level of care that hospital personnel can provide within the training 
scope of their professional licenses. 
 
Capacity: the ability of Our Lady of the Lake to accommodate a patient requesting 
examination or treatment and includes numbers and availability of beds, equipment, 
qualified staff and past practices of accommodating patients in excess of occupancy 
limits. 
 
Off Campus Transitions to Main Campus or Transfers:   
 
Off-Campus Emergency Departments are considered hospital departments and as such do not 
meet the definition of transfer if transitioning to OLOLRMC.   
 
The Consent to T ransfer form initiated by the ED physician serves as MD order to initiate 
process for transfer from the offsite campus.  Sending physician determines the mode and 
method of transport that will safely meet the transfer needs of an individual patient, taking into 
consideration the condition of the patient, and/or treatment previously rendered, or still in 
progress (i.e. IV access/lock). A review of level of stability for transfer should always be 
established, stipulated, and documented by the MD as to the method/mode of transport. The 
transport form may indicate ambulance or appropriately monitored form of transport to a higher 
level of care, as deemed appropriate per medical assessment. The method and mode of transport 
is included in the risks, benefits, and alternatives to transfer that is discussed and documented in  
 10 
communication between the sending physician with the patient or their representative prior to 
transfer.  
 
Transfers from offsite campus to OLOL Regional Medical Center are coordinated with 
Emergency and Specialty providers, Clinical Staff, Access Services, Bed Coordinator, and 
House Manager as appropriate. Transferring department notifies receiving department of patient 
status and documents accordingly.  
 
Mental Behavioral Health transfers are requested and coordinated through COPE. For patients on 
an Order of Protective Custody and/or a PEC/CEC, a copy should be scanned into the medical 
record and original legal form should accompany patient. 
Pediatric transfers are coordinated with emergency providers/staff and OLOL Childrens 
Hospital’s House Supervisor.   
Heart Alerts are coordinated with offsite ED physician, cardiologist, and Regional Medical 
Center ED physician for timely intervention, transfer, and direct admit to OLOL Cath 
Department. 
Adult Inpatients and Critical transfers are coordinated between the ED Physician, Primary Care 
Physician, Hospitalist/Specialist, for appropriate initial bed placement. This placement may be 
ED to ED or directly to an observation/inpatient/ICU bed, through mutual consultation. 
Incoming Stroke transfers are coordinated between Critical Care Medicine Services (CCMS), ED 
Physician, Interventional Radiologist/Neurosurgeon for timely intervention and transfer to the 
ED/Stroke Landing Zone.   
Incoming Trauma / Critical Care transfers are coordinated by ED physician. This coordination 
may include pre-hospital providers to access level of injury and stability/status of patient. The 
decision will be made by ED physician to:  
• Direct Ambulance to stop at offsite campus for stabilizing treatment then proceed 
on to hospital.  
 
• Direct Ambulance to bypass to proceed to full -service facility to meet  complex 
care needs.    
 
Individuals With EMC but refusing consent for treatment or transfer:  
 
If the individual refuses examination, treatment, including transfer,   
 
• the provider must inform the individual or legally responsible person of the risks and 
benefits of refusing the examination and treatment.  
 
• Hospital shall take all reasonable steps to have the individual or legally responsible 
person sign AMA form.   
 11 
 
• The medical record shall contain a description of the examination, treatment, or both if 
applicable, that was proposed but refused by or on behalf of the individual; the 
risks/benefits of the examination and/or treatment; the reasons for refusal; and the steps 
taken to secure the written informed refusal.   
 
Documentation:  
 
A safety event will be entered when an individual who has an emergency medical condition 
refuses to consent to further examination and treatment or the individual refuses transfer.  
If the patient (person) refuses to consent to the transfer, a description of the proposed transfer 
will be included in the patient’s medical record and the patient will be asked to sign the 
appropriate refusal form. A refusal to sign will be documented on the physician's record of care.  
Patients have the right to refuse transfer intrafacility from an offsite ED or to another facility. At 
that time, disposition as deemed appropriate will be made by the physician in conjunction with 
the patient or responsible party to admit, discharge or discharge against medical advice. 
 
Signage:   
 
In compliance with the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act and OBRA / 
COBRA, signage will be posted in the Emergency Department in a place or places likely to be 
noticed by all individuals entering the Emergency Department and by those waiting for 
examination and treatment.   
The signs may be posted at hospital entrance, admitting and/or waiting area, or treatment area.  
The sign will specify the rights of individuals and women in labor who come to the hospital for  
health care services and will also indicate whether the hospital participates in the Medicaid  
Program. 
 
The wording of the sign will be clear, in simple terms, and in languages that are understandable.  
by the population served by the hospital.  
 
 
Non-Retaliation of EMTALA Reporting:  
 
To provide for protection of  individuals who report suspected violations of the Emergency Medical 
Treatment and Active Labor Act. 
 
• The hospital will not penalize or take adverse action against a physician or qualified 
medical person who refuses to authorize the transfer of an individual with an emergency 
medical condition that has not been stabilized. 
• The hospital will not penalize or take adverse action against a hospital employee 
(including a contract employee) because the employee reports a violation of EMTALA, 
including but not limited, to an inappropriate transfer.  
 12 
 
 
 
References:  
 
 
CM.07.001_Mental Health Legal Status (03.22.2021).pdf 
 