 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Srvs. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   
Subject:  Callback for Lab/Imaging Reports: Discharged 
Patients 
Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  February 5, 1987 Supersedes:  
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed: 
May 23, 2024 
May 23, 2024  
Serial Code:  ADM-13 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for timely follow -up of positive culture or radiology reports on Emergency 
Department (ED) patients who have not been admitted. 
POLICY: 
1. Physicians/Qualified Medical Providers  review positive culture report s and appropriate imaging 
reports fo r appropriateness of care  and plan of care changes as required .  The Charge 
Nurse/designee may assist in follow up for patients needing further care or change in medical 
plan.    
2. If no additional treatment or treatment change is indicated, this is documented in the 
computerized chart callback function. 
3. If further treatment or treatment change is indicated, attempts will be made to contact the patient 
or parent guardian.  If there is a primary care physician listed, he/she may also be contacted at 
the direction of the ED physician.  Any or all attempts to contact the patient or parent/guardian, 
whether successful or unsuccessful, will be documented.  Documentation should also reflect the 
name of the person to whom the nurse speaks to as well as the nature of treatment change or 
recommendation by the ED physician.  If attempts to reach the patient are unsuccessful, a 
registered letter will be mailed.  If the letter is returned as undeliverable, the appropriate 
documentation (returned envelope/letter) will be scanned into the electronic medical record.  
4. Call-backs should ensure that the information is given to the patient or guardian, i.e. asking for 
Social Security Number or Date of Birth, can be identifying factors.  If voice messages are left, 
no confidential information should be disclosed other than a call -back number and to whom the 
patient should speak. 
 