 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Srvs. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center    
Subject:  Patient Leaving the Hospital Against Medical Advice 
(AMA) 
Section:  Administrative 
Date of Origination:  February 29, 1988 Supersedes:  
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed: 
February 26, 2021 
January 8, 2024 
Serial Code:  ADM-10 
  
PURPOSE: 
To address patients voluntarily leaving the hospital against the advice of the attending physician (AMA)  
POLICY: 
1. Patients desiring to leave the hospital against medical advice will be requested to read and sign the 
appropriate release. 
a. When the patient notifies the staff that he/she is leaving the hospital voluntarily against the 
advice of the attending/Emergency Department physician, the patient is requested to sign the 
appropriate release (AMA form). A safety event will be entered.  
b. The attending physician is notified that the patient is leaving OLOLRMC voluntarily, without 
being discharged and/or against medical advice.   
c. If the patient refuses to sign the AMA form, a notation to that effect is documented on the form 
and in the patient’s medical record. 
d. If the patient leaves the hospital without notifying the staff and does not return, a complete 
description of the incident is described in the emergency medical record and a Safety Event 
Report will be completed. Unless the patient is on a legal hold or has a medical condition their 
departure would present a significant risk to the patient or others, the departure will be 
considered AMA, not an elopement. 
e. Patients on a legal hold status are not allowed to leave AMA. 
f. The patient should then be discharged according to hospital procedure. 
g. An attempt by the medical team to review with the patient possible risks/consequences of their 
departure is advisable when possible. The patient should be advised to seek continued medical 
care as soon as possible. Document  conversation  in the patient record. 
h. Reasonable efforts will be made to contact the patient that leaves AMA to notify them of any 
abnormal lab or test results that were obtained after their departure at the discretion of a 
physician and will be encouraged to seek continued medical care as soon as possible. The  2 
attempt of or success of the notification  attempt will be documented in the patient medical 
record. 
i. At the discretion of the physician, the patient leaving AMA should be provided with a copy of 
any pertinent test or procedure results obtained in the Emergency Department and documented in 
the patient medical record. 
j. Reasonable efforts should be made to rectify the reason for the patient’s AMA departure in an 
attempt to circumvent the AMA departure. Any steps taken to rectify the situation are to be 
documented in the patient medical record. 
References:  
FMOLHS Policy CM.07.001 Mental Health Legal Status, 
https://fmolhs.sharepoint.com/sites/TeamLink/Policy/FMOLHS/Operations/Care%20Management/CM.0
7.001_Mental%20Health%20Legal%20Status%20(01.20.2021).pdf 
 
              OLOLRMC Policy, OC019: Patient Leaving Against Medical Advice.  
 