 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Srvs. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   
Subject:  Traffic Control in the Emergency Department Section:  Administrative 
Date of Origination:  February 17, 1987 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed: 
5/23/2024 
5/23/2024 
Serial Code:  ADM-21 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for visitors and traffic control in the Emergency Department.  
 POLICY: 
1. Visitors are not generally permitted to witness medical treatment unless: 
a. The patient is a minor. 
b. The adult patient expresses their desire for the visitor's presence and the physician approves 
of the visitor remaining during the procedure. 
2. When visitors are asked to leave for a procedure, they should be directed to the appropriate 
lobby.  
3. If a visitor becomes verbally or physically disruptive in the treatment area, they will be asked to 
leave the treatment area.  If the visitor refuses the nurse or physician's request, the 
Nurse/Department Leader will determine if security should be asked to assist in removing the 
visitor peaceably. 
4. Any employee not having direct Emergency Department responsibilities or duties may be asked 
to remove themselves from the treatment area. 
5. Should the situation warrant, the Nurse/Department Leader may request all visitors and non-
essential personnel to remove themselves from the treatment area. 
6. Presence of a visitor in the patient care area is dependent upon the safety and well-being of all 
patients in the Emergency Department.  At no time should the presence of a visitor constitute an 
impediment to the delivery of care.  In situations where allowing visitors access to the 
Emergency Department presents a risk to patients and staff, the Nurse/Department Leader team 
may institute “secure access” of the Emergency Department (reference policy ECSE020) 
7. Patients presenting for care related to questionable acts of violence may not be allowed visitors 
until such visitors are determined not to pose a threat to that patient or others. 
8. “No visitor” status may include patients who have been involved in a crime scene (i.e., GSW,  2 
stabbing, MVC (DWI, vehicular homicide).  The deputy may be posted outside the patient's 
room.  The nurse assigned and the deputy will determine when and if the patient may receive 
visitors. In the case of a pediatric patient, the caregiver may be present as long as there is a team 
member present at all times. Caregiver should have no contact with any potential evidence, 
belongings, etc.  
 