 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Srvs. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   
Subject:  Triage (Adult & Pediatric) Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  September 11, 2020  Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed: 
 February 14, 2023  
 January 9, 2025 
Serial Code:  ADM 34 
 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide a standardized system whereby patients presenting to the Emergency Department (ED) are 
treated in order of priority based upon acuity utilizing the Emergency Severity Index (ESI) 5 level triage 
system. The triage assessment does not constitute a medical screening exam.  
 
Additional Reference:  MH-02 Care and Observation Monitoring of Behavioral Health Patients within 
the ED.  
DEFINITIONS:   
LWBS (Left Without Being Seen) A patient classification that encompasses those individuals leaving 
the emergency department before initiation of the medical screening exam.  
LPTC (Left Prior Treatment Was Complete) A patient classification that encompasses those individuals 
leaving the emergency department after the medical screening exam but before the provider documents 
that treatment is complete.  
POLICY: 
1. Any patient presenting for care at Our Lady of the Lake will be offered a medical screening 
exam (MSE) by a provider to determine if they have an emergency medical condition.  (Refer to 
ADM01 Medical Screening Exam) . In addition, if the individual arrives with Law Enforcement 
or becomes under Security / Law Enforcement custody, that individual must be offered an 
appropriate MSE. The MSE must be completed prior to any Law Enforcement disposition / 
removal. 
2. If open treatment room available, the patient may be direct bedded and bypass triage area. A 
triage assessment will be documented by registered nurse in patient’s assigned room.  
3. A brief subjective and objective assessment including vital signs will be performed to  
determine further ESI classification.  
4. A patient requiring immediate lifesaving interventions will be triaged as the highest priority for 
room placement (ESI Level 1) and will be taken directly to the treatment area. Some patients 
bypass formal RN triage to facilitate patient care (i.e., trauma, cardiac arrest, walk-in/clinic care).  2 
5. A patient presenting with a condition which poses a potential threat to life, limb or function 
requiring rapid intervention / care will be triaged as emergent (ESI Level 2).  
6.  ESI LEVEL 3, 4, or 5 will be determined based on predicted resources necessary to diagnose 
and treat patient. An acuity level will be assigned to facilitate priority of patient care. 
7.  At the time of triage, the Registered Nurse assessing the patient should include the following 
information as applicable: 
• Mode of arrival      
• Chief Complaint   
• Pre-hospital care prior to arrival / Mode of arrival  
• Pertinent medical information/Past medical history 
• Vital signs including assessment of pain  
• Primary Assessment  
• Allergies, particularly to drugs/medications 
• Current Medications 
• Immunization status  
• Falls Risk Screening 
• Suicide Risk Screening (Pediatrics age - 8 and above) 
• Travel Exposure 
8. Patients arriving by ambulance are assessed upon arrival by a Registered Nurse who will assign 
an Acuity level using the ESI Triage. Depending upon the severity, the illness/condition will 
determine the urgency of bed placement.  
9. Patients who choose to leave before or after the triage process but never see a provider are 
assigned LWBS status.  LWBS and LPTC patient status are dispositioned in the electronic 
medical record (EMR) as appropriate.  
 
SUBJECTIVE AND OBJECTIVE TRIAGE ASSESSMENT TO INCLUDE: 
 
Full set of vital signs to include temperature, pulse, respiratory rate, blood pressure and pulse oximetry.  
 
A pain assessment / level assigned on each patient, using the appropriate pain scale. 
 
Nurse will utilize the Pediatric Assessment Triangle to assess general appearance, circulation, skin 
turgor, and level of consciousness. (Ages 0 through age 17). 
 
 
Temperature  
• Oral temperatures may be taken on children 3 years and above or when developmentally 
appropriate. 
• Axillary temperature may be utilized when other means or temperature measurement are 
clinically not feasible.  
• Rectal temperatures will be taken on patients 6 months or younger, unless immuno-
compromised, rectal bleeding, recent rectal surgery, or infection to the rectal area. Rectal 
temperatures may be taken as ordered by the provider or at the nurses’ discretion. 
  3 
 
Height & Weight  
 
• Height or length will be obtained on all patients stated height acceptable for adult patients.  
• Head circumference will be obtained only if ordered by physician. 
• An accurate weight in kilograms will be obtained on ED patients.  
• For critically ill or injured child, a length-based resuscitation tape can be used to obtain estimated 
weight.  
• For critically ill or injured adult, an estimated weight may be necessary until patient stabilized 
and resources allow ED to obtain actual weight. 
 
 
 
Triage Nurse: 
The triage nurse is responsible for monitoring all patients awaiting an assigned treatment room. Triage 
responsibilities include: 
• Communicating to the patient/family members the approximate wait time and documenting 
accordingly. 
• Reassessment of patient’s condition to include vital signs every 2-3 hours and more frequent as 
needed. 
• Communicate with the charge nurse regarding any significant changes in patient’s condition. 
 
 
REVIEW OF ESI 5 LEVELS of TRIAGE: 
 
TRIAGE LEVEL 1 – CRITICAL (Resuscitation) 
The patient presents with the need for immediate lifesaving interventions. Patients will be placed 
immediately in a patient care area, and the Physician/Charge nurse notified immediately.  
It is understood that these will be recognized as a Level 1 prior to triage. Examples of Level 1 may 
include but not limited to the following: 
 
Level 
1 
Cardiopulmonary arrest, unresponsiveness, active seizure, required immediate intubation, 
extensive burn injury, precipitous delivery, major multiple trauma, hemodynamically unstable, 
respiratory distress 
 
TRIAGE LEVEL 2 - EMERGENT 
The patient presents with a condition that poses a potential threat to life, limb or function and requires 
rapid medical interventions. Triage may take place at the bedside as this patient is a high risk for 
deterioration. Examples of Level 2 may include but not limited to the following: 
 
Level 
2 
New onset of confusion, disorientation, significant cardiac symptoms, severe pain, 
Psychiatric/Suicidal ideations, pediatric age 1day to 4 months temp greater than 100.4, 
SVT, Chemical exposures, Head trauma with Hx LOC/AMS, overdose, suspected  4 
testicular torsion (testicular pain, swelling) active GI Bleed with abnormal vital signs 
 
TRIAGE LEVEL 3 - URGENT 
These patients present with a condition that could progress to a serious problem requiring emergency 
intervention. The vital signs may or may not be WNL’s. The presenting condition is anticipated to 
require two or more resources. Patients should be seen as soon as possible but should not suffer any 
untoward effect if their care is delayed. Examples of Level 3 may include but  
Not limited to the following: 
 
Level 
3 
Asthma with moderate wheezing, migraine H/A, abdominal pain, gastroenteritis, significant 
laceration, pleuritic type pain, bronchitis, potential fracture of extremity, geriatric age with 
fever greater than 100.4, stable GI Bleed 
 
 
 
TRIAGE LEVEL 4 – NON-URGENT 
The patient presents with a condition that has a low potential for deterioration or complications. The 
presenting condition is anticipated to require one resource. Examples of Level 4 may include but not 
limited to the following:  
 
Level 
4 
Dysuria, simple laceration, mild gastroenteritis, foreign body removal, ear infection, upper 
respiratory infection 
 
TRIAGE LEVEL 5 – MINOR 
 
The patient presents with a condition that may or may not be a chronic problem. The presenting 
condition is anticipated to require no resource utilization. Examples of Level 5 may include 
But not limited to the following: 
 
Level 
5 
Suture removal, generalized rash, pink eye, minor sore throat, re-check, prescription refill, 
minor wounds/abrasion, toothache, STD check. 
 
REFERENCE: 
 
Gilboy N, Tanabe T, Travers D, Rosenau AM. Emergency Severity Index (ESI): A Triage Tool for 
Emergency Department Care, [4]. (2020). Schaumburg, IL: Emergency Nurses Association. Retrieved 
September 14, 2020, from https://www.ena.org/docs/default-source/education-document-library/esi-
implementation-handbook-2020.pdf?sfvrsn=fdc327df_2 
Thomas, D.O. and Bernardo, L.M. (2009). Core Curriculum for Pediatric Emergency Nursing. Sudbury, 
MA: Jones and Bartlett.  5 
Emergency Nurses Association (2012). Provider Manual Emergency Nursing Pediatric Course (4th ed.) . 
Des Plaines, IL: Emergency Nurses Association. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 