 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Srvs. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   
Subject:  Assessment/Reassessment of  Patient in the 
Emergency Department 
Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  March 13, 2012 Supersedes:  
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed: 
January 26, 2024 
January 9, 2025 
Serial Code:  ADM-33 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for assessing, reassessing, planning, and providing care to meet  patient’s needs 
for treatment in the Emergency Department (ED).   
-Pediatric Assessment reference: CH PEDS 02 
-Care and Observation Monitoring of Behavioral Health Patient within the ED (MH-O2)  
POLICY: 
A. An ESI triage assessment, if performed, is completed at the initial RN encounter with the E D 
patient to facilitate ESI triage scoring and appropriate treatment decisions for E D resource 
utilization.   
 
B. Patients will be assessed and reassessed according to patient acuity, chief complaint, and as 
indicated in certain patient conditions to evaluate response to care rendered or assess stability of 
patient condition.  
 
C. Ongoing assessments, including vital signs, are completed based upon the patient’s condition or 
as ordered by physician. Literature supports that frequency of RN assessments and reassessments 
requires consideration of different factors such as patient stability, co -morbidities, vulnerability, 
resiliency, and predictability of disease processes.  
 
D. There is no set standard for the frequency of on-going assessments, the following provides 
guidance. 
 
Level 1 – critical will require an on-going reassessment as patient’s condition warrants.  
(Example:  Cardiac arrest, major trauma, respiratory distress).  These patients should be on a 
cardiac monitor and continuous pulse oximetry with appropriate alarm limits set.  NIBP 
monitoring can be utilized as appropriate. 
  2 
Level 2 – emergent will be reassessed every 30min – 1 hour as patient’s condition warrants.  
(Example:  major burns, acute M.I., active seizure).  As above, these patients should be on a 
cardiac monitor with appropriate alarm limits set.  
 
Level 3 – urgent will require reassessment every 1-2 hours or as patient condition warrants.   
 
Level 4 – non-urgent will require reassessment every 2-3 hours or as patient condition warrants. 
 
Level 5 – minor will require assessment as patient condition warrants. 
E. Emergency Department patients are undressed and placed in a treatment gown to facilitate       
comprehensive assessment as necessary. MBH patients are placed in appropriate clothing   as per 
facility protocol. 
F. Mental Behavioral Health patients are triaged as ESI Level 2 with the exception for assessing 
every 4 hours or as the patient’s condition warrants upon medical clearance.      
 
G. Principles of delegation, supervision, and accountability apply when the RN assigns vital sign 
measurements to unlicensed personnel. Assessments requiring nursing judgment are not 
delegated.   
 
H. In addition to recommended assessments based upon ESI triage assessments, reassessment of   
  
• patients is completed when the following occurs 
• Change in patient’s status 
• Significant change in patient’s vital signs 
• As indicated by the patient’s condition and/or treatment, diagnosis, patient care needs and 
procedures performed  
• Pain reassessment within one hour after administration of oral analgesic, and within 30 
minutes after IV analgesic.  
 
I. The physician is notified of abnormal vital signs or assessment findings of initial and ongoing  
assessments, to include patients with high suicide ideation risk. 
J.   When patient has in patient admission orders, reassessments and vital signs are per MD orders   
and assessment and reassessment time frames.  (see: OrgClin/031) 
 
At time of discharge or transfer,  the chart documentation will include as appropriate: 
• Time of discharge/transfer 
• Updated focused assessment, including lines, drains, airway (IV, vitals, foley, Endotube) 
• Follow-up Instructions as appropriate 
• Follow-up Teaching (Medication instructions, wound care, etc.) 
• Patient's condition 
• Mode of transportation  3 
• Documentation of Handoff for transfer including discharge to another facility 
• Disposition of clothing and valuables-as applicable 
• Provider notification of  abnormal vitals/assessment prior to transfer/discharge and 
documentation to proceed    
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
Sweet, V. (ed.). (2018). Emergency Nursing Core Curriculum, 7th Edition. St Louis, MO: Elsevier 
Sins, E. & Navarro, K. (eds.) (2015) Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support (ACLS) Provider Manual. 
Dallas, TX: American Heart Association 
American Heart Association & American Academy of Pediatrics (2016). Pediatric Advanced Life 
Support Provider Manual. Dallas, TX: American Heart Association 
Emergency Nurses Association (2020) Trauma Nursing Core Course Provider Manual (8th ed). 
Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett 
Emergency Nurse Association (2020). Emergency Nursing Pediatric Course Provider Manual (5th ed). 
Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett 