 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Access Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Physician Group  Chapter:    
Subject:  Dress Code Section:    
Date of Origination:  April 17, 2002 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised:  August 23, 2016, Jan 23, 2018 Serial Code:    
 
PURPOSE:  To present a professional image at all times. 
 
POLICY:  All Access Services Staff will abide by the dress code set forth by the department and the hospital.   
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. Name tags: Hospital issued nametags are to be worn by all employees while on duty.  The entire nametag 
should be visible at all times and should be worn no more than 10 inches below the collar bone.   This is a 
security and identification issue and will be enforced. 
 
2. Uniform for Access Services Employees:  
a. Patient-facing staff:   
• Black pants or skirt.  Scrub pants are not allowed.  
• Black cardigan or blazer.  Fleece jackets, scrub jackets, hoodies, and outwear designed for 
outdoor sportswear are not allowed.  Cardigan/blazer is to be worn at all times when on 
stage. 
• Shirts: 
o Access Service Reps will wear the teal shirts listed below (ordered through the 
company store). **A black camisole must be worn under Polo (L540) at ALL times. 
▪ Female Button Down (L508 Short Sleeve)  
▪ Female Button Down (L608 Long Sleeve) 
▪ Female Button Down (L6290 3/4 Sleeve) 
▪ Female Silk Touch Performance Polo (L540)  
▪ Male Button Down (S 508 Short Sleeve) 
▪ Male Button Down (S 608 Long Sleeve) 
▪ Male Silk Touch Performance Polo (K540) 
o Financial Counselors and Cashiers will wear red shirts. Coordinating scarves are 
optional but must be the same pattern for all. 
o Supervisors (in all patient-facing Access areas) will wear black, white, red  or 
(Maroon - Silk Touch Performance Polo K540/L540) shirts.  Coordinating scarves 
are optional but must be the same pattern for all. 
• Black shoes:  Should complement the uniform and be of standard business attire.  Tennis 
shoes are permitted for ER Admissions staff only and must be completely black on all 
surfaces.  Comfortable walking shoes, e.g. Timberland shoes, may be worn as an alternative 
to tennis shoes in the other Admissions areas. 
 
 b. Non Patient-facing staff:  Business attire as specified in the hospital policy.  NOTE:  Scrub 
pants, scrub jackets, capris, t-shirts, and hoodies are not allowed. 
 
 
 
3. Gum chewing is prohibited during business hours, except during break times. 
  
Refer to the OLOL policy on Employee Dress and Appearance requirements not mentioned above 
 
Ann Marie Montanio  
Approved by 