POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Access Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:   
Subject:  Advance Directives Section:   
Date of Origination:  July 2015 Supersedes:  
Date Last  
  Revised: 
  Reviewed: Jan 2018 
 
 Serial Code:   
     
  
PURPOSE: 
To define Patient Access’ role in Advance Directives. 
Advance Directive:  A document in which a person either states choices for medical treatment or 
designates who should make treatment choices if the person should lose decision-making capacity.  
Living Will:  A type of advance directive which tells health care providers what types of treatment 
the patient does or does not want when end-of-life medical decisions must be made.  
Durable Power of Attorney for Health Care (DPOA):   A type of advance directive in which an 
individual names someone else (an “agent” or “proxy”) to make health care decisions in the event the 
individual becomes unable to make them.  The DPOA may also include instructions about specific 
possible choices to be made. 
POLICY: 
This policy applies to all adult patients (18 years and older) and emancipated minors  (confirmed by legal 
documentation in the medical record.) 
o At time of registration, the Admissions Rep  will give written notice to the patient about advance 
directives containing the following information: 
▪ Information about advance directive is available upon request; and 
▪ Assistance with formulating an advance directive is available upon request. 
o If a patient requests information, the Admissions Rep  will provide the patient a copy of OLOL’s 
advance directive information. 
o The patient should discuss questions about Living Wills, Durable Power of Attorney for Health Care 
or Self-Determination with his/her spiritual advisor, legal counsel and physician.  Team members of 
Pastoral Care, Medical Management and Patient Care Services Administration are available to serve 
as resources.  If a patient requests assistance with formulating an advance directive, the Admissions 
Rep will provide phone number as a reference.  
o If the patient is unable to respond (i.e., confused, unresponsive, etc.), the Admissions Rep  will 
provide the notice to the closest living relative or legal surrogate, if present with the patient.    
o Access will document in registration that the patient has been given a copy of the Adv Dir 
information upon admit.   
 