1 
 
Committee Consultation Process & Procedure 
 
Committee Consultation is provided upon request of the Ethics Case Consultation Team when 
the Team decides not to authorize an ethics recommendation.   Additionally, any party involved 
in a case may request Committee Consultation at any time.  
 
• The Bioethicist notifies the admitting physician, the Nurse Manager, and the Ethics 
Committee Chair of an impending Committee Consultation.  
• The Committee will meet as soon as possible and within 24 hours of the request when 
appropriate. Health care professionals directly involved in the situation, and, as 
appropriate, the patient and his/her surrogate decision-makers(s), will be informed of the 
scheduled meeting and encouraged to attend. 
• Prior to a Committee Consultation, the Bioethicist performs preparatory services that 
include thoroughly identifying and reviewing the medical, ethical, and legal aspects of 
the case, identifying all individuals who are involved in the situation and who may have 
information/insight to share with the Ethics Committee, and identifying and assuring the 
availability of relevant documentation. FMOLHS Legal Services will be consulted if the 
preparatory services identify potential legal issues or uncertainty with regard to legal 
issues that may arise in the context of the Consultation.  
• Committee Consultation requires a quorum of Ethics Committee Members present.  A 
quorum consists of at least three (3) members of the Ethics Committee, and must include 
the Vice President for Patient Care Services/Chief Nurse Executive (or designee), the 
Compliance Officer, and the Chaplain.  The Ethics Committee Chair (or designee), the 
patient’s attending physician (or designee) and Nurse Manager (or designee), the 
Bioethicist, and two other Members of the Ethics Case Consultation Team must also be 
in attendance. FMOLHS Legal Services may also be a mandatory part of the quorum in 
those instances that require legal involvement.1 
• The Ethics Committee Chair (or designee) presides at Committee Consultations.   
• The Chair’s introduces participants and explains the Committee’s role and process. The 
initial portion of the meeting shall consist of a synopsis of the case/situation presented 
and relevant facts concerning the patient’s medical condition by the attending physician 
(or designee). 
• In addition, in the initial portion of the meeting, the Bioethicist will present findings of 
his/her preparatory work, including delineation of specific issues to be addressed during 
the consult. 
• Subsequently, all caregivers directly involved in the situation being discussed and the 
patient and/or surrogate decision-makers who are present will be invited to contribute 
additional information that may further clarify the issues. Non-Committee members may 
be excused for portions of the meeting, as appropriate. 
 
1 FMOLHS Legal Services shall be consulted prior to a Committee Consultation in all situations 
involving the withdrawing or withholding of treatment from a minor, unless the minor is chronically and 
irreversibly comatose or when the provision of such treatment to the minor would merely prolong the act 
of dying or not be effective in ameliorating or correcting all of the minor’s life threatening conditions or 
otherwise be non-beneficial in terms of the survival of the minor. 2 
 
• Then, all caregivers directly involved in the situation being discussed and the patient 
and/or surrogate decision-makers who are present will be invited to contribute additional 
information that may further clarify the issues. Non-Committee members may be excused 
for portions of the meeting, as appropriate. 
• Following the foregoing discussion, each member of the Ethics Committee will have an 
opportunity to ask questions of the people involved in the situation. 
• In appropriate cases, the Ethics Committee may seek consultation from physicians or 
others who are knowledgeable about the patient’s disease or about salient issues in the 
case and who are not involved in the case. 
• Following the above-described discussion, the Ethics Committee Chair (or designee) will 
write a Summary of the facts and issues involved in the case and the consensus reached 
by the Committee (as applicable) on the ethical issues presented.   
• The Bioethicist enters the Summary into the patient’s medical record. Any opinion of the 
Ethics Committee represents a multidisciplinary consensus of thought concerning any 
given ethical question.  It is not a mandate for a particular course of action in delivering 
patient care. 
• Ethics Committee physician members shall not assume roles in the care of the patients 
whose cases come for Committee Consultation following such consultation. In situations 
where there will be a change in attending physician, the Chief Medical Officer will 
arrange such change.  
• In some circumstances, patient involvement is not indicated (e.g., when a consult is 
called to facilitate resolution of a dispute between health care providers). 
Documentation 
 The Bioethicist enters ethics recommendations into patients’ permanent medical records.  
He/she retains copies in the Office of Bioethics.   