   
 
Page 1 of 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Access Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:    
Subject:  Attendance Guidelines Section:    
Date of Origination:  April 17, 2002 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed 
 
Aug 2009; Feb  2015; Apr 2015 , Jan 2018 ; 
Aug 2019; Nov 2022; Dec 2023 
Serial Code:    
Attendance Policy: 
Please refer to FMOLHS Attendance Policy (HR.06.002) 
 
Purpose:  
To establish attendance guidelines for the Access Service Department and to supplement the existing 
OLOL attendance Policy and Procedure.  These guidelines are designed to provide clear instructions for 
employees to follow in planning their time off, and to address si tuations where frequency of absence 
exceeds the standard set forth.  It is understood the legitimate and unavoidable employee absence may 
occur. Frequent unscheduled absences may limit promotion opportunities and result in employment 
termination. 
 
Policy:   
Regular attendance is required of all Access Services employees . Department heads will monitor 
attendance. Supervisors are responsible for monitoring the attendance of each person under their 
supervision.  
 
Sick Time: 
Employees must call in at least 2 hours before scheduled shift, 4 hours in the ER.  A call to the Supervisor 
is required. Email, voice, and text messages are not acceptable. 
 
 Absences: The Management Team may at any time  require written documentation from the 
employee’s physician for absence due to illness . A team member must apply for leave if unable to 
work or incapacitated for more than 3 calendar days. If you are absent more than three working days 
automatically requires such a statement . In cases of prolonged and/or serious illness, an employee 
may be placed on medical leave of absence until certified by the physician for return to work ( See 
Family and Medical Leave Act Policy). Excuses need to be turned in on the day the employee returns 
to work. Failure to turn in an excuse will result in an unexcused absence. 
 
 Physician Excuse : May be requested for any length of absence and at the Management Team’s 
discretion.  
 
 Medical and Preventive Care Appointments: Must be approved in advance by department manager. 
Employees must request these appointments according to the request policy. Failure to request in a 
sufficient period may result in such requests being denied . Appointments are not to be made on 
scheduled work times unless prior arrangements have been made with your department manager. 
 
 
 
 
 Scheduled Surgery: Must be approved by the Leave Administration department.    
 
Page 2 of 1 
 
 Holiday Call-In: If an employee is scheduled to work the day before, the day of, or the day after a 
holiday and they call in sick, it may be considered an unexcused absence and may result in disciplinary 
action.  
 
Unexcused Absences: 
Any illness or absence must be reported by using the hospital guidelines. An unreported or unexcused 
absence will result in disciplinary action.  
 
 Late call-Ins: Are to be considered unexcused absences . (Two-hour advance notification is required 
for non-emergent Admissions areas; four-hour notice is required for ER Admissions.)   
 
 No Call/No Show: Absences will result in immediate disciplinary action.  
 
 Illnesses that occur after arrival to work must be reported to the supervisor or manager.   
 
Scheduling: 
Any requests for time off must be turned into the Management Team via email a minimum two weeks in 
advance, for all areas except ED. For Access Services employees working in the ED, requests must be 
submitted by the 15th day of the month prior to the month in which time off is being requested. Requests 
cannot be submitted more than 3 months in advance.   
 
Note: You must have the PTO Hours for the time you are requesting off.  If you do not have PTO hours, your request 
is subject to denial. 
 