OO-HR-S-001 
Page 1 of 2 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Access Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:    
Subject:  Automated Time Management (ATM) Section:    
Date of Origination:  November 15,2010 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed:     
APRIL 2011; Jan 2018  Serial Code:    
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines for recording of payroll and benefit hours for all 
employees through the Automated Time Management (ATM) System. 
POLICY: 
Every employee must be knowledgeable of and follow the policies and procedures for using the ATM 
system.  Every department director must be knowledgeable of and follow the policies and procedures for 
using the ATM system for maintaining their departmental payroll. 
PROCEDURES 
 
1. Clocking Responsibilities: 
a. Every non-exempt employee is required to "clock" in and out at the beginning and end of each 
workday and at designated 30 minute lunch, using the ATM system.  Clocking in and out will 
be accomplished only through using an authorized computer within the employee’s department 
(or the department to which the employee is floating). 
b. Employees are to clock in at their scheduled shift and only when "ready to work" and to clock 
out at the end of their shift and at designated 30 minute lunch period.  In order to work 
overtime, an employee must obtain prior permission from his/her supervisor, except in cases of 
emergencies. 
c. Department leaders will determine if employees or designated individuals within the 
department will enter applicable non-clocked transactions (e.g., Extended Illness Time (EIT), 
jury duty). 
2. Security:  No One May Clock Someone Else’s Time: 
a. Every non-exempt employee must use the ATM system to record only his or her own time 
worked.  An employee may not clock time for someone else.  Non-clocked transactions will 
only be entered by the employee or individuals designated by the department director.   
b. Violation of this policy will result in disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
3. Responsibility For Accuracy and Completeness of Timekeeping Information: OO-HR-S-001 
Page 2 of 2 
a. Every employee is responsible for the accuracy of all information recorded through the ATM 
system.  Employees are expected to cooperate with their supervisors by submitting corrections 
in a timely manner.  Department directors must approve the time reported by their employees.  
This includes resolving discrepancies between clocking records and actual time worked, 
reviewing the corrections made by staff sent by email to supervisor. ensuring that corrections 
are input into the system in a timely manner.   
b. Managers changing time records without documentation of correction from their employees 
will be subject to disciplinary action.  Each level of management is to monitor subordinates’ 
actions to ensure ATM procedures are followed.   
4. Delegating Time-Keeping Functions: 
a. Department directors may delegate time-keeping management functions to others in their 
department, however, they retain ultimate responsibility for the accuracy of their employees' 
payroll.  These alternates must be assigned their own passwords on the system. 
b. Passwords may not be used by anyone other than for whom they are assigned. 
5. Correction of Timekeeping Errors From Prior Pay Periods: 
a. Employees are expected to resolve discrepancies with their supervisors.  Submission of prior 
period corrections to payroll requires written department director approval.  This department 
director responsibility cannot be delegated.   
b. Non-recorded time will be paid on the next biweekly check.  Exceptions will be made with 
administrative approval only. 
6. Failure to Clock In or Out: 
a. Non-exempt employees are required to properly record their time worked by using the ATM 
system to clock in and clock out.  Repeated failure to clock in or out will not be tolerated and 
will result in progressive disciplinary action.  
b. Supervisors are responsible for monitoring their employees' use of the ATM system and taking 
appropriate disciplinary action when necessary.  In general, more than ten failures to clock in 
or out by any employee during a three-month period shall be considered cause for initiating 
disciplinary action. 
7. Employees Working Overtime Without Prior Approval: 
a. Non-exempt employees are required to obtain approval from their immediate supervisor or 
Department Head before working any overtime.  The only exception to this is in case of 
emergency, when the supervisor or manager is not available.  The supervisor/manager should 
be informed of the situation as soon as possible.   
b. All departmental overtime must be approved by the Supervisor as the department need arise 
 
Employee Signature      Date 