 Policy Reference Number BAG - 014 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health Section: Administration 
Title: Attendance and Scheduling Policy Reference #: BAG - 014 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: May 12, 2020 Last Date Reviewed: May 20, 2024 
Last Date Revised:  
 
PURPOSE: 
 
This policy outlines and clarifies the Mental and Behavioral Health Division’s (MBH) process for 
attendance and scheduling of staff.   
 
DEFINITIONS: 
A. Support Departments – COPE department, social services, activity therapy, case management, 
and administrative services. 
B. Scheduled Absence-team member requests off after the schedule has been completed and the 
request is granted. (Time Code-ABE). 
C. Unscheduled Absence-team member calls-in for a scheduled shift (Time Code-ABN) 
D. Tardiness-a team member clocks in more than 5 minutes after their scheduled start time. A team 
member is also tardy if they return more than 5 minutes late from a break or meal.  
E. No Call/No Show-team member accrues a No Call/No Show Absence if the team member fails 
to notify the unit leader in accordance with the Reporting Procedure outlined in this policy. No 
Call/No Show will result in disciplinary action.  
F. Unauthorized Early Exit-occurs when a team member leaves the worksite without leader 
authorization more than 2 hours prior to the end of a scheduled shift. Unauthorized Early Exit 
will result in disciplinary action.  
G. Job Abandonment-team member is considered to have permanently abandoned their 
employment when they have 2 consecutive No Call/No Show absences, or if the team member 
leaves their duty station without authorization prior to the end of a scheduled shift with the intent 
to permanently abandon their employment.  
 
POLICY: 
 
It is the policy of the MBH Division to ensure adequate staffing in accordance with the policies of Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) and Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady 
Health System (FMOLHS) in order to provide safe and quality care to our patients. Clinical coverage by 
staff provides for patient care, contributes to employee satisfaction, and allocates staff effectively. 
Schedules reflect the categories and numbers of employees as defined in the unit’s staffing matrix.  
 
 
 
 
  Policy Reference Number BAG - 014 
Page 2 of 4 
PROCEDURES: 
 
1. The Master Staffing Matrices for the MBH Division are reviewed annually and adjusted as 
necessary.  Matrices are based on historical data. 
2. The work schedule for all types of MBH personnel are based upon the Master Staffing Matrices. 
3. A Charge Nurse is scheduled by the Nursing Director or designee.  
4. The Nursing Director is responsible for the scheduling of nurses, mental health technicians 
(MHTs), and customer service representatives (CSRs). The Support Departments are 
responsible for scheduling staff sufficient for their daily required tasks.  
5. The scheduling of overtime is discouraged; however, this is a consideration for providing clinical 
coverage for patient care as the needs of the unit and availability of other resources dictate. 
Overtime must be authorized by the Nursing Director or designee.  
6. An employee is not allowed to be scheduled more than 16 consecutive hours on duty in a 24-
hour period and no more than 60 hours scheduled per week. This may vary during times of 
disaster staffing when activation and recovery teams have been implemented.  
7. Changes in the electronic schedule must be requested in writing or electronically through the 
scheduling software system by the employee and approved by the Nursing Director or designee. 
Changes should not result in overtime.  
8. Any changes to the Daily Staffing sheet should be done by the Nursing Director or the designee 
(supervisor or charge nurse). Changes include call-ins, no call no shows, floats, and cancels. 
a. If a team member signs up for an open shift in the staffing book, they are responsible for 
working that shift and cannot mark themselves off of the staffing sheet. Only the Director 
or Charge Nurse can make the determination regarding whether the team member will be 
cancelled or floated to another unit based upon regular staffing needs of the division.  
9. Employees who are sick are required to call-in to the unit 3 hours prior to the scheduled shift 
each and every day they will miss a scheduled shift   
a. Nurses, MHTs, and CSRs are required to call the unit and speak to the Charge Nurse (or 
another qualified Registered Nurse if the Charge Nurse is not available) when calling in.  
b. Support personnel are required to call their director or designee.  
c. If the employee does not give 3 hours’ notice, the call in will be an additional occurrence.  
d. If incentive pay has been approved for a shift and the team member calls-in on a shift in 
the same week, the incentive pay will be forfeited.  
e. Refer to HR.06.002 Attendance Policy for the Occurrence System Process and 
Disciplinary Guidelines.  
 
Occurrence Guide. A team member accrues Occurrences as follows: 
 
Occurrence Guide 
 
Action Occurrence Count 
 
Scheduled Absence A Scheduled Absence does not 
count as an Occurrence 
 
Three (3) instances of Tardiness One Occurrence 
  Policy Reference Number BAG - 014 
Page 3 of 4 
Unscheduled Absence, up to three consecutive 
days 
One Occurrence 
 
Each consecutive day of Unscheduled 
Absence following three consecutive days 
One Occurrence 
 
Each day of No Call/No Show Absence One Occurrence 
 
Each Unauthorized Early Exit or Lte Call in 
after the 3 hour time frame 
One Occurrence 
 
 
 
10. Employees who call in on a scheduled weekend shift will be scheduled to work the next 
weekend based on the need of the division and at the discretion of the Nursing Director or 
designee.  
a. A call in on a make-up weekend will result an automatic progressive counselling action.  
11. Team members may be floated to other units within the division based upon their skill set and 
clinical charting availability. 
12. In the event staff must be cancelled or called-off, team members in overtime will be called-off 
first, PRN staff second. Part-time staff third, and full-time staff last.  
a. If a team member volunteers to be cancelled/called-off, this may be granted if there is no 
other team member in overtime.  
b. A list of cancelled/called-off team members should be maintained for each to ensure a 
fair rotation when calling off staff.  
13. MBH staff must work 2 major and 2 minor holidays. Vacation requests or scheduled PTO during 
the week of a major holiday will be considered only after careful review of staffing coverage 
versus staffing matrix. Vacations/PTO may not be approved if there is less than adequate unit 
coverage creating an inability to provide safe and quality patient care. Holiday schedules are 
subject to change as directed by the Nursing Director or designee in order to maintain safe and 
adequate staffing levels to ensure quality patient care. Calling in on scheduled holiday will result 
in counselling and being scheduled for the next equal holiday that the team member is not 
scheduled to work.  
a. Major Holidays: Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year’s Day 
b. Minor Holidays: Good Friday, July 4th-Independence Day, and Labor Day 
14. Scheduling and work assignments are coordinated by the Nursing Director or designee. Team 
members may self-schedule however schedules may be changed at the discretion of the Nursing 
Director or designee to ensure coverage of all shifts.  
a. Weekend shifts are defined as Friday, Saturday, and Sunday. 
b. Only 12-hour shifts may be scheduled for nurses and MHTs. 
c. Fulltime team members are required to work 6 weekend shifts per 6-week period. Part-
time team members are required to work 3 weekend shifts per 6-week period. PRN team 
members are required to work 2 weekend shifts per 6-week period.  
d. Vacation requests must be made in writing or using the electronic scheduling system. 
i. Vacation requests will be considered based upon the needs of the unit and first 
come first honored.  
ii. Any vacation request that does not have PTO to cover the request will not be 
approved.   Policy Reference Number BAG - 014 
Page 4 of 4 
15. All team members should report to their designated work area on time and in the appropriate 
uniform or business attire in accordance with NNA-017 Dress Code policy. Failure to report to 
the designated work area within 5 minutes of the scheduled shift will result in a tardy. In addition 
to the OLOLRMC Dress Code policy, the following is applicable: 
a. Clinical team members (Nurses and MHTs) may wear khaki pants and a solid color polo-
style shirt. 
b. Excessive and/or large pieces of jewelry may not be worn. This includes large or hoop 
earrings, multiple rings, large or heavy necklaces or multiple necklaces, and noisy 
bracelets. Team members should not wear their badge on a lanyard. 
c. Fingernails should be no more than ¼ inch long. Artificial nails are not permitted. 
d. Team members shall report to work with clean, well-groomed hair, which is styled in a 
manner that is not a safety hazard and does not interfere with the work being performed. 
Hair accessories may be worn provided they are not a distraction and do not interfere 
with the work being performed. Hair color shall be a color that naturally occurs in 
humans.  
16. All team members in the support departments should refer directly to their team process 
regarding scheduling. 
17. All employees are responsible for providing a current phone number and address to their 
Department Leader upon employment and whenever the information changes. 
a. The team member phone number lists are located in Teams “MBH Nursing Page” 
group>files>Nurse.tech.phone list.  
18. In May of each year, each MBH Department should submit their Disaster Staffing Team Roster 
to the MBH Disaster Lead.  
a. The roster will be kept on the t-drive and submitted to Patient Care Services.  
b. Team Members in Core Departments will be assigned to either the Activation Team or 
Recovery Team.  
c. Team Members who do not respond as assigned may be subject to disciplinary action up 
to and including termination. 
 
REFERENCES AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
A. NNA-044 (Scheduling of Personnel) (OLOLRMC) 
B. Attendance HR.06.002 (FMOLHS) 
C. Family and Medical Leave of Absence (OrgOps/HR/P/007) (OLOLRMC) 
D. NNA-017 Dress Code Policy (OLOLRMC) 
E. ECEP014 Disaster Team Staffing (OLOLRMC) 
F. HR.06.004 Dress and Personal Appearance  
 
 
 