 
 
 
1 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center          
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health  
Title:  QRN Training for Seclusion/Restraints Section: Patient Care  
Date of Origination:     May 11, 2018 
 
Policy Reference #: BPC 017 
  
Last Revised Date: January 2020 Supersedes #:     BAG 013 
  Last Reviewed Date: May 20, 2024 
  
POLICY:        
 
The Qualified Registered Nurses (QRNs) provide timely and quality review of patients in seclusion/restraint and 
effective guidance to staff.  There is special training provided to the staff designated as Qualified Registered 
Nurses (QRNs) by the NM/Medical Director or his/her designee. The designated QRNs can provide the One Hour 
Face to Face Medical and Behavioral Evaluation only after they have completed the training and demonstrated 
competency. 
 
Definitions: 
Qualified Registered Nurses (QRNs): Registered Nurses who are identified by the Director Nursing as qualified to 
perform the One Hour Face to Face Medical and Behavioral Evaluation due to their experience, leadership 
qualities and successful completion of specific training for this role. 
 
Equipment: 
A. The Learning Module – 1-Hour Face to Face Evaluation of Restraint and Seclusion by a Qualified 
Registered Nurse (QRN) and Post Test. 
B. Validation Competency Form – 1-Hour Face to Face Evaluation of Restraint and Seclusion by a Qualified 
Registered Nurse (QRN).  
C. The learning module will be assigned through the computer-based learning system to each nurse yearly 
during their Crisis Prevention Intervention (CPI) and restraints training renewals.  
 
SCOPE: 
Qualified Registered Nurses, Psychiatrists, Medical Director 
 
ACTION STEPS: 
1. The QRNs are trained by approved Computer Based Learning Module approved by the Medical Director.   
2. The QRN training includes the following: 
a. Recognizing how specific patient factors such as age, developmental considerations, ethnicity and 
history of abuse may impact the way in which a patient reacts to physical contact. 
b. Using behavioral criteria for discontinuation of seclusion/restraints and how to help patients in 
meeting these criteria. 
c. Evaluation of patient’s immediate situation, reaction to the intervention, and need to continue or 
terminate the seclusion or restraint. 
d. Key components of the physical assessment of patients, including skim integrity, 
respiratory/circulatory status, nutrition/hydration, pain, pulses for restraint extremities and  
 
 
2 
review of medications and lab results that may contribute to a patient’s violent or self-destructive 
behaviors. 
e. Mental status examination for patients in seclusion/restraints/restraints. 
f. Proper documentation on the One Hour Medical and Behavioral Evaluation in the EMR.  
g. Demonstration of competency by performing the One Hour Assessment and completing the One 
Hour Medical and Behavioral Evaluation Exam. 
3. All training for the QRN role is documented, including the dates of CBL demonstration of competency, 
and post-test.  The QRN is required to have annual refresher review for the One Hour Face to face 
Evaluation.  In addition, ongoing feedback regarding any documentation and/or incident concerns is 
reviewed with the QRN by the NM/Medical Director/Designee on a timely basis as part of Performance 
Improvement review. 
4. The QRNs evaluation indicates whether changes in the patient’s care are required and, if so, ensures that 
these changes are made. 
5. The QRN needs to meet the seclusion/restraint training requirements for all clinical staff in addition to the 
specialized training for the One Hour Face to Face Medical and Behavioral Evaluation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCE:   
 
Hospital Accreditation Standards, Joint Commission Resources. Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare 
Organizations, 2017. 
 
Department of Health & Human Services, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) Restraint/Seclusion 
Interpretative Guidelines & Updated State Operations Manual (SOM), Appendix A, 2008. 