 
 
1 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center                       
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title: Van Usage: Transporting or 
Transferring Patients & 
Transportation Emergencies 
Section: Administrative - 
General 
Date of 
Origination:        
February 1991 Policy Reference #: BAG 0007 
Last Revised 
Date: 
November 2019 Supersedes #: B/A/G/024  
B/P/G/024 
  Last Review Date: May 20, 2024 
 
  
POLICY: 
Van usage will be limited to patient transportation needs, unless approval has been obtained for other hospital-
related needs. All transportation emergencies will follow Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
procedures for patient and staff safety and notification of proper authorities. 
PROCEDURE: 
1. The transporter picks up the key and phone upon arrival. The transporter is responsible for the key and 
phone while on duty.  
2. All patients being transported should be identified using at least 2 identifiers. Transporters will utilize 
admission paperwork (ie: PEC, CEC, Facesheet) or the “Ticket to Ride” to determine who is to be 
transported. The patient’s identity will then be verified by looking at the armband and asking the patient 
their name and date of birth. 
3. In the event of a transfer, the patient’s chart and his/her belongings must be transferred with the patient or 
as soon as possible.  
4. Two (2) BLS and CPI certified staff members will accompany a patient utilizing a wheelchair. One staff 
member will remain hands-free.  
5. When arriving at the Tau Center, an effort should be made to notify Tau Center Security prior to exiting 
the van with a patient. If Security is not available, a third escort may be obtained from Administration or 
an inpatient unit.    
6. Patient(s), as well as all other passengers, should be secured in the van with proper seat belts fastened 
before departure. 
For Vehicle Accidents or Injuries: 
1. Check all passengers. 
2. Call 911 (EMS)  
3. The vehicle should be stopped in place and the employee should remain at the scene until law 
enforcement arrives. 
4. Notify the appropriate patient unit(s) and communicate the status of patients, staff, van, and the van's 
location. 
5. Consideration should be given to returning patients to their unit(s) as soon as possible. Other 
transportation, i.e., taxi, should be considered, with unit staff in accompaniment.  
 
2 
6. The following individuals shall be notified: 
 A. The Nursing Director(s) or designee of the unit(s), who is responsible for notifying: 
  i. The physician will be notified of the accident and appropriate notification will be made to 
individuals with consent. 
  ii. The unit’s leader/director. 
 B. The unit’s leader will then notify: 
  i. Medical Director 
  ii. Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) House Manager  
  iii. Risk Management 
  iv.         Administrator on call for Mental and Behavioral Health Division (MBH) 
 
7. Should any of the patients require transportation to a hospital, a staff member will accompany the patient 
and remain unless the patient is discharged and admitted to another service. 
8. Documentation of the occurrences shall be entered into the medical record(s)  
9.  A Safety Event Report is completed by the driver.  
 
For Patient Elopement from the Van: 
 
1. The driver is to notify the patient’s assigned unit and communicate circumstances of the situation 
including location of the occurrence. 
2. The following individuals are notified: 
 a.          The unit notifies law enforcement, the physician or on-call physician and the patient’s family. 
   
 b. The Nursing Director or designee of the unit is responsible for notifying: 
  i. The administrator on call for MBH 
  ii. OLOL House Manager, who will notify AOC 
   
 c.. The administrator on call will notify:   
  i.          MBH Senior Director of Nursing 
                          ii.         Medical Director   
                          iii.        Risk Management   
                          iv.        Regulatory Management 
3. Documentation of the occurrences shall be entered into the medical record(s). The patient is to remain in            
the electronic medical record system for 4 hours. 
4. A Safety Event Report is completed by the driver.  
5. Refer to the Organizational Policy on Elopement.  
 
Requirements for Drivers: 
1. Drivers must be at least 21 years old and must have a valid standard or chauffeur license to drive hospital 
vehicles specific to Mental & Behavioral Health. 
2. Drivers are required to view a driver safety video as part of their training. 
3. Drivers must be on the approved list to be included on the hospital insurance policy. 
4.  Refer to Hospital Vehicle Fleet Policy GN023. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCE:  OLOL: OrgOps/GN/023 – Hospital Vehicle (Fleet)  
   OLOL: ECSE/007 – Code White Security Emergency   
   OLOL: OC/047 – Elopement 
   OLOL OrgClin/018 Patient Identification/Alert Bands 
   NPSG 01.01.01 Improve the accuracy of the identification of individuals served.  