 
 
 
1 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center          
Policy Manual:  Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title:  Employee Conduct Section: Administrative - General 
Date of 
Origination: 
July 1997 Policy 
Reference # 
BAG001 
Last Revised 
Date: 
July 2018 Supersedes #: B/A/G/028 
 Last Review 
Date: 
May 20, 2024 
  
POLICY:     
Employees are expected to maintain ethical, professional relationships with patients and are strictly prohibited 
from engaging in personal relationships with patients. Violation of the policy may result in disciplinary action 
including termination. 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. Employees are expected to maintain professional relationships with patients within the boundaries of the 
treatment program. 
2. Employees may not participate in the personal life of any individual who is an inpatient, outpatient, or 
former patient for a minimum of one (1) year post discharge from treatment. 
 a. Employees who have a personal connection with someone prior to the patient becoming a patient 
on our inpatient unit’s should be flexed or swapped to another unit.  This relationship could include 
family, friends, and/or someone they know from church or an organized club or their community.  In 
certain cases, the patient may be consulted regarding the staff member remaining on the unit, but under no 
circumstances will a staff member be a care provider for the patient in question. 
3. Employees cannot buy or bring items from home for a patient unless approved by the treatment team. 
4. Employees may not release personal phone numbers or social media contacts to patients. 
 a. Should a patient obtain an employees’ home, cell phone number, or social media, the employee is 
to clearly state it is inappropriate for the patient to contact a staff member at employee’s home or by cell 
phone. 
5. Employees who have a personal (information such as phone number, address, email address, etc.) or 
professional relationship with an individual prior to that individual becoming a patient, are to contact their 
supervisor immediately so that a determination can be made as to the most therapeutic approach to be 
taken. 
 a. The staff member may visit the individual during scheduled visiting hours as a visitor, following 
all established visiting guidelines. 
6. Employees are to follow hospital policy declining any gifts other than nominal gestures of thanks or 
appreciation from patients. The employee is to report any such gesture to his/her supervisor. 
7. Employees are expected to consult with their supervisor should they have any questions regarding the 
course of action they should follow to maintain professional boundaries with patients, staff, or visitors. 
REFERENCE: 
  Org/Ops/ET-002:  Conflict of Interest  Org/Ops/ET-004: Ethics and Professional Conduct  