POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL

Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Manual: Business Office
Chapter:

Subject: Identifying & Refunding Medicare Credit Balances
Section:

Date of Origination: December 2004 Supersedes:

Approved: _

PURPOSE:

Date of Last Revision: June 10, 2016 Serial Code: BO-C24

Establish steps to identify Medicare Credits and refund any over payments to the Fiscal
Intermediary, third party payer or patient timely.

POLICY:

OLOL will report to our Fiscal Intermediary all refunds due to the Medicare program each quarter.
OLOL will report the Medicare overpayments in the format and timelines outlined in Section 484
of the Hospital Manual.

PROCEDURE:

a,

Run the Nomad Report, (BUS017-PACRBAL), which reports all credit balance
accounts. Review accounts that have Medicare as a payer, but have not already
been identified as a patient credit (PC), insurance credit (CB), Medicare credit
(CR), Medicaid Credit (WC), or blood credit (BC).

Benefits may be verified by using Medicare’s secondaty payor questionnaire. The
patient or responsible party may be contacted, but if not available or deceased, we
may verify Medicare benefits using information in Medicare’s Common Working
File and/or the other Insurance or Payor may be contacted. All EOB’s and
remittances will be reviewed.

Ifit has been determined, that Medicare should not have paid on this claim or should
have paid as secondary payer, the account shall be identified as a Medicare Credit
(CR) and the amount shall be returned to Medicare.

If possible, the claim adjustment or void should be completed electronically.

If it is not possible to do a claim adjustment or void the claim, a memo should be
placed on the account using the canned message “QF” reporting on the CMS 838.
Change the account’s collections status to the assigned HCFA 838 status.

At the end of the quarter, list all Credit Balances identified by the HCFA 838 status
on the Medicare Credit Balance Report, by payer type. Complete each column and
attach all documentation needed.

Once the 838 is completed by the Refund Supervisor, the attached cover memo will
be attached to the 838 and forwarded to the PFS Manager and PFS Director for
review. After the review is completed the PFS Manager and PF'S Director will sign


the cover memo indicating their review and forward the cover memo and the 838
to the CFO or other approved Administrator for signature.

The Refund Supervisor shall make copies of all documentation and will maintain a
copy in the quarterly credit balance folder.

The CMS 838 report is to be faxed or sent via FedEx prior to the Medicare’s due
date.

. The credit report worked and the CMS 838 submitted to Medicare is to be saved on
the T drive under Data/Business office reports/Medicare credit balance reports.
Save the report name by quarter and year.

If the adjustment was completed electronically, the account should be reviewed
within 21 days to make sure the adjustment was completed successfully. If the
adjustment had to be mailed in hardcopy, the account should be reviewed 30 to 45
days from mail date, to verify that the adjustment was completed successfully.

. Credit amounts unresolved 60 days from the date submitted to Medicare should be
reported to the Business Office Manager for review.


Supervisor/Manager
Medicare Credit Balance Report Cover Memo

INTERNAL MEDICARE CREDIT BALANCE COVER MEMO
The Medicare Credit Balance Report is required under the authority of Sections 1815(a), 1833(e),
1886(a)(1)(C) and related provisions of the Social Security Act. Failure to submit this report may result in a
suspension of payments under the Medicare program and may affect your eligibility to participate in the Medicare
program.
CERTIFICATION BY SUPERVISOR AND MANAGER OF PROVIDER (S)
I HEREBY CERTIFY that I have read the above statements and that I have examined the accompanying credit
balance report prepared for

Provider Name Provider 6-Digit Number

for the calendar quarter ended and that it is a true, correct, and complete statement prepared from the
books and records of the provider in accordance with applicable Federal laws, regulations and instructions.

(Sign)

Supervisor
(Print)

Name and Title
(Print)

Date
(Sign)

Manager
(Print)

Name and Title
(Print)

Date


