OLOL Bankruptcies Policy and Procedure 
 Page 1 of 2 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center  Manual: Business Office 
 Chapter:  
Subject:  Bankruptcies Section:  
Date of Origination:  November 11, 2003 Supersedes:   
Date of Last Revision:  January 27, 2016 Serial Code: BO.P43 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
To ensure all bankruptcy  accounts are submitted to our attorn ey from the hospital  in a timely manner.    
Bankruptcies in the Business Office are time sensitive and all filing deadline must be met. 
 
POLICY: 
 
Upon receipt of bankruptcy notification, Our Lady of the Lake ( OLOL) will cease all in -hospital collection 
activity and forward the account(s) to our  OLOL attorney.  Our attorney will be responsible for taking the 
necessary steps to ensure OLOL account(s) are worked in accordance with all State and Federal guidelines. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. Click on the system Health Quest (Rumba) and do the following; 
• At the bottom of the function selection screen type Ins…$  PAV A   Entity…G1. 
• Go to function select and type GUAR.., this will take you to the CPI search 
• On the CPI search, put in the social security number for each debtor, go to account summary and print 
each screen.  Do for each debtor.   
• Within 5 day of the account you are working check the statement date (memo/change collection data). 
2. Return to AA, side check each account listed on printouts. 
3. If the date of service is three (3) years  old or more the account is uncollectable, memo account – “pt. (or 
pt. Guarantor) filed chapter ___ bankruptcy on 0/0/00.   
4. However, should the date of service come AFTER the bankruptcy filing date.  The account CANNOT be 
included in the bankruptcy and should be handled through the hospital in-house collection process. 
5.    All bankruptcy accounts that are at early out and collection agencies must be recalled and put to C9.   
6. Use BB at Memo Code on patient’s account to enter information.  Example: 
Bankruptcy filed: 
XChapter 7, case # 00-00000 filed 0/0/00 
_Chapter 11  
_Chapter 13 
7.   If account had to be recalled, memo the account – recall __ – w/o to __ (C9/AL) or forward the account  
to__ (C9/AL) and change the collection status to C9.   
8. When the account is in Out for Collections (OFC), use a Yellow Recall Form, fill out and give to customer 
service to key for the day.  Upon receipt of the yellow Recall Form is returned, accounts pulled back are 
checked to make sure they are indeed in active A/R status. 
 
 
 
 OLOL Bankruptcies Policy and Procedure 
 Page 2 of 2 
9. Pending insurance payment for less than six (6) months , go to  the memo  type,”insurance is pending 
payment, and the accounts is not turned over to the OLOLRMC’s attorney. ”  Place account status on Al 
and put the collection status to C9 once insurance has paid.  Customer service will c hange the guarantor 
address so statements are not sent to the patient. The address will be the following; 
 
CS BO MRG,  
5000 Hennessy Blvd, 
Baton Rouge, LA 70808 
 
It should only take 2 days for t he process of removal of an account out of OFC , then back to active A/R 
then back to AL or CP .   The process should not pull back dollars to active A/R over a weekend or at 
month-end. 
 
10. If filing date has expired, send a “BB” memo. Go to memo and type,“ filing date has elapsed, cannot be 
filed.”  Forwarding to “C9”.  Change collection status to C9 but do not recall if from the agency.  Also 
make a copy, highlight the deadline date and write…”Not Filed – Uncollectable and “on the bottom put 
FYI Please do not file!!!” 
11. All other correspondence should be placed in bankruptcy files.  If it is a closing notice, transfer all 
correspondence from open files to closed files.   
 
  Letters for requests not going to the OLOLRMC Attorney are kept within the Business Office for 6 months. 
 
Bankruptcies from companies go to Accounts Payable in Accounting. 