1 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center                   
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title: Assessment Process Section: Patient Care 
Date of 
Origination:        
June 1985 Policy 
Reference #: 
BPC 003 
Last Revised 
Date: 
April 2020 Supersedes #: B/T/R/002 
  Review Date: April 2024 
  
POLICY: 
The interdisciplinary treatment team will adhere to Organizational Policy: Patient Assessment/Reassessment and 
include additional assessment components specific to mental health and/or substance abuse patients. 
PROCEDURE: 
1. A physician will conduct a comprehensive physical examination within twenty-four (24) hours of 
admission to an inpatient unit or partial hospitalization program.  
 The Medical History incorporates: 
• Chief complaint 
• Details of present illness 
• Review of systems 
• Medical History 
• Functioning of each cranial nerve 
2. A comprehensive nursing assessment is completed within 24 (twenty-four) hours of admission to an 
inpatient unit. The Nursing Assessment shall include at least the following information. 
• Health history and physical assessment including current treatment, habits involving sleeping, 
eating, hygiene, elimination, fall risk and medication history including medications patient has 
taken, nature of response and known side effects. 
• Psychosocial assessment 
• Behavioral-emotional assessment including risk for suicide. 
• Emotional and physical strengths 
• The patient’s ability to self administer medications 
• Seclusion / Restraint Risk Assessment 
• Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS) 
• AUDIT – C 
• OASIS 
• Medication Reconciliation 
• Tobacco Screening 
 
3. All patients are seen by a psychiatrist within twenty-four (24) hours of admission. A preliminary plan of 
care is completed, and a Psychiatric Assessment is documented within twenty-four hours of admission. 
When it is impossible to obtain the information necessary to complete the assessment, an interval note is 
completed, including reasons for the type of admission, the patient’s symptoms, the Mental Status 
Examination and any other information deemed necessary at the time. A complete Psychiatric Assessment 2 
 
is provided within sixty (60) hours admission. 
  
 The Psychiatric Assessment shall at least include the following components and culminate in a diagnosis 
from the current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, which specifies all five Axes of classification: 
• A notation of the onset of illness, the circumstances leading to admission, attitudes and behavior 
• An inventory of the patient’s assets in descriptive, not interpretive, fashion 
• A summary of present medical findings, which includes an appropriate neurological assessment. 
• The patient’s medical history, including response to somatic treatments in the past, i.e., ECT or 
psychosurgery.  
• A mental status examination and results 
• A statement as to whether the patient presents with mental retardation. 
• The patient’s memory, mental, intellectual and physical functional capacity and orientation 
• An assessment of signs and symptoms, Extra Pyramidal Symptoms (EPS) utilizing AIMS results 
• The patient’s prognosis 
4. A psychosocial history is obtained from the patient and/or family within 72 hours of admission to 
inpatient units or prior to discharge if stay is less than 72 hours on the inpatient unit. The Counselor or 
Social Worker completes the assessment utilizing information from the multidisciplinary team members, 
patient and the family members when possible. 
 A psychosocial history/assessment must be completed on all patients. Three key components are to be 
addressed: 
A. Factual and Historical Information 
1. Specific reasons for the patient’s admission or readmission 
2. A description of the patient’s past and present biopsychosocial functioning 
3. Family and marital history, dynamics, and patient’s relationships with family and significant 
others 
4. Pertinent religious and cultural factors 
5. History of physical, sexual, and emotional abuse 
6. Significant aspects of psychiatric, medical and substance abuse history and treatment as presented 
by family members and significant others. 
7. Education, vocational training, employment, and military service 
8. Identification of community resources including previously used treatment sources 
9. Identification of present environmental and financial needs 
B. Social Evaluation 
1. Patient strengths and deficits (weaknesses) 
2. High risk psychosocial issues requiring early treatment planning and intervention; unattended 
children in the home, prior noncompliance to specific treatment and/or discharge interventions, 
and potential obstacles to present treatment and discharge planning. 
C. Conclusions and Recommendations -Assessment of Sections A and B shall result in the development 
of C recommendations related to the following areas: 
1. Anticipated necessary steps for discharge to occur. 3 
 
2. High risk patient and\or family psychosocial issues requiring early treatment planning and 
immediate intervention regardless of the patient’s length of stay. 
3. Specific community resources/support systems for utilization at discharge, ie: housing, living 
arrangements, financial aid, and aftercare treatment sources. 
4. Anticipated social work role(s) in treatment and discharge planning. 
 
 
5. An activity therapy assessment is completed for all inpatients within 72 hours of admission. Sources of 
information used by the activity therapist are direct observation of the patient, the A.T. questionnaire 
completed by the patient, interview and/or team input. Information is incorporated into the patient’s plan 
of care.  
 
6. Other evaluations will be conducted based on the patient’s assessed need. As appropriate, these may 
include but are not limited to: 
 
• Nutritional Assessment 
• Vocational or Education Assessment  
• Other functional evaluation of communication, self-care and visual-motor functioning 
• Psychological assessments, including intellectual, projective, neuropsychological and personality 
testing. 
 
REFERENCE:    
 
Policy#: OrgClin/031 – Patient Assessment/Reassessment Policy 
Medical-Dental Staff Rules and Regulations  
DHH Standards for Payment, 1994: Assessments (b), (c), (d) 
Joint Commission Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals,  2019: PC.01.02.01 EP’s   1,2,3; PC.01.02.03 EP’s 
1,3, 4, 5, 6 PC.01.02.05 EP 1; PC.01.02.07 EP’s 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8; PC.01.02.08 EP’s 1, 2; PC.01.02.09 EP’s 1, 2, 3, 6, 7; 
PC.01.02.11 EP’s 1, 4, 5, 6; PC.01.02.13 EP’s 1 thru 6 
Policy#: OrgClin-027 – Suspected Abuse or Neglect, Reporting of Child/Adult Policy 
State Interpretive Guidelines-revised 02/21/2020 