 
 
 
1 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center               
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title: Special Precautions Section: Patient Care  
Date of 
Origination:        
April 2015 
 
Policy Reference #: BPC 011 
Date Revised 
Last: 
October 19, 2022 Supersedes #:  
  Last Review Date:     June 27, 2024 
 POLICY: 
Special precaution procedures can be initiated by physician or nursing staff when a patient is considered to be at 
imminent risk for harm to self, others or property, or for those who need an increased level of observation and/or 
precautions for other specified reasons. Clinical staff should assess the patient’s risk utilizing the evidence-based 
tool, the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (CSSRS) and initiate the following procedures to help protect 
the patient and others.  
PURPOSE: 
To provide information that is based on best practice and/or clinical evidence to guide the use of special 
precautions that is cost-effective and justifiable for patient care and minimizes the infringement on patient rights.  
To define and support appropriate use of special precautions in Mental and Behavior Health inpatient settings. 
To ensure that a decision-making process is used which includes, ongoing assessment of patient need for special 
precaution monitoring, goal setting within the plan of care, use of alternative strategies, documentation of 
continued need for special precautions by the nurse every 4 hours and by the psychiatrist daily, reassessment, 
monitoring and discontinuation of special precautions.   
To ensure the appropriate level of supervision is established for the protection and safety of the patient and/or 
hospital staff, other patients, and visitors.  
To provide guidance for observations when a patient is assessed using the CSSRS Lifetime/Recent and Safe-T 
Protocol. This is to be used as a guide and not in lieu of the face-to-face assessment for suicidality and physician’s 
recommendation of observation. Consideration should be given to the facets of the Safe-T protocol and the 
intrinsic and extrinsic risk and protective factors when considering the level of observation. There should be a 
progression of intervention and goals documented in the treatment plan that match the observations and reflective 
of progress to a less restrictive observation.  
1. CSSRS score negative for suicide – Q15 minute observation 
2. CSSRS score positive low suicide score- Q15 minute observation 
3. CSSRS score positive moderate score- Q10 minute observation 
4. CSSRS score positive high score- 1:1 observation 
 
A. Nursing documentation for Routine, nurse initiated special precautions, or Bed Blocking  
 
 
2 
includes: 
1. A Patient Observation Record is maintained which reflects the patient’s location and observed 
behaviors, at the frequency that has been ordered.  
2. Changes in the patient’s condition and /or changes in the patient’s status is reflected in the review of 
system documented per hospital policy.  
3. A patient on nurse initiated 1:1 or Q10 min precautions must be assessed by the RN every 4 hours 
and a note for the continued justification of the special precaution should be included with the 
assessment when the RN has used nursing judgement to place the patient on the special precaution.  
4. Bed blocking must be approved by an MBH Administrator except in the case of maintenance or 
gender identity  
 
B. Physician documentation for Special Precautions or blocked bed will include 
 1. A new physician’s order Q24 hours for the special precaution or blocked bed 
2.         Daily clinical justification for the special precaution or blocked bed included in the physician’s 
note 
 
  
Routine or Level 3 (Observations every 15 minutes)  
The following precautions should be provided to all patients on Q15 minute observations.  
 
1.  Environmental Safety and Security rounds should be conducted at each change of shift and as needed 
by the charge 
Nurse or designee to observe for safety/security risks and to visually note the presence of each         
patient. The charge nurse should follow-up on significant issues identified. 
2. The treatment team shares a responsibility to communicate any change in a patient’s mental status 
and/or ability to effectively function within the patient community.  Deterioration in a patient’s 
condition should be reported immediately to the unit charge nurse.  The unit charge nurse should 
conduct an assessment and report significant findings to the physician and/or use his or her clinical 
judgment to initiate the level of precautions necessary to maintain patient safety.  
3. Staff should maintain visual and verbal contact sufficient to monitor the patient’s condition on a 
frequency level as order by the physician (every 15 Minutes).  Rounding should be staggered as to not 
be predictable by patients.  
4. Patient sleep/bed checks should be conducted carefully as follows:  
a.  Staff should document a patient’s presence at bed check only after actual observation and 
identification of the patient.  
b. When a patient appears to be resting or asleep, staff should observe for the rise and fall of the 
patient’s chest to assure he/she is breathing without difficulty.  
c. Sleep/bed checks can be conducted at staggering times rather than exactly every 15 minutes to 
avoid predictability and dissuade patient planning for high risk or inappropriate behaviors.  
5.  Day rooms, hallways and unit common areas should be supervised by staff during unstructured times 
when patients are present.  
6. When patients are showering, verification of the identity of the patient should be made while also 
preserving the privacy and dignity of the patient. This may be accomplished by: 
a. The MHT should announce their presence upon entry to the room and state the need to make 
rounds with the patient 
b. The MHT should ask if the patient is clothed or if they can cover themselves with a towel.  
c. The MHT should then ask the patient to make eye contact with the MHT. This should protect 
the modesty of the patient while ensuring patient safety and encouraging appropriate self-care 
and/or hygiene.  
 
Special Q 10-minute Precautions (Observations every 10 minutes)  
 
 
3 
This precaution should be provided for patients when it is deemed the patient should be more closely 
observed than every 15 minutes.  
1. The treatment team shares a responsibility to communicate any change in a patient’s mental status 
and/or ability to effectively function within the patient community.  Deterioration in a patient’s 
condition should be reported immediately to the unit charge nurse.  The unit charge nurse should 
conduct an assessment and report significant findings to the physician and/or use his or her clinical 
judgment to initiate the level of precautions necessary to maintain patient safety.  
2. Staff should maintain visual and verbal contact sufficient to monitor the patient’s condition on a 
frequency level as order by the physician (every 10 Minutes).  Rounding should be staggered as to not 
be predictable by patients.   
3. Patient sleep/bed checks should be conducted carefully as follows:  
a. Staff should document a patient’s presence at bed check only after actual observation and 
identification of the patient.  
b. When a patient appears to be resting or asleep, staff should observe for the rise and fall of the 
patient’s chest to assure he/she is breathing without difficulty.  
c. Sleep/bed checks can be conducted at staggering times rather than exactly every 10 minutes 
to avoid predictability and dissuade patient planning for high risk or inappropriate behaviors.  
d.  Day rooms, hallways and unit common areas should be supervised by staff during 
unstructured times when patients are present 
 
4. Day rooms, hallways and unit common areas should be supervised by staff during unstructured times 
when patients are present.  
5. When patients are showering, verification of the identity of the patient should be made while also 
preserving the privacy and dignity of the patient. This may be accomplished by: 
a. The MHT should announce their presence upon entry to the room and state the need to make 
rounds with the patient 
b. The MHT should ask if the patient is clothed or if they can cover themselves with a towel.  
c. The MHT should then ask the patient to make eye contact with the MHT. This should protect 
the modesty of the patient while ensuring patient safety and encouraging appropriate self-care 
and/or hygiene.  
6. A Behavior Observation Sheet with 10-minute intervals will be provided for this type of special 
precaution.  
7. Environmental Safety and Security rounds should be conducted at each change of shift and as needed 
by the charge 
8. The Treatment/Care Plan should reflect Q10 minute rounding as an intervention and goals the patient 
must achieve in order to be placed on Q15 minute checks.  
 
 
Definition of 1:1 level of observation 
All patients receiving One-to-One will have an increased level of observation and supervision by designated staff.  
This consists of One-to-One level monitoring and use of alternate techniques to provide safety and to protect the 
well-being of the individual and others in the patient care environment.  To ensure safety, patients receiving one-
to-one monitoring must always have the appropriate personnel in attendance and providing care. 
 
1. The level of risk of each patient at the time of admission and throughout hospitalization is 
determined by the registered nurse or physician.  Risk is determined by initial and ongoing 
assessment including mental status as well as criteria listed below.  
2. Criteria for use of One-to-One continuous observation may include: 
a. Patient exhibits behavior that has potential of harm to self or others  
 
 
4 
a. Imminent suicide or homicide attempt/risk while on unit 
b. Increased risk of sexual/physical assault  
c. Elopement: significant potential to successfully leave the hospital and/or unit against medical 
advice when cognitively impaired and a potential risk to self.  
d. Uncontrolled aggressive behaviors such as combative, aggressive and/or poses potential harm 
to the safety of hospital staff, other patients, or visitors when other documented means have 
failed.  
e. Hallucinations, particularly voices commanding harm to self or others. 
f. Paranoid ideas where the patient believes that other people pose a threat. 
g. Risk indicators identified on a case-by-case basis.  
h. Significant medical issues, i.e., IV’s Peg tubes, O2 with an imminent risk of harm to self or 
others.  
i. 1:1 for the protection of the patient.  
3. An order for the appropriate One-to-One level of monitoring should be documented in the medical 
record. A new physician’s order must be obtained daily.  
a.  When One-to-One level of precaution is initiated by nursing clinical judgment and other 
documented interventions have been tried and failed, the physician is contacted, informing 
him/her of the rationale justifying the precaution and an order is entered into the electronic 
medical record,  
b. Initiation of One-to-One level of precautions is documented as a physician’s order.  
c. During the next assessment by the physician, the nurse and physician should assess the patient 
together to determine if the 1:1 observation should be continued 
4. Assessments by a physician should be completed and documented daily while patient is on One-One 
precautions, with specific clinical justification in behavioral terms for renewal, and the treatment 
plan with goals and interventions aimed at reducing the risk sufficiently to allow discontinuation of 
high-level observation. 
 
5. Prior to the patient’s discharge, the physician should document the progress and current state of the 
high-risk behavior that led to the need for increased observation. Typically, patients will not be on a 
One-to-One level of precaution at discharge.  
6. Restriction of any patient rights due to special precautions should be thoroughly documented with 
appropriate clinical justification for such restrictions. Restriction of any patient rights with 
continuous observation should result in the addition of the associated problem into the patient’s 
treatment plan.  
7. Medical Record entries should reflect behavioral observations and patient’s mental status indicating 
the necessity for the level of continuous observation (One-to-One) 
8. Active goals in the plan of care for the discontinuation of 1:1 observation 
9. Special Precaution levels and guidelines which may be ordered include:  
 
Level 1 Guidelines 
Guidelines for implementation of this level of precautions include, but are not limited to, the 
following:  
a.  Patient remains in a secure, locked unit.  
b.  1:1 staff accompaniment is always required, including times for personal hygiene, toileting 
and other self-care needs.  Physician may clarify order to adjust the distance between patient 
and staff as needed for patient/staff safety. 
c. The staff member assigned to perform 1:1 observation should be of the same sex as the patient, 
as the staffing pattern allows.  If this is not possible, arrangements should be made for the 
same sex staff to accompany the patient during times of personal hygiene, toileting and other 
self-care needs.   
 
 
5 
d. Access to sharps, razors, or other items which may increase risk should be limited and only 
with supervision.   
e. Meals are provided on the unit and in the company of staff.  
f.  The patient may only attend group therapies on the secure unit.  
g. Visitation may be restricted at the physician’s discretion.  In this case, an order restricting 
visitor must be provided by the physician, and the rationale for the restriction of the patient’s 
rights must be documented.  A patient may have visitation in a secure area with continuous 
observation by staff. 
h. Patient may leave unit for medical consult/testing by physician order: 
i.  Patient admitted to the Tau building will be transported by ambulance if a medical 
emergency requires transfer to a medical facility. 
ii. Staff stays with patient in ambulance until patient is handed off to receiving unit and 
psychiatrist approves discontinued 1:1.  
  
Designated levels of increased observation above routine, should only be implemented after engagement 
with the patient has failed to mitigate the potential for disturbed/violent and/or high-risk behavior.  
1. The least intrusive level of observation that is appropriate to the situation should always be adopted 
so that due sensitivity is given to patient’s dignity and privacy while maintaining the safety of the 
patient and all those on the unit.  
2. Patient’s Needs 
a. The patient must be provided with information about why they are under observation, the aims of 
the observation, goals for discontinuation, how long it is likely to be maintained and the review 
arrangements.  
b. The aims and level of observation should, where appropriate, be communicated with the patient’s 
approval to the nearest relative, friend, or caregiver.  
3. For other options related to precautions for patient behavior, Refer to policy for Aggressive behavior 
and sexually inappropriate patients.  The use of the green, yellow, and red level system will help with 
the management of these patients.  
4. Care Planning 
The level of observation is to be included in the patient’s care plan. When special precautions are 
used, there must be an active plan using goals for the discontinuation of special precautions.  
 
 
REFERENCE:      
 
OLOLRMC Policy NNA-061 Assessment & Reassessment of Patient Care Needs According to Nursing Job 
Classes  
 