 
 
 
1 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center                          
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title: Admission of Persons Suffering from 
Mental Illness and Substance Abuse 
Section: Patient Care  
Date of 
originati
on: 
March 1994 Policy 
Reference #: 
BPC 002 
Last 
Revised 
Date: 
August 2019 Supersedes #: B/A/G/007, B/P/G002, 
B/P/G/003, B/P/G/004, 
B/P/G/028, B/P/G/029 
  Last Review 
Date:     
September 2020 
    
 POLICY: 
Patients are admitted in accordance with the procedures outlined in Title 28: Louisiana Mental Health Law or LA 
Children’s Code 1464-1470. 
PROCEDURE: 
Admission on Involuntary Status: Physician Emergency Certificate – Physician Emergency Certificate 
(PEC) / Corner Emergency Certificate (CEC): 
Any physician, psychologist, or psychiatric mental health nurse practitioner may execute a PEC. 
1. COPE is to notify the coroner of any patient admitted on a PEC and request an examination of the patient. 
A CEC is to be completed within seventy-two (72) hours of the physician emergency certificate. 
2. Both a PEC and a CEC are required to continue the patient's confinement up to 15 days. 
3. At any time after a PEC is written, if the patient wishes to change his status to a Formal Voluntary 
Admission, and he meets the criteria as established by law, the treating physician may change the 
patient’s status.  
4. In the event that the coroner has made the initial examination and executed the first emergency certificate, 
the attending physician shall make a second examination within 72 hours of the coroner's certificate to 
continue the patient’s confinement. 
5. If, from his/her examination, the coroner concludes that the person is not a proper involuntary admission, 
the person shall not be further detained and shall be discharged. 
7. If the minor is under sixteen (16) years of age and a physician deems medical treatment necessary but a 
guardian is in disagreement then a PEC is initiated and Child Protection must be notified of medical 
neglect. 
8. Reasons for issuing an Emergency Certificate and the right of a patient to contest the admission include: 
 a. An Emergency Certificate may be executed only by a physician, a psychologist, psychiatric 
mental health nurse practitioner, nurse practitioner or a physician’s assistant and only after an 
actual examination of a person alleged to be mentally ill or suffering from substance abuse.  
 
 
2 
Refer to Medical Staff rules and regulations at OLOLRMC. 
 
 b. An Emergency Certificate may be executed only upon a determination that a person is in need of 
immediate medical treatment in a treatment facility because the person is dangerous to 
himself/herself or to others or is gravely disabled or is unwilling or unable to seek voluntary 
admission. 
 c. A patient admitted pursuant to Emergency Certificate or his/her attorney shall have the right to 
demand a judicial hearing to determine if probable cause exists for his/her continued confinement 
under an Emergency Certificate. Petition should be filed as soon as the patient is admitted to the 
unit; which shall be filed in the Court of the jurisdiction in which the patient is confined. Pending 
the decision of the Court, the patient shall remain confined unless the Court orders release or a 
less restrictive status. 
 d. Every patient shall have the right to be discharged from a treatment facility when his/her 
condition has changed or improved to the extent that confinement and treatment at the treatment 
facility are no longer required.  
   
Admission on Non-Contested Status: 
1. The individual is admitted with a physician's order authorizing non-contested admission. 
2. The COPE Team Member completes and places Non-Contested Form on the medical record at time of 
admission. 
3. The physician signs the Non-Contested Admission Form within 24 hours of admission. 
4. A diagnostic and evaluative study will be completed within 14 days. Following a review of the diagnostic 
and evaluative results, the physician will determine if the patient needs to remain on a non-contested 
status, be discharged, be converted to formal or informal voluntary status, or involuntarily hospitalized. 
At no time may a patient remain on a non-contested status longer than 3 months. 
5. If the patient objects to non-contested status at any time, a staff member shall assist him/her in preparing 
and submitting a valid written objection to the Medical Director. The RN will notify the Medical Director 
and attending physician. 
 a. The attending physician must then execute one of the following within 72 hours: 
  1. Discharge the patient. 
  2. Complete an Emergency Certificate. 
  3. Advise the family of judicial commitment. 
6. Reasons for issuing a non-contested admission including: 
 a. A mentally ill person or persons suffering from substance abuse that does not have the capacity to 
make a knowing and voluntary consent to a voluntary admission status and who does not object 
to his admission to a treatment facility may be admitted to a treatment facility as a non-contested 
admission. 
 b. A person admitted pursuant to a non-contested admission is subject to the same rules and 
regulations as the person admitted on a voluntary admission status. 
  
Voluntary Admissions:  
1. Voluntary admission is offered when the individual requesting admission is capable of understanding the 
following: 
a. The treatment facility he/she is requesting admission is for mentally ill persons or persons  
suffering from substance abuse. 
 b. He/she is making an application for admission. 
             c. He/she understands the discharge procedures applicable to voluntary status and  
 
 
3 
d. He/she understands procedures applicable to conversion to an involuntary status. 
2. Voluntary admission may not be coerced or otherwise obtained by stating to an individual that           
involuntary admission may result if the individual does not voluntarily admit himself/herself unless the physician 
is prepared to execute such. 
3. The admission team member will explain the provisions of Louisiana Mental Health Law governing 
voluntary admissions which include the following: 
 a. An individual admitted on a voluntary basis must be informed of alternative treatment programs 
                          and/or facilities by a member of the COPE team upon consultation with the physician and the 
                          individual is to be given an opportunity to seek admission to such alternative treatment programs  
                          or facilities. 
 b. Every patient admitted on a voluntary admission status shall be informed in writing at the time of  
 admission of his/her right to be discharged upon his/her request. If the patient was admitted by 
                           his/her request without a written request (Informal Voluntary), the patient may leave at any time 
  during the day from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday thru Friday. If the patient was admitted 
pursuant to written request and the patient requests to leave, the nurse provides him/her with a 
Request for Leave Formal Voluntary admission form and notifies the attending 
psychiatrist/physician. If no emergency certificate is executed or no judicial commitment is 
instituted, the patient must be released within 72 hours of his written request. 
 c. Every patient admitted on a voluntary admission status must be informed of his/her rights at the 
time of admission. A unit staff member reviews the patient’s rights at the time of admission. 
Patient Rights are in the Patient’s Handbook and posted on each unit.   
 d. Every patient admitted on a voluntary admission status must be notified of availability of counsel, 
rules applicable to or concerning his/her conduct while a patient in the treatment facility, times 
for telephone use, procedures for discharge and availability of the Mental Health Advocacy 
Service.  
 e. If the patient is illiterate or does not understand English, appropriate provisions should be made to 
supply him/her with this information.  
 
Admission of Minors Suffering from Mental Illness and Substance Abuse:  
1. Provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes Title 28, Children’s  Code 1464-1470 governing  
voluntary admission of minors including: 
 a. Any minor, sixteen years of age or older may apply for voluntary admission. 
 b. A minor admitted voluntarily shall have the same rights as an adult patient. 
 c. The admitting physician may admit the person on either a formal or informal basis. If admitted 
upon the minor’s written request, the admission is a formal voluntary admission. If admitted upon 
the minors’ request without a formal application, the admission is an informal voluntary 
admission. 
 d. Voluntary admission may not be coerced or otherwise obtained by stating to the minor that 
involuntary admission may result if the minor does not voluntarily admit himself/herself unless 
the physician is prepared to execute such. 
 e. No admission may be deemed voluntary unless the admitting physician determines that the minor 
has the capacity to make a knowing and voluntary consent to the admission. Knowing and 
voluntary consent shall be determined by the ability of the minor to understand:  
  1) That the treatment facility to which the minor is requesting admission is one for mentally ill 
persons, or persons suffering from substance abuse; 
  2) That he/she is making an application for admission;  
  3) He/she understands the discharge procedures applicable to voluntary status and 
  3)  He/she understands the procedures applicable to   conversion to an involuntary status. 
 f. Each minor admitted on a voluntary basis shall be informed of any other medically appropriate 
alternative treatment programs and treatment facilities by a member of the COPE team upon 
consultation with the physician and shall be given an opportunity to seek admission to  
 
 
4 
alternative treatment programs or facilities.   
 g. Every minor patient admitted on a voluntary admission status shall be informed in writing at the 
time of admission of the following: 
  1) The procedures for requesting release from the treatment facility; 
  2) The availability of counsel; 
  3) Information about the mental health advocacy service; 
  4) The rights guaranteed to the minor while confined; and 
  5) The rules and regulations applicable to or concerning his/her conduct while a patient in the 
treatment facility.  
  If the minor is illiterate or does not read or understand English, appropriate provisions should be 
made to supply him with this information. A copy of the information set forth in items f and g 
(above) must be posted in any area where minor patients are confined and treated. 
 h. A minor patient shall not be detained in the facility for longer than seventy-two (72) hours after 
making a valid written request for discharge to the director of the facility unless an emergency 
certificate is issued or a judicial commitment is instituted.  
 
Voluntary Admission of a Minor: 
With Parental Authority: 
1. Minors under the age of 16, only a written consent by parent is required. 
2. For minors who are 16 years of age and up to their eighteenth (18th) birthday that refuses treatment and 
parental authority is insistent upon admission, the following is required:   
 a.         A physician has determined admission is appropriate. 
 b.         72-Hour Notice will be explained to parent and minor. 
 c.         Parent will sign Formal Voluntary Admission form to admit minor, giving written consent. 
3. Any minor may request signing 72-hour notice form at the time of admission. 
 a. Prior to patient arriving on unit, report will be called including 72-hour notification 
  information. 
b. Nurses on unit will be responsible to notify doctor of patient signing Request for Release Formal   
Voluntary admission .                     
4. A Physicians’ Certificate for a Minor is completed. A copy is kept in the patient file and the original is 
delivered to the Mental Health Advocacy office within 72 hours of admission. 
Without Parental Authority: 
1. Voluntary Admission is available to any minor 16 years of age and up to their 18th birthday requesting 
admission for a mental illness and/or substance abuse, and who meets admission criteria.   
2. Parental consent is not required. 
3. As a formal voluntary patient who is 16 years of age and up to their 18th birthday she/he has the right to 
sign a Request for Release Formal Voluntary Admission. 
REFERENCE:      
 
Title 28: Louisiana Revised Statutes revised 2003 
Joint Commission Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals, 2019: PC.01.01.01,  
PC.02.01.01, EP(s): 1, 5: PC.02.01.03, EP(s) 1, 7, 20 
Joint Commission Accreditation Manual for Behavioral Health Care, 2016: CTS.01.01.01; A-1, C-3,4,5 
 