 
 
 
1 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center               
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title: Admission and Exclusionary Criteria Section: Patient Care  
Date of 
origination: 
August 2017 Policy 
Reference #: 
BPC 001 
Last 
Revised 
Date: 
January 2019 Supersedes #:  
  Last Review 
Date 
January 2023 
 POLICY: 
OLOLRMC Mental and Behavioral Health accepts only those patients whose identified care, treatment and 
services it can meet. 
PROCEDURE: 
 Intake and Admission 
 Admission Criteria: 
A. Admission to the Psychiatric Program is indicated for individuals aged 12 and older who have an 
acute and/or unstable DSM-5 diagnosis and meet the severity of illness and intensity of service 
criteria (at least one from each) listed below.  
a. For the purpose of this document, “mental disorder” does not include dementia, delirium or a 
developmental disorder (such as intellectual disability). 
B. Admission criteria is applied uniformly to both Medicare and non-Medicare patients. 
Severity of Illness: 
1. Suicide attempts and threat to self, requiring 24-hour professional observation. 
2. Suicidal ideation or gesture within 72 hours prior to admission. 
3. Self-mutilation behavior, actual or threatened, within 72 hours of admission. 
4. Homicidal ideation, threat to others requiring 24 hours professional observation. 
5. Assaultive behavior threatening others within 72 hours prior to admission. 
6. Command hallucinations directing harm to self or others where there is risk of patient taking action. 
7. Chronic and continuing self-destructive behavior, such as bulimic behaviors and substance abuse, that 
poses a significant and/or immediate threat to life, limb or bodily function. 
8. Psychiatric symptoms such as hallucinations, delusions, panic attacks, anxiety, agitation, and/or 
depression, severe enough to cause disordered, bizarre behavior or psychomotor retardation resulting 
in significant interference with activities of daily living. 
9. For patients with a dementing disorder-for evaluation or treatment of a psychiatric co-morbidity such 
as risk of suicide, violence, severe depression, warranting inpatient admission. 
10. A mental disorder causing major disability in social, interpersonal, occupational, and/or educational 
functioning that is leading to dangerous or life-threatening functioning and can only be addressed in 
an acute inpatient setting.  
 
 
2 
11. A mental disorder that causes an inability to maintain adequate nutrition or self-care and 
family/community support cannot provide reliable, essential care so that the individual cannot 
function at a less intensive level of care during evaluation and treatment. 
12. Failure of outpatient psychiatric treatment so that the individual requires 24-hour professional 
observation and care. Reasons for failure could include: 
a) Increasing severity of psychiatric symptoms. 
b) Noncompliance with medication regimen due to the severity of psychiatric symptoms. 
c) Inadequate clinical response to psychotropic medications. 
d) Due to the severity of psychiatric symptoms, the patient is unable to participate in an 
outpatient psychiatric treatment program. 
13. The need for chemical dependency detoxification. 
 
Intensity of Service 
 Treatments 
1. Continuous observation and control of behavior is required to protect self, others, and/or property. 
2. Comprehensive multi-modal therapeutic plan requiring close medical supervision and coordination 
due to its complexity and/or severity of the patient’s signs and symptoms. 
3. Psychoactive medications which require daily, close and continuous skilled medical observation due 
to side effects such as hypotension or arrhythmia, or significant increases, decreases, or changes of 
psychoactive medication(s) requiring close and continuous skilled medical supervision. 
Exclusion Criteria 
Each case is evaluated on an individual basis by the COPE assessment team and admitting psychiatrists in 
consultation with MBH Executive Director or Director of Nurses as needed. 
1. Patients with a substantiated diagnosis of dementia with no acute behavioral change or no known 
psychiatric disorder and no expectation for a positive response to treatment. 
2. Patients with life threatening acute medical or surgical illnesses will not be accepted. 
3. Medical disorders requiring care beyond the capability or capacity of unit staffing. 
4. Patients with terminal diseases without a treatable psychiatric disorder. 
5. Patients who are bedfast or who cannot participate in the treatment program due to physical limitations. 
6. Patients with complex medical/surgical procedures which prevent their participation in the active 
treatment program. 
7. Patients with a primary personality disorder. 
8. Patient’s clinical condition / behavior arises primarily out of character / personality disorder that cannot 
be reasonably expected to benefit from inpatient treatment. 
9. Refer to MBH Infectious Disease Policy 
10. .  
 
 
3 
UNIT SPECIFIC ADMISSION CRITERIA 
 
Adolescent Unit 
1. Must be between ages 12-17. 
2. Must be cognitively capable of participating in the program. 
3. Must have a primary psychiatric diagnosis. 
4. Behaviors must be such that they can be managed on an acute behavioral unit. 
Geriatric Behavioral Unit 
1. Age 55 and up. Special consideration may be given to those under 55 based upon the patient’s functioning 
/ ADL’s 
2. Behaviors must be such that they would fit into the geriatric milieu. 
3. Individuals with dementia must have a primary mental health diagnosis in conjunction with the dementia. 
4. Individual’s co-morbid medical condition must not be the primary reason for hospitalization. 
5. Individuals must be able to participate in programming. 
St. Clare Unit 
1. Age 18 and over with a primary psychiatric diagnosis. 
2. Must be able to participate in programming. 
3. Must not have a secondary diagnosis which is medically/surgically complex. Refer to exclusion criteria 2 
and 5. 
1 North Unit 
1. Age 18 and over with primary psychiatric diagnosis. 
2. Must not have a medical diagnosis which is medical/surgically complex. Exclusion criteria 5. 
3. Must have an expectation of improvement. 
4. Must be able to participate in programming.  
 
 
 
 
REFERENCE:      
 