 
 
1 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center                     
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title: Patient Consultation with Attorney Section: Patient Care 
Date of 
Origination: 
September 1989 Policy 
Reference #: 
BPC 008 
Last Revised 
Date: 
October 2016 Supersedes #: B/A/G/014, B/P/G/017 
  Last Review 
Date: 
June 27, 2024 
  
POLICY: 
The Mental and Behavioral Health Services staff support patient rights by facilitating communication between the 
patient and his/her attorney as deemed necessary by the patient and/or attorney and authorized in writing by the 
patient. 
PROCEDURE: 
1. A patient shall have the right to communicate in private with his/her attorney. 
a. Special Precautions will remain in effect. 
2. When a patient requests an opportunity to consult with his/her attorney, a staff member will assist the 
patient, if needed, to communicate with his/her attorney by telephone, in writing, or in person. 
3. Any individual presenting himself/herself as a patient’s attorney must have the patient’s identification 
number and present his/her identification as a current member of the bar. 
4. The patient’s physician is notified if any request is made by the attorney to view the medical record. 
 a. The attorney may view the patient’s record only with written authorization from the patient. If 
authorization is given, the record is viewed in the presence of OLOL Mental & Behavioral Health 
licensed staff.  
 b. The patient must give written authorization for the attorney to receive a copy of the medical record. 
 c. All requests for copying the medical record will follow OLOL’s Health Information Management 
Policy “Release of Information: Psychiatric.” 
5. The charge nurse or patient’s social worker/counselor will inform the patient of the request by the 
attorney and obtain the patient’s approval to permit the attorney to communicate with the patient. 
 
REFERENCE: Title 28: Mental Health Law, La. Statute: Part III Section 64, Part VI-Rights of Persons 
Suffering from Mental Illness and Substance Abuse     
  
                                       OLOL Policy: HIMR-17 – Release of Information: Psychiatric 
Joint Commission Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals, . 2016: 
RI.01.01.01 EP 1, 2, 5, 7 
 