 
 
1 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center                  
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title:  Interdisciplinary Plan of Care  Section: Patient Care 
Date of 
Originati
on: 
September 1989 Policy 
Reference #: 
BPC 005 
Last 
Revised 
Date: 
August 2018 Supersedes #: B/A/G/027, B/T/R/014, 
B/V/G/016 
  Last Review 
Date: 
January 28, 2025 
  
POLICY: 
Each patient shall have a documented plan of care formulated from interdisciplinary assessments within 72 hours 
of admission. Each plan is individualized based on the patient’s needs, strengths, limitations, and goals.  
PROCEDURE: 
1. The attending physician completes the initial assessment and documents a preliminary plan of care within 
24 hours of the patient's admission. 
2. Appropriate therapeutic efforts begin immediately in accordance with the preliminary plan of care. 
3. Nursing initiates the plan of care at the completion of the nursing admission assessment. 
4. A Plan of Care is based upon comprehensive assessments and continuing reassessment of the patient’s 
needs and includes: 
 a. Substantiated diagnosis 
 b. Clearly defined problems and needs statements. 
 c. Measurable goals and objectives based on the patients’ assessed needs, strengths and limitations. 
  (1) Goals are time-limited and achievable. 
  (2) Objectives are expressed in behavioral terms and sufficiently specific to evaluate progress. 
  (3) Objectives are reviewed and updated at least every seven (7) treatment days, but more 
frequently if indicated by the patient’s response to treatment or change in status. 
 (4) If the patient made progress toward meeting goals or if there is a lack of progress, 
documentation must justify: 
   i. Continuing with current goals or approaches. 
   ii. Revising the Plan of Care to increase the possibility of a successful treatment outcome.  
 d. Interventions and frequency to accomplish goals are determined by each discipline. 
Accountability is documented by specifying the discipline and person responsible for the 
intervention. 
e.          The patient/family/significant other’s goals for treatment and expected outcomes. 
 f. A description of facilitating factors and possible barriers to care or reaching established goals. 
Specific objectives for the goals are identified.  
 
2 
 g. Documentation of the criteria for transitioning to less restrictive environments and successful 
adaptation into community settings. 
  
5. The overall responsibility for the patient's plan of care is the attending physician who coordinates the 
efforts of the treatment team. 
6. All disciplines document their participation in the plan of care. 
7. The multidisciplinary plan of care meeting is coordinated by the appropriate clinical personnel on all 
units. 
8. The plan of care establishes specific goals, long and short term, which the patient may accomplish in 
moving toward discharge. 
 a. Specific objectives for the identified goals are included. 
 b. Modalities used to reach goals include type, amount, frequency, and duration. 
 
 
Reference:       
CMS State Operations Manual, Appendix AA-Psychiatric Hospitals – Interpretative Guidelines and Survey 
Procedures* §482.6(c)(1)(i) 
Joint Commission Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals, 2019: PC.01.03.01, EP’s 1, 5, 22, 25, 26;      
RI..01.02.01 EP’s 1,3,6,7,8,20,21 
DHH Standards for Payment – Distinct Part Psychiatric and Hospital Based Alcohol/Drug Treatment Units: 
Treatment Plan and Staffing.  
Louisiana Revised Statutes Title 28: Mental Health Part VI “Rights of Persons Suffering from Mental Illness and 
Substance Abuse” 
  
    