OrgOp/ET/012 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center                             
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title: 
Management of patients with 
physically aggressive or sexually 
inappropriate behavior toward others 
Section: Patient Care 
Date of Origination: October 21, 2011 Policy 
Reference #: BPC 007 
Last Revised Date: December 2017 Supersedes #: BPG 037 
  Last Review 
Date: June 27, 2024 
 
PURPOSE:  
 
To provide guidelines for the management of patients who demonstrate or have documented evidence 
for the potential to be physically aggressive or sexually inappropriate towards others. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Physically aggressive behavior is an overt act of inflicting bodily harm to another individual. 
 
Sexually inappropriate behavior include s a range of sexual behaviors such as  suggestive language, 
flirtation, touching another seductively with sexual intent, removing one’s clothing, masturbating in 
public, pursuing sexual behavior with a person, entering another patient’s room. 
 
POLICY: 
 
Patients admitted to Mental and Behavioral Health Units have a right to: 
• Safe, humane, dignified equal care and treatment. 
• Be free from restraints of any form that are not medically necessary or that are used as a means 
of coercion, discipline, convenience, or retaliation by staff. 
• Be free from all forms of abuse and harassment of any form. 
• An environment that contributes to a positive self image 
 
Patients who exhibit physically aggressive or sexually inappropriate behaviors toward others should be 
managed proactively with a consistent approach. Interventions used will include environmental, 
behavioral, pharmacological, and/or physical interventions. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
All newly admitted patients will be assessed for potential for violence thro ugh patient diagnosis, patient 
and family reports, and the patient’s history of violence. 
 
Upon documented evidence of t he potential for exhibiting physically aggressive or sexually 
inappropriate behaviors, a plan of care will be implemented to include goals and interventions  which OrgOp/ET/012 
are individualized and based on therapeutic standards of care  to address th ese behaviors. As clinically 
appropriate, patients will be assigned a behavioral level, Green, Yellow or Red.  
 
When inappropriate behavior first occurs, a member of the treatment team and/or physician should 
counsel the patient on the inappropriateness of the behavior and document the exhibited behavioral 
problems. Documentation of this counseling should be placed in the patient’s record.  
Instances of inappropriate or persistent, noncompliant conduct should be documented to establish a 
pattern of repetitive physically aggressive or sexually inappropriate behavior. 
 
If physically aggressive or sexually inappropriate behaviors toward others occur, an interdisciplinary 
huddle should be initiated to evaluate the most effective way to address the behavioral issues.  The 
members of the patient’s Treatment Team should meet with the patient to establish rules/boundaries 
and explain the consequences of continued inappropriate behaviors. Interventions will be initiated 
utilizing the green, yellow, red  level system when clinically appropriate.   The plan of care will be 
updated as necessary. 
 
Adolescent patients  may have incentives to encourage participation in treatment and appropriate 
behavior. 
 
Level Green: The primary objective of a level green intervention is to maintain a therapeutic milieu 
and patient autonomy. The patient may participate in group activities, eat in the community setting, and 
move freely about the milieu.  Early interventions should prevent escalation of distress and 
unacceptable behaviors and therefore should be initiated as soon as mild agitation is detected. Ideally, 
level green interventions focus on the patient, the milieu, or both and are based on an understanding of 
the patient’s behavior. Some potential behavioral management techniques for Level Green are to:  
1) Listen and convey interest in and concern about the patient’s welfare,  
2) Engage the patient in a conversation about his or her experiences and feelings to calm or rectify 
any disturbing situation,  
3) Offer choices to give the patient a sense of control and may include interaction with a trusted 
staff member,  
4) Offer physical activity such as walking or exercising, listening to music, meditation, or 
diversional activities. 
5) Approach the patient in a nonthreatening manner and be sensitive to a patient’s need for 
adequate personal space,  
6) Offer the patient a quiet place within the milieu, either to be alone or to interact with staff if 
needed,  
7) Maintain a therapeutic milieu that keeps patients engaged or occupied and conveys a sense of 
staff control. 
 
Level Yellow: The primary goal of a level yellow intervention is to reduce the target symptoms. 
However, to the greatest extent possible, it is also important to maintain the patient’s autonomy and a 
therapeutic milieu. The patient may participate in group activities, eat in the community setting, and 
move about the milieu with staff supervision.  Level Yellow interventions should be considered when 
Level Green interventions are not appropriate or have not been successful. Level Yellow interventions 
focus on interpersonal responses and medications to ameliorate specific symptoms and assist the 
individual in achieving behavioral control. All Level Yellow interventions require voluntary OrgOp/ET/012 
cooperation from and communication with the patient. Alternatives are not presented in a coercive or 
punitive manner, but rather should encourage the patient to exercise autonomy.  Level Yellow 
interventions may include:  
1) Removing other patients and other stimuli from the immediate vicinity to help the patient regain 
control by decreasing stimulation. 
2) Voluntary physical separation from an over stimulating environment to a quiet, less stimulating 
area. Once removed from the stimulating environment, staff may use Level Green interventions 
to manage the situation. 
3) Increasing the number of staff present during an acute aggressive episode to help a patient 
regain self-control. This approach also helps secure the safety of other persons.  
4) Distance Restrictions – instruct patient to maintain a specified distance from other patients. 
5) Administering medications aimed at reducing the target symptoms and calming the patient.  
 
 
Level Red: The primary goal of a Level Red intervention is to maintain the safety of the patient, other 
patients and the staff.  Level Red interventions are the most restrictive and are used as a last resort when 
Level Yellow interventions are either not appropriate or unsuccessful. The patient may not participate 
in group activities (except adolescents whose do not have imminently dangerous behavior) , may not eat 
in the community setting, and may only  move about the milieu  with staff supervision .  These 
interventions should be as short in duration as possible.  
Level Red interventions may include: 
1) Medications aimed at reducing the target symptoms and calming the patient. 
2) Time Out to re-gain self-control. 
3) Seclusion to refrain from unsafe behavior in the milieu,  
4) As a last resort, restraint may need to be considered to assist the patient to maintain self-control 
and refrain from unsafe behavior when the patient is incapable of such control, 
 
Patients will move within the level system as behavior necessitates.  A patient may be placed on a more 
restrictive level (Yellow or Red) at any time depending on their behavior.  Once a patient is placed on 
Yellow or Red, they will remain there or at a more restrictive level for a specified period of time until 
patient and nurse have debriefed and evaluate the patient’s readiness to change levels. 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
OLOL Policy: BPN-018 Special Precautions 
OLOL Policy: B/P/G/035 Use of Behavior Management Interventions 
OLOL Policy: Org/Clin 027 Suspected Abuse or Neglect, Reporting of Child - Adult 
OLOL Policy: Org/Clin-036 Restraints and Seclusion 
 
Ackley, B.J., and Ladwig, G.B., (2002).  Nursing diagnosis handbook: A guide to planning care. 
Mosby: St. Louis, MO 
Ford, E., Rosenberg, M., Holsten, M., and Boudreaux, T., (2003).  Managing sexual behavior on adult 
acute care inpatient psychiatric units.  Psychiatric Services, 54:3 pp. 346-350. 
Mauck, J., Reid, P., DaPrato, R., (2009).  Disruptive patient behavior.  Sarasota Memorial Hospital. 
McClelland, K and Mo ore, K., (2010). Management of violence and aggression p olicy. West 
Hertfordshire Hospitals NHS Trust.   
Therapeutic process for managing physically aggressive or sexually inappropriate behaviors. OrgOp/ET/012 
 