 
 
1 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center                      
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title: Use of Behavior Management Interventions Section: Patient Care 
Date of 
Origination:       
May 2005 Policy  
Reference #: 
BPC 006 
Last Revised 
Date: 
August 2019 Supersedes #: B/A/G/018, 
B/A/G/019, 
BPG/035 
  Last Review 
Date: 
June 27, 2024 
  
POLICY:  
The Mental & Behavioral Health Division utilizes positive behavior management interventions utilizing least 
restrictive measures and violence prevention techniques. The measures include but are not limited to level 
systems, individualized plans as directed by a physician and in emergency situations seclusion and/or restraint in 
accordance with the hospital policy.  Qualified staff review, evaluate and approve the use of all behavior 
management procedures. 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. Behavior Management treatment interventions are utilized to foster adaptive behaviors and are not 
exclusively used for behavior control. 
 
2. The selection of interventions considers both appropriateness and minimizing the restrictiveness of 
interventions. 
 
3. Patients, and as appropriate their families, participate in the selection of behavior management 
treatment interventions and agree to their use in the following ways: 
a. Education is provided about the organization’s use of behavior management treatment 
interventions including level systems. 
b. Target behaviors for which behavior management treatment interventions may be used are 
explained. 
c. Patients, and as appropriate their families, participate in the selection of a specific behavior 
management treatment intervention(s) for the patient. 
d. Patients, and as appropriate their families, participate in identifying antecedents to and 
consequences of the target behavior. 
 
4. Aversive procedures are not utilized in any behavior management treatment interventions. 
 
5. Interventions are individually determined based upon an assessment of the patient and the target 
behavior. This assessment includes: 
a. Environmental and contextual factors associated with the target behavior. 
b. Skill deficits associated with the target behavior. 
c. Performance deficits associated with the target behavior.  
 
2 
d. Identification of strengths associated with the target behavior. 
e. Frequency, duration and intensity of the target behavior. 
 
6. Assessment of the target behavior is ongoing. 
 
7. Education and positive reinforcement techniques are used whenever possible. 
 
8. The least restrictive technique will be used before progressing to more restrictive behavior 
management techniques. 
 
9. The patient’s physical safety is protected. 
 
10. Adaptive/replacement behaviors are assessed to determine that appropriate behavior is exhibited. 
 
11. Any individual detailed behavior management treatment intervention plan is incorporated into the 
Plan of Care for the patient. This plan includes: 
a. Target behavior. 
b. Adaptive/replacement behavior. 
c. Method of implementation-strategy, support, teaching methods, motivation and reward if used, 
frequency and circumstances under which the plan will be implemented. 
d. Condition for discontinuation. 
e. All interventions attempted. 
 
12. The following procedures are prohibited under any circumstances: 
a. Any procedure that physically hurts a patient. 
b. Any procedure that poses a psychological risk to the patient. 
c. Procedures that deny any basic needs, such as nutritional diet, water, shelter and essential, safe, 
and appropriate clothing.  
d. Corporal punishment. 
e. Fear-eliciting procedures. 
f. Any behavior management treatment intervention that is implemented by another patient. 
g. The use of mechanical restraint and seclusion unless it is used for patients who exhibit intractable 
behavior that is severely self injurious or injurious to others, have not responded to traditional 
interventions, and are unable to contract with staff for safety. When restraint or seclusion is used 
in an emergency situation, the use complies with hospital policy regarding restraint and seclusion. 
 
13. Behavior management treatment interventions that apply to a group of patients, such as level systems, 
are individualized in the following ways: 
a. Requirements for moving through level systems are standardized and achievable. 
b. Requirements for moving through level systems are equitably and fairly applied to all patients 
based on each patient’s individual behavior and compliance. 
c. Group contingencies are based on collective group outcomes and not on the behavior of a single 
patient. 
d. Group consequences respect each patient’s rights. 
 
 
REFERENCE: Joint Commission Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals, 2019:  
PC.01.03.03, EP’s 1-5; PC.01.03.05, EP’s 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8 
  
 
3 
OLOL: OrgClin/036 – Restraint and/or Seclusion and Safe Patient Management 
BPC 009 Time Out 