 
 
1 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center          
Policy Manual: Mental and Behavioral Health 
Title:    Discharge Criteria  Section: Patient Care 
Date of 
Origination:    
September 2018    Policy Reference #:   BPC 015 
Last Revised 
Date: 
April 2020 Supersedes #:  
  Last Review Date: June 27, 2024 
 POLICY:      
To provide criteria for discharge from Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Inpatient Mental and 
Behavioral Division (MBH). 
 
PURPOSE:  
 
Our Lady of the Lake Mental Behavioral Health Division process for discharge is based on the 
patient’s assessed needs.  To facilitate discharge, the Hospital assesses the patient’s needs, plans 
for discharge, facilitates the discharge process, and helps to ensure that continued care treatment 
and services are maintained. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A patient is discharged from OLOL Inpatient MBH Division based on the following criteria: 
 
A. Treatment team determines that the patient has adequately accomplished the goals of 
treatment.  
B. If the patient’s condition necessitates long-term, ongoing treatment, a transfer to an 
appropriate facility will be arranged. 
C. If the patient’s condition necessitates further inpatient treatment, but the Program is not seen 
as best serving his or her clinical needs, transfer to a different inpatient facility will be 
arranged. 
D. If the patient’s medical condition is such that the required level of nursing care is beyond that 
available in the Program and the patient is too physically ill to participate, transfer will be 
arranged to another program/facility for medical treatment. 
E. If patient being discharged has a behavioral change and requires medication or behavioral 
restraints/seclusion to address the behavioral change within 24 hours of planned discharge, 
the patient must be reassessed by a physician prior to discharge.  
F. If a patient requests discharge without the treatment team's agreement and is not in need of 
involuntary admission as defined by Louisiana State Mental Health code, the patient shall be 
discharged against medical advice.  
G. If the patient does not provide a destination location or other disposition upon discharge, the 
patient will receive a list of available shelters. If the patient does not have transportation, 
transportation will be provided to the designated destination or shelter.  
H. When suicide assessment is completed at discharge, if it shows the patient has become 
suicidal, wants to harm others, or has had a mental status change, the physician should be  
 
2 
notified. The discharge should be held until the physician determines if the discharge is going 
to be cancelled.  
I. If the patient declines to complete a Discharge Crisis Prevention Plan, the discharging 
physician should be notified before the patient is discharged.  
 
REFERENCE: 
 
Louisiana Mental Health Law 
The Joint Commission Standards    CMS Conditions of Participation  