St. Elizabeth Hospital Capacity Management Protocol  
Effective Date 8/1/2016 
  
Purpose:  To establish a hospital-wide approach to maximize capabilities in response to patient 
influx /surge, or hospital at full capacity with admission holds as defined in box 
below. 
Protocol: The protocol will utilize an objective measure that will automatically activate a 
response. This policy is designed for rapid notification and implementation of 
guidelines to be referenced by all departments to decrease times patients are waiting 
for inpatient placement.   
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 Overcrowding/Capacity Management 
Overcrowding:      Patient volume / acuity that surpasses the available resources requiring short-term 
assistance within the Department. 
Capacity management:  An organized response to volume demand. 
 
NEDOC score 141 or above:      
I. PROTOCOL FOR ED Capacity Management ACTIVATION: 
1. The E.D. Manager or designee identifies the criteria has been met and is necessary to activate 
capacity management protocol.  
2. The E.D.Manager or designee will consult with the E.D. Physician and the House Supervisor to 
evaluate the need for activation of the Capacity Management protocol.  
3. The E.D. Manager or designee in partnership with Medical Director, will determine need for 
implementing alternate staging areas to maximize throughput and patient safety. (refer to ED 
staging section) 
4. Upon activation the House Supervisor or designee will notify the CNO or designee and activate 
the Capacity Management Protocol  
5. If after hours, the House Supervisor will notify as appropriate to affected areas: 
i. CNO/VP Nursing 
ii. Assistant VP of Patient Care Services 
iii. Nursing Managers / Directors 
iv. Divisional Director of Ancillary Services 
This is a guide for the House Supervisor in collaboration with charge nurses to determine a units 
ability to manage overcrowding. Utilize NEDOC = National Emergency Department Overcrowding 
Score.  Calculate ED score when ED is holding patients. http://providers.otddi.com/h3/index.php/2012-11-
06-16-50-56/nedocs-calculator 
 
00 to 20 Not busy  21 to 60 Busy 61 to 100 
Extremely busy but 
not overcrowded 
101 to 140 Over-
crowded 
141 to 180 
Severely over-
crowded 
181 to 200-
Dangerously over-
crowded 
 
▪ Any unusual event defined as multiple codes, trauma, massive influx of patients  
▪ In the event of massive surge/influx of patients due to an outside event Emergency Plan will 
be activated. 
▪ PACU unable to place patients and holding 4 patients.  Unable to move patients from surgical 
suite to PACU. 
▪ Inpatient critically high census refer to census action plan (Appendix A). 6. Departmental Leaders and/or designees will report to a pre-determined command center CNO 
office or individually affected unit as indicated by the House Supervisor. 
7. Briefing will be conducted by the House Supervisor/ Manager/Director or Charge RN and/or 
designee.   
8. Briefing communication will include the following: 
i. Number of patients holding for a bed 
ii. Diagnosis, type of bed needed, and any special needs. 
iii. Volume and Acuity of E.D. 
iv. Potential future admissions / incoming arrival of patients 
v. Staffing needs 
vi. Status of PEC’s 
vii. Other identified needs 
9. Capacity Management will be reviewed and updated every 2 hours.  
 
II. Departmental Role Responsibilities:  
1. House Supervisor and/or designee: 
a. Serve as Command Center (CC) maintaining all incoming communication during 
Capacity Management activation. 
b. Update leadership team on status of hospital to include the following: 
i. Current hospital census 
ii. Overcrowding status of ED/ICU/PACU 
iii. Status of closed beds 
iv. Status of placement 
v. Status of monitored beds 
vi. Status of pending discharges/incoming transfers 
vii. Current status of staffing  
c. Monitor throughput of inpatient discharges / transfers. 
i. Discharge or Transfer to occur within 1 hour of written order. 
ii. If greater than one hour, house supervisor contacts unit charge nurse to inquire 
iii. Directs additional resources as needed i.e. staffing, transportation, discharge 
hold unit. 
iv. Facilitates problem-solving as needed  
2. CNO/Designee : 
a. Coordinate communication with attending physicians/hospitalist regarding need for 
bed availability. 
b. Determine needs for opening closed inpatient beds or discharge unit facilitating 
throughput. 
c. Coordinate with Staffing Coordinator/House Supervisor on staffing needs for opening 
closed beds. 
d. Determine need for inpatient float nurse to manage admissions. 
e. Assist with problem-solving issues or obstacles interfering with throughput and or 
delivery of patient care. 
f. Cancel all non-mandatory meetings. 
3. Staffing Coordinator/House Supervisor:  
a. Evaluates immediate staffing for all patient care areas and communicates to the 
appropriate nurse leader. 
b. Initiates appropriate measures to ensure that all units are staffed accordingly, identifies 
staffing needs, and seeks out additional resources as needed.  
c. Utilizes the Emergency Operations Plan STELEC 400 for staffing guidelines. d. Anticipates staffing needs for the next 48 hours and works to flex staffing to 
accommodate surge in census. 
e. Determine other clinical resources i.e. education, infection control, quality that may be 
redirected to the bedside. 
f. House supervisor will be responsible for patient throughput taking into consideration 
the needs of the patient.  i.e. ICU patients holding in ED with ICU at capacity, triage 
will be done to determine best unit to manage the critical patients. 
4. Inpatient Units: 
a. Bed ahead communicated with house supervisor. 
b. Nursing units will complete discharge within 1 hour of written order.  
c. Customer Service Representatives (CSR) /Monitor Techs will communicate 
pending/actual discharges to the Command Center. 
d. Nursing Units will take “hand-off” report immediately upon patient assignment to 
available inpatient bed. 
e. Nursing Units may be asked to transport patients to assigned unit.   
5. Hospital Team Members: 
a. All staff (i.e. Administrative, Nursing, and Ancillary, Non-Clinical) maybe requested 
to assist beyond scheduled hours to assist in meeting patient care needs. 
b. Non-mandatory meetings and classes may be cancelled to allow team members to 
assist with patient needs. 
6. Hospitalist and Consultants: 
a. Case Manager/designee communicates needs with physicians. 
b. Physician will prioritize discharges. 
c. Hospitalist and Case Management collaborate regarding status of pending discharges 
and reasons for delay. 
d.  Re-evaluate every hour. 
7. Case Management:   
a. Identify patients meeting criteria for discharge or transfer. 
b. Facilitate potential discharges and resolve discharge delays. 
c. Contact physicians as needed to expedite pending discharges. 
d. Communicate status of discharges hourly to the House Supervisor/designee. 
e. Facilitate “Discharge Holding Area” for stable discharges needing minimal to no 
assistance. 
8. Surgical Services: 
a. If volume permits contact ED to determine need for additional stretchers. 
b. Assess availability of staff to float high capacity areas or assist with patient 
throughput. Advise House supervisor of available staff. 
c. House supervisor will advise staff report to the appropriate unit for assignments. 
i. Team member will not be assigned patients unless team member has 
completed cross training and competency in the unit assigned. 
ii. Administration of medications 
iii. Initiation of intravenous starts (IV) 
iv. Transport patients to the Admission Hold Area, inpatient bed 
v. Transport patients upon discharge to the front lobby 
vi. Assist with other procedures and/or patient care as deemed appropriate. 
9. Environmental Services:  
a. Prioritizes room cleaning for admitting patients. 
b. Utilizes electronic bed system to communicate beds cleaned. 
c. Prioritize rooms to be cleaned with the house supervisor. d. Expedite cleaning of any available inpatient bed. 
e. Re-assign EVS team members to areas of high priority.   
f. EVS team members assigned to the ED should report to the unit clerk with name / 
contact information, and assist with turnover of ED rooms upon discharge.  
10. Laboratory Services: 
a. Responsible for ensuring all ED lab tests are given priority for completion.   
b. Additional staffing will be assessed and implemented by the divisional director of 
ancillary services. 
c. Assign phlebotomist to the ED to assist with managing venipuncture and blood 
culture’s. 
11. Radiology Services: 
a. Notifies Radiologist of Capacity Management.  
b. Additional staffing will be assessed and re-allocated by the divisional director of 
ancillary services. 
12. Respiratory Service: 
a. Staffing will be assessed and re-allocated by the divisional director of ancillary 
services. 
13. Security representative: 
a. Maintains stationed at entrance into ED, maintaining a controlled environment. 
b. Provides assistance to incoming visitors as needed. 
c. Coordinates visiting privileges with the charge nurse. 
d. Responsible for the managing crowd control limiting visitors of 2 per patient room 
with direction of the ED charge nurse. 
14. Food and Nutrition: 
a. Coordinating with CSR to meet nutritional needs for patients. 
b. Assures delivery of food is provided in a timely manner. 
15. Materials Management: 
a. Assess the need for additional equipment needed to accommodate high volume in 
patients.  i.e. IV pumps, stretchers 
b. Provide additional supplies and/or re-stock as needed. 
16. Pharmacy: 
a. Assess the need for additional supplies/medications/IVF needed to accommodate high 
volume in patients.  
b. Provide additional supplies and/or re-stock as needed. 
17. Team Members Reporting for assistance: 
a. Report to the CSR or charge nurse for check-in and assignment. 
b. Receive assigned resource person for partnering in delivery of patient care activities 
(see appendix b) 
c. Report off to resource person upon completion of assignment and/or returning to home 
unit. 
18. Emergency Department Staging Schematic: 
a. Rapid Treatment area open. 
b. Staging areas for triage will take place to facilitate the separation of the worried-well 
and those will minor illnesses/injuries to accommodate incoming patients with higher 
acuity needs. 
c. “Initial Quick Triage” (IQT) will take place at the entrance of the Emergency 
Department where an ED RN will complete a brief visual assessment, chief c/o to 
determine if any critical / emergent needs in completing the Triage Screening Tool. 
(See attached document). d. Triage a (color coded yellow) will be the Triage Room where all incoming higher 
acuity level patients are directed by the IQT. 
e. Triage B (color coded green) will be the Outpatient Surgery/ICU Waiting room area 
where all non-acute patients will be directed 
f. Patients are assigned to the appropriate treatment area based upon their presenting 
acuity level and availability of beds.  
g. Triage B (color coded green) RN will reassign patient to main ED based upon acuity 
as needed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References: 
ACEP Crowding Resources Task Force. Responding to Emergency Department Crowding: A 
Guidebook for Chapters. American College of Emergency Physicians 2002 
JCAHO:  Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals 2006. Standard LD.3.15. 
JCAHO:  Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals 2006. Standard LD.3.20. 
Vicellio, P. Emergency Department Full Capacity Protocol. Stony Brook University Hospital and 
Medial Center, State University of New York.  Available at 
www.hospitlovercrowding.com/policyFCPword.doc.  
 
NEDOC calculator example: http://providers.otddi.com/edwin/nedocs_calc.html 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reviewed/Revised 8/26/2016 added relieve 1:1 sitter for RN/LPN and C N A 
12/2017 no change 
07/21 no change 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                      Appendix A 
Census Action Plan 
CENSUS LEVEL INDICATORS  ACTIONS:  Note when at Critically High Census all plans in force. 
Critically High @ Capacity  
54-57+ patients 
• No Available Critical 
Care Beds  
• ED Holds, PACU 
Holds 
• Local Mass 
Casualty/Disaster 
Event  
• Jan-Mar 
 
• Reassign all clinical staff not working in direct patient care to support 
patient care staff.   
• Managers/Directors providing patient care, completing discharges and 
admissions. 
• Personnel lists actively managed by staffing coordinator. 
• Implement premium pay policy. 
• Ops (RT, EVS, FANS, Mat Man, Lab, Radiology, Pharmacy) included in 
Huddle 
• Consider admission of patient in holding location within 8 hours of hold 
time (could be completed by house supervisor, manager, director, 
nonclinical RN staff, RN) 
• Consider implementing discharge hold area. 
• Determine staffing to assist in opening any closed beds. 
• Discourage scheduled PTO   
•  If PACU or ED is holding ICU patients determine appropriate staffing and 
appropriate holding unit. (see page 3)                                                                
• Over 57 all RN/LPN in nonclinical roles are expected to contribute at least 
one hour of time in a clinical area. 
• Recognize team members for going above and beyond with walking 
rounds. 
High Census, Near Capacity 
51-53 patients 
• Limited Available 
Critical Care Beds 
• ED Bed Holds, PACU 
holds  
  
  
  
  
  
 
• 9:30 a Daily Rounds (includes staffing review)  
• Communicate needs to NLC after daily rounds. 
• 1 pm Huddle 
• Consider admit nurse or discharge holding unit. 
• Consider reassignment of clinical staff not working in direct patient care to 
support patient care staff.  
• Mid-day rounds 
• Engage Director of Hospital Medicine, ICU, and ED manager 
• Maximize case management  
• Review/cancel non-essential events (meetings, IT maintenance)  
• Review scheduled PTO 
• Active Supply Management 
• Notify FANS and EVS 
• Contact OLOL bed placement to advise 
Optimum 41-50  
• 9:30 a Daily Rounds 
• 1 pm Huddle 
• House  Supervisor Round Every 2 hours (minimum) 
Moderate 31-40 
• April - December   •  Normal Operations as above 
• Determine staffing per target HPPD 
Critically Low below 30   • Normal Operations • Manage flexing off staff, consider cross training 
• Manage supplies to volume   
 
           Appendix B 
Assignments for Capacity Management 
 
 
Clinical: RN/LPN Clinical:  
Nursing Assistants 
Non-Clinical 
 
➢ Initiate IV starts with drawing 
rainbow lab tubes 
➢ Assist with vital signs ➢ Assist with answering 
phones 
➢ Assist with admission 
assessment (RN) or profile 
(LPN) 
➢ Consider staffing holding 
area 
➢ Pass water and ice 
➢ Place patients on cardiac 
monitors, NIBP cycle every 
30min-1hr, asst with vital 
signs 
➢ Asst Accu-checks ➢ Assist answering patient call 
lights 
➢ Place patients on Pulse 
Oximetry 
➢ Assist with Cleaning / 
turnover of rooms, general 
tidiness and trash 
➢ Assist with cleaning / 
turnover of rooms, general 
tidiness and trash 
➢ Administer medications as 
ordered 
➢ Assist with bedside 
procedures  
➢ Assist family and visitors as 
needed 
➢ Assist with transporting 
admission 
➢ Transport admissions ➢ Provide comfort needs such 
as warm blankets, ice bags 
➢ Assist with discharges ➢ Transport discharges ➢ Provide TLC-sit with a 
patient, offer prayer 
➢ Educate Patients and families ➢ Assist patients to bathroom ➢ Pass linen 
➢ Assist with cleaning / turnover 
of rooms 
➢ Rounding on patients 
(4P’s) 
 
➢ Assist with placing patients 
from triage to assigned ED 
rooms 
➢ Provide TLC-sit with a 
patient, offer prayer 
 
➢ Rounding on patients (4P’s) ➢ Pass water and ice  
➢ Ambulate patients ➢ Ambulate patients  
➢ Pass water and ice ➢ Offer spirometry  
➢ Assist with Accu-checks ➢ Assist passing trays and 
feeding patients 
 
➢ Offer spirometry ➢ Assist with baths, pass 
linen 
 
➢ Assist passing trays and 
feeding patients 
➢ Relieve 1:1 sitter  
➢ Assist with baths, pass linen   
➢ Nurse leader conduct leader 
rounding (Appendix C) 
  
➢ Relieve 1:1 sitter   
Name: ___________________________ Resource: ___________________________ 
Clinical / Non-Clinical (circle one)                 From: Dept.: _____________  
 
 
 
           Appendix C 
 
Rounding Script 
 
Leader Round questions: 
Ask nurses station if there are already any known concerns and let the team know you will be rounding.  
1. When entering patient room: Introduce yourself and explain why you are there.  
2. Let the patient know that their satisfaction is important to us and that we want to make sure that they are 
having a great stay. 
3. Ask if there are any issues/concerns with the stay or if they have any questions about their care.  
4. Ask if they are being rounded (leaders, nurses, MDs) on regularly. 
5. Ask if there is anyone who has done a great job you can recognize.  
6. Ask if there is anything you can do for them right now to make their stay more comfortable.  
7. Address visitors: Ask if they are finding their way around and if their needs are met (blankets, pillows, 
etc. are common requests) 
8. Wish the patient well and exit room. 
9. Notify nursing team of any concerns or outstanding requests. 
While in patient room:  
*Observe-white boards, cleanliness, take trays out, see if they need water etc… (for equipment concerns, submit 
work orders; for concerns about insurance/facility changes, inform case management)  
*Also look for missing crucifixes and clocks and replace. 
Finally advise the team of any recognition (good and bad) 
*If there was anything outstanding get a Daisy nomination for RN and SPOT for others.  
 
 
  
Emergency Department 
Patient Surge/Admit Hold 
 Tracking Form 
 
Patient List 
MRN # 
Age & 
Gender 
ER 
 Acuity 
Admit Diagnosis Unit 
Requested 
Special Needs Assigned 
Unit/RM # 
 
 
      
 
 
      
 
 
      
 
 
      Emergency Department 
Patient Surge/Admit Hold 
 Tracking Form 
 
  
 
ER Census 
q30mins 
# Vents 
Longest admit 
time (in hrs) 
Total pts with 
admit orders 
Wait time for 
last patient 
called 
NEDOC 
SCORE 
Additional 
Staff 
Assigned 
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
ER PEC Pt List 
MRN # 
Age & 
Gender 
Monitor 
Risk level 
ER  
Room # 
 
Placement/ 
Transfer 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     