 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Srvs. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center    
Subject:  Evidence: Disposition of Material Evidence Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  January 1, 1987 Supersedes:  
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed: 
April 11, 2005 
May 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  CAR-04 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for disposition of material evidence.   Refer to Organizational Policy OrgOps/ 
GN/026 Chain of Custody. 
POLICY: 
All material evidence will be handled in accordance with the following procedure: 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Any specimen (bullet, foreign body, etc.) that is removed from a patient whose injury is 
suspected to be the result of a criminal action shall be preserved and given to the appropriate law 
enforcement agency.  If the patient is to have the foreign body removed in surgery, the 
Emergency department nurse will inform the OR nurse and a note will be attached to the 
patient's chart with the name of the law enforcement officer to be notified.  The physician of 
record shall also be notified. 
2. Any specimen released to law enforcement will be placed in a container with the name of the 
patient, the date, the name of the physician who removed the specimen, as well as the name of 
the nurse receiving the specimen. 
3. When removing the clothing from the victim of a gun show wound or stabbing, assure that 
caution is taken to cut around the area of the entrance and exit rather than through it. 
4. In any case in which death is the result of violence (gun shot wound, stab wound, etc.), clothing 
and valuables cannot be released without permission of the coroner. 
5. Any valuables or clothing on a victim of any criminal action will be given to the appropriate law 
enforcement officer with a minimum of handling by Emergency Department personnel.  The 
name of the Officer and the item provided to him/her will be documented on the Nurse's Notes. 
6. A Chain of Evidence Form will be initiated and completed.  This documentation will begin at the 
time any evidence is collected from the name of the physician to the nurse who receives it, from 
the nurse who receives to the law enforcement officer.  The original of the Chain of Evidence  2 
Form will go with the evidentiary material.  A copy will be attached to the Emergency 
Department record. 
7. Any patient presenting to the Emergency Department for treatment who has an injury that is due 
to a violent act must have that reported to the law enforcement agency in the location where the 
injury occurred.  It is appropriate that the nursing staff initiates that notification and document 
who was notified as part of their Nurses Notes. (See policy, CAR -05, regarding rape /sexual 
assault for specific instruction.) 
8. If law enforcement desires any photographs to be taken for evidentiary purposes, it will be the 
responsibility of that law enforcement agency investigating the case to provide photographers 
and take photographs after the patient has signed a release form if they are able to do so.  Our 
Lady of the Lake does not have available in-house capability to provide evidentiary photographs 
to law enforcement officials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  3  
   4 
 