 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Srvs. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   
Subject:  ED Mandatory Reporting  Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  February 14, 2023 Supersedes: CAR-02 
CAR-06 
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed:           
May 23, 2024 
May 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  CAR-07 
 
  
PURPOSE: Compliance for mandatory reporting requirement  
Burn Related Injuries: Louisiana State Revised Statues 14:403.4 Burn Injury report: Title 14:403.4  
In every case of a burn injury or wound in which the victim sustains second or third degree burns to 
five percent or more of the body or any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due to 
the inhalation of super -heated air, and every case of a burn injury or wound which is likely to or may 
result in death, shall be reported to the office of state fire marshal, code enforcement and building 
safety; hereinafter, sometimes referred to as the "office".  That office shall then immediately notify the 
appropriate local or state investigatory agency or law enforcement agency of the receipt of such report 
and its contents.  A report shall be made within 2  (two) hours  of examination or treatment  via 
electronic reporting link to Louisiana Office of State Fire Marshal. Louisiana Office of State Fire Marshal 
 
The following information is required: 
a. Victim's name, address, sex, and date of birth. 
b. Address where burn injury occurred. 
c. Date and time of burn injury. 
d. Degree of burns and % of body burned. 
e. Area(s) of body injured. 
f. Injury severity. 
g. Apparent cause of burn injury. 
h. Name and address of reporting facility. 
i. Attending physician's name. 
j. Signature of person filling out report. 
 
 
 
 
Animal Bites: State Legislature RS 14:102.22  2 
The health care provider who examines or treats any person who has been bitten by an animal or upon 
whom an animal has inflicted serious bodily injury shall report such bite or injury to the law 
enforcement or animal control agency for the location where the bite or injury occurred. Such report 
shall be made immediately, if possible: in any event should be made within twenty-four (24) hours. 
a.  The report shall include as much of the following information as is available: 
          i. The patient’s name, date of birth, sex, and current home and work address. 
         ii.  The nature of the bite or injury that is the subject of the report. 
        iii.  Any information about the location of the biting animal and the name and address of   
                    any known owner. 
        iv. The name and address of the health care provider.      
 
Violent Crime:  considered as offenses against another person's physical body with harm or intent to 
harm. Violent acts include Sexual Assault, battery, assault, gunshot wounds or other potential crimes 
and acts of violence that would warrant reportable to local law enforcement.   
Gunshot wounds: should be reported to local law enforcement upon patient’s arrival/assessment. 
 
Suspected abuse or neglect, (may include failure to thrive): see Org OC027 OC027.doc 
 
Sexual Assault: See ED CAR-05 CAR05.doc 
 
Coroner Deaths:  includes SIDS See Org OC004 OC004.doc 
 
Complications of Abortion: Notify Regulatory Department within 24 hours at 225-765-7795. 
 
Reference: Sanitary Code State of Louisiana Part II `rev 06/21 