CH-ECLS-012 (7549) 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: BioMed Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for BioMed (7549) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7549 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are located exiting department into hallway and at intersection of halls 
near the department. 
  CH-ECLS-012 (7549) 
Page 2 of 2 
• The Adjacent smoke compartment is located through double doors towards Materials 
Management. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• Supervisor or Senior Technician position clears the hallway of any carts or equipment  
• Supervisor or Senior Technician closes doors  
• Supervisor or Senior Technician confirms automatic fire doors closed  
• Supervisor or Senior Technician moves patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital 
is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Supervisor or Senior Technician assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Supervisor or Senior Technician ensures all employees are accounted for 
• Supervisor or Senior Technician ensures each room is empty.   
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The closest Fire Extinguisher is located outside the department in hall to the right outside the 
Biomed closet. 
• The closest manual pull station is located in hall outside Sharps room. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Turn off all medical equipment within the Biomed shop 
• There are combustible products located throughout Biomed department 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors toward Materials Management 
gathering at the Staff parking. 
• BioMed will only have horizontal evacuation. 