CH-ECLS-012 (7550) 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Dietary Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Dietary (7550) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7550 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located throughout the department at the end of hallways and at 
doorways exiting the department. 
  CH-ECLS-012 (7550) 
Page 2 of 2 
• The adjacent smoke compartment is located through double doors towards the laboratory. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• Any available team member clears the halls of any items blocking safe exit 
• Any available team member who closes doors 
• Any available team member moves patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Any available team member assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Department Leadership ensures all employees are accounted for 
• Department Leadership ensures each room is empty 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The Ansul system is installed with two different locations to activate.  Fire extinguishers are 
located in the main kitchen area and outside the dish room. 
• Manual pull stations are located near entrance to stairwell 7 and near doorway exiting serving 
area. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Kitchen equipment with open flames would need to be turned off 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors towards the front hall of the 
Laboratory. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors towards the back hall of 
the Laboratory exiting the building by Materials to muster in the Staff Parking Lot. 
• This location will only have horizontal evacuation. 