CH-ECLS-012 (7547) 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Environmental Services Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Environmental Services 
(7547) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7547 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• An Illuminated Exit Signs is located at the doorway exiting department. 
  
• Adjacent smoke compartments are Located through the Plant and through the double doors 
CH-ECLS-012 (7547) 
Page 2 of 2 
entering hall between Materials Management and the Laboratory. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• The Onsite Operations Manager or designee will clear the hallway by moving items into the 
nearest office 
• The Onsite Operations Manager or designee will close doors. 
• The Onsite Operations Manager or designee will move patients and visitors to safety 
explaining, “The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety”. 
• The Onsite Operations Manager or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for. 
• The Onsite Operations Manager or designee will ensure each room is empty 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The closest fire extinguisher is located in the hall outside Plant Services. 
• The closest manual pull station is located on the wall outside Stairwell 6 by Plant Services. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Ensure Washer and Dryer are turned off  
• Key is required to open floor equipment cage in EVS area.  Extra Key is located in the EVS 
Director office for the cage. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the plant into the Plant Control Room. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors entering the hallway 
between Materials Management and the Laboratory. 
• This department will only have horizontal evacuation. 
• In the event that the building is evacuated; the department will evacuate to the center staff 
parking lot. 
 