CH-ECLS-012 (6237) 
Page 1 of 4 
 
Policy Manual: Emergency Department Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Emergency Department 
(2453) 
Policy 
Reference #: 
CH-ECLS-102-10312-
2453 CH ER 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date: 2/5/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit director or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Fire-Life 
Safety Management Plan ECLS-000 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated EXIT signs are located throughout the department primarily at the ends of hallways, 
through the double doors entering/exiting the department, and at both stairwells. 
 
• Adjacent Smoke Compartments are located: CH-ECLS-012 (6237) 
Page 2 of 4 
o through the double doors towards Imaging 
o through the double doors towards the front hallway by Chapel 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response  
Main PEDS ER and Waiting Area 
• All staff are responsible to clear the hallway of any carts or equipment closest to them by moving 
them to closest to nurse’s station, triage rooms, equipment rooms  or available alcoves 
• All staff are responsible for assuring all doors and windows are closed 
• Nurse Leader/Supervisor will confirm automatic fire doors closed. This role will be assumed by 
charge nurse or delegated by charge nurse in the absence of Nurse Leader or Supervisor 
• Nurse Leader/Supervisor will confirm provider notification of need to evacuate. This role will be 
assumed by charge nurse or delegated by charge nurse in the absence of Nurse Leader or 
Supervisor 
• Nurses, Nurse Techs and Emergency Room Technicians are responsible to  move patients and 
visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your 
safety” 
• CSR will locate him/herself at ambulance entrance to assure no evacuation through this route 
unless directed by Nurse Leader/Supervisor or charge nurse to assure patient safety due to 
potential arriving ambulance vehicles 
• Triage Flow RN will assist patients and families in all ER waiting areas to appropriate 
evacuation route 
• Triage RN and Rapid Treatment Area RN will assists those with Limited English Proficiency 
(LEP) and those with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Nurse Leader/Supervisor will ensure all team members are accounted for, this role will be 
assumed by charge nurse or delegated by charge nurse in the absence of Nurse Leader or 
Supervisor 
• Charge Nurse will work with all nursing staff to ensures all patients are accounted for 
• Nurse Leader/Supervisor will confirm each room is empty.  This role will be assumed by charge 
nurse or delegated by charge nurse in the absence of Nurse Leader or Supervisor. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response  
Mental Behavioral Health Area  
• We must  consider safety and monitoring during evacuation of the Mental Behavioral Health 
Population  
• Mental Health Tech/NT/ER Tech in Mental Behavioral Health (MBH) area will clear halls and 
secure doors and windows 
• RN assigned to MBH area will assure any fire doors are closed and attend to any Level 1-1:1 
monitored patients where movement is needed 
• If non ambulatory patients are in this area, charge nurse will assign a secondary ancillary team 
member to area to assist with patient movement. 
• All additional staff will be responsible to move Level 2 patients and visitors to safety explaining, 
“The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” and will utilize the 
door next to the nurse’s station for evacuation- The opposite exit door will be avoided due to 
close proximity to ambulance entrance/exit area to assure patient and visitor safety and prevent CH-ECLS-012 (6237) 
Page 3 of 4 
elopement 
• Charge nurse will work with MBH area assigned RN to assure all patients are accounted for. 
• Nurse Leader/Supervisor will confirm each room is empty.  This role will be assumed by charge 
nurse or delegated by charge nurse in the absence of Nurse Leader or Supervisor. 
• Nurse Leader/Supervisor will confirm all team members from MBH area are accounted for.  This 
role will be assumed by charge nurse or delegated by charge nurse in the absence of Nurse 
Leader or Supervisor 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response  
Trauma/Critical Area 
• All staff will assure hallways are clear and free from medical equipment or carts. 
• Each patient in this area will be accompanied by 2 team members responsible to move patients 
and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure 
your safety”, one team member will secure any equipment or oxygen needs, if on vent or 
respiratory equipment for airway support, respiratory will also assist with rapid move and can be 
considered the second team member 
• Provider will be notified of need for evacuation, and patient movement by primary RN caring for 
patient 
• Provider will determine if they are needed during the transport to assure patient safety. 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• The medical gas shut off valves are located: 
o Outside the OB/GYN room 
o Across the hall from MBH room 27-stainless steel sloping locked cover in place(key 
located MBH nurse’s station next to door on hook) 
o Outside the ABG room 
o On both sides of the hallway outside the Decontamination room 
o Outside of all three Major exam rooms (C1, C2 & C3) 
o In the hall across from ET# 9 
o In the hall across from ET# 10 
o Outside the Rad Room 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Many pediatric emergency room patients will be non-ambulatory due to age/development. 
Parents and staff will assist with all non-ambulatory children and adults. 
• Wheelchairs, cribs and stretchers will be utilized to transport non-ambulatory patients during 
evacuations.   
• All patient rooms have stretchers and/or cribs that can be used to mobilize patients during 
evacuation. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire Extinguishers are located: 
o At “B” nurse’s station outside the Medication room CH-ECLS-012 (6237) 
Page 4 of 4 
o Outside ABG Room 
o In ER waiting room by triage C & D next to bathroom area 
o In the hall across from Triage A & B next to ER radiology room 
o Outside Transport/ER Supervisors office across from transport storage 
o At the double doors towards Imaging 
 
• Manual Pull Stations are located on the wall near the Ambulance entrance and on wall by 
patient/visitor entrance. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Oxygen canisters full (PSI 2000) are located in clean supply room, Trauma Bay and Major Exam 
rooms. Partial oxygen canisters (PSI greater than 500) are located in clean supply room. There 
are multiple crash carts on unit with one oxygen tank located on each cart (O2 PSI greater than 
or equal to 1500), and empty canisters (O2 PSI less than 500) are stored in soiled utility room  
• Special patient populations to consider are neonate/infants/children who cannot evacuate 
independently as well as any physically disabled patient population visiting the department.  
• Doors are 15second delay push release for any patient or family needing immediate exit from 
unit and will be auto released in case of fire alarm. 
• If code red drill occurs the MBH doors auto release. The CSR will monitor exit door near 
ambulance bay entrance, and the charge nurse will assign individual to monitor MBH locked unit 
entry/exit door by room #21. Once all clear has been called the charge nurse /MBH nurse or 
designated individual will re-activate doors using the red button indicated for re-activation just 
inside the MBH Nurse’s station door. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors into the Imaging area. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors into the front hallway. 
• The Emergency departments will only have horizontal evacuation. 