CH-ECLS-012 6032 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Hematology/Oncology Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Hematology / Oncology, 
6032 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 6032 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
o Outside Patient Rooms 7, 10, and 1 
o At entrance to stairwell 1 CH-ECLS-012 6032 
Page 2 of 2 
  
• The Adjacent smoke compartment is located via double doors toward front hallway and via 
double doors toward back hallway. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• The CNA, CSR, and/or Nurse will clear the hallway of any carts or equipment and place these 
items in the supply room. 
• The CNA, CSR and/or Nurse will close all doors on the unit.  
• The Charge nurse or designee will confirm that the fire doors closed. 
• The Bedside nurse or CNA will move patients and visitors to safety. 
• The CSR, CNA or Nurse will prevent people from using the elevators. 
• The Bedside nurse or CNA will assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities   
• The Charge nurse or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for.   
• The Charge nurse or designee will ensure each room is empty.  
• The Charge nurse or designee will confirm Area of Refuge occupants or those needing assistance 
have been evacuated. 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• The medical gas shut off valves are located outside Patient Room 1 and outside the Staff 
Conference Room. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Special transporting devices include Patient bed or crib or bassinet depending on age of patient 
and 2 small wheelchairs.  The wheel chairs are stored in equipment room. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire Extinguishers are located outside the Family bathroom and the Staff bathroom. 
• The nearest Manual Pull Station is located on the wall outside patient room 3 right before the 
Stairwell 1 door. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Oxygen tanks, Chemo therapy 
• The entire Children’s hospital requires badge access.   
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The horizontal evacuation route is through double doors into the front or back hallway. 
• The vertical evacuation route from the front hallway is down Stairwell 3 and, if needed, exiting 
the building via the front doors mustering in the Public Parking area. 
• The vertical evacuation route from the Hematology-Oncology department would be down 
Stairwell 1 and, if needed, exiting the building via the Emergency Department main visitor 
entrance mustering outside the Emergency Department.  