CH-ECLS-012 7502 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Computed Tomography Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Computed 
Tomography (7502) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7502 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are located on each of the double doors entering the Emergency 
Department and heading towards MRI. 
  CH-ECLS-012 7502 
Page 2 of 2 
• Adjacent smoke compartments are located through double doors entering the Emergency 
Department and through double doors on either side of the Laboratory. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• The Technologist or designee will assume responsibility of the patient that they are examining, 
and bring them to the adjacent smoke compartment 
• The Technologist or designee will ensure all doors are shut, that do not automatically shut.  
• The Technologist or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed  
• The Technologist or designee will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital 
is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• An Imaging Manager or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and 
those with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• An Imaging Manager or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for by having a copy 
of the daily schedule 
• The Technologist or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for by checking the 
transportation logs, and case board  
• The Technologist or designee will ensure all rooms are empty in area 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• The medical gas shut off valves are located outside the CT Control room across the hall. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Patients will be transported in the same manner they were transported to the department. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The closest fire extinguisher is in the hall to the left of the CT Equipment Room. 
• The closest manual pull station is located by the exit near PBX. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors entering the Emergency 
Room. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors on each side of the 
Laboratory. 
• This department will only have horizontal evacuation. 
• The muster/ gathering location for this department will be in the physician parking lot near the 
loading dock. 