CH-ECLS-012 7505 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policy Manual: Laboratory Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Laboratory (7505) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7505 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
o Exiting department through double doors by Microbiology 
o Exiting department through door next to Red Bag Storage CH-ECLS-012 7505 
Page 2 of 3 
o In front of Storage room door 
o Exiting department into hallway by Chemistry 
  
• Adjacent smoke compartments are Located: 
o Through double doors toward Imaging 
o Through double doors toward the Kitchen 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
NOTE:  The Laboratory operates 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.  Responses during evening and night 
shifts will be performed by the Section designee. 
• Venipuncture staff or designee will move any Phlebotomy carts in the hallway into the 
Venipuncture Staging area room.  
• Central Processing Staff or designee will clear main hallway exit routes of any trash bags or 
boxes waiting to be picked up.   
• Phlebotomists, MT/MLT, and MLA’s will close any open doors nearest to them at the time 
that the Code Red is announced. 
• Transfusion Services MLA or designee will ensure that the fire window has closed.  If it has 
not automatically closed, this person will manually close the window. 
• In the event that there are patients or visitors in the Outpatient waiting area, Outreach Call 
Center staff or designee will assist in moving any patients and visitors to safety explaining, 
“The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety”.  Any Laboratory 
Team Member may assist with a patient or visitor.   
o Any Lab Team Member performing a procedure on an outpatient will remain with 
the patient and any visitors, and will assist them to safety. 
o Hematology Charge Tech or designee will check the Outpatient Waiting area to 
ensure that it is empty after hours. 
• Supervisor, Senior Technologist, or designee after-hours from each Lab section will ensure 
that all employees in their section are accounted for. 
• Supervisor, Senior Technologist, or designee after-hours from each Lab section will ensure 
that each room in their section is empty by marking the door/door frame with chalk to indicate 
that the room is empty. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguishers are located: 
o Near Urinalysis 
o Outside the department across from the Blood Bank 
o Outside the department close to the entrance to Materials Management 
• The nearest manual pull station is located at the exit by PBX. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Instruments do not need to be turned off 
• Combustible products: 
o All Lab Departments have flammable Reagents/Chemicals used in testing 
• The irradiator room requires special badge access.  Transfusion Services Supervisor, Senior CH-ECLS-012 7505 
Page 3 of 3 
Technologist, or designee will provide access to the Code RED Response Team if needed 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors towards Imaging and, if 
needed, exiting the hospital at either the PBX or loading dock gathering in the staff parking 
area. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is through double doors towards the kitchen. 
• Laboratory will only have horizontal evacuation. 