CH-ECLS-012 6036 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policy Manual: Medicine Unit Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Medicine Unit (6036) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 6036 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date: 3/4/24 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
o Outside patient room 12, 17, 20, 1, 4, and 9 
o At Stairwell 1 CH-ECLS-012 6036 
Page 2 of 3 
  
• The Adjacent smoke compartment is located through the double doors past patient room 20 or 
through the double doors past patient room 1. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• CNA or designee will clear equipment from halls and move them to Treatment Room and/or 
Clean Utility 
• Charge nurse or designee will ensure windows and doors are closed 
• Charge nurse or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed  
• Charge nurse or designee will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Charge nurse or designee will prevent visitors/people from using the elevator. 
• Charge nurse or designee to assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Charge nurse or designee will ensure that all employees are accounted for 
• Charge nurse or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for 
• Charge nurse or designee will ensure each room is empty   
• Charge nurse or designee will confirm Area of Refuge occupants or those needing assistance 
have been evacuated. 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves  
• The medical gas shut off valves are located: 
o In the hall across from patient room 18 
o Outside the procedure room near the double doors to the back hallway 
o Outside patient room 1 near the double doors to the front hallway 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Equipment such as wheelchairs will be used to assist in transporting patients in emergencies as 
indicated.  The wheelchairs are stored in the treatment or/and clean utility room.   
• Some patients are ambulatory as well as non-ambulatory.  Parents are also located in the 
patient’s rooms and may need assistance.   
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguishers are located:  
o In back hall outside the patient bath/toilet room 
o In hall outside alcove across from patient room 7 
o In hall next to stretcher alcove across from patient room 3 
o Inside the data and electric rooms 
• Manual Pull Stations are located at Stairwell 1 and at Stairwell 3. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Oxygen is stored in the Treatment room.  
 CH-ECLS-012 6036 
Page 3 of 3 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the back hall double doors close to the 
PT/ST/OT gym or through the front hall double doors close to the Teen Room. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is through the front hall double doors near the Teen Room 
down Stairwell 3 mustering on the other side of the ambulance bay. 