CH-ECLS-012 7511 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policy Manual: Operating Room Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Operating Room (7511) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7511 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
o In the Sterile Core at the exit to the back hallway, outside the OR Robotics Room 
entrance, and at the exit to the hallway by the Control desk. CH-ECLS-012 7511 
Page 2 of 3 
o In the hallway outside the EVS closet 
o At the double doors entering PACU 
o In the hallway across from the Control desk directly outside the OR Robotics Room 
o At the double doors between the two Procedure Rooms 
o In the hall outside the Male Locker Room 
o In the back hall towards the Clean Sterile Medical Surgical Supply area 
 
• Adjacent smoke compartments are Located: 
o Through the double doors towards PACU and Pre-OP 
o Through the double doors toward the front hall near the Mechanical room entrance 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• Designee (Case Tech, RN, Surgical Tech, CRNA, etc.) will clear the hallways of any carts or 
equipment by moving them to supply room, equipment storage room and/or sterile core. 
• Designee (Case Tech, RN, Surgical Tech, CRNA, etc.) will closes doors and windows. 
• Charge nurse or designee will confirm automatic fire doors are closed  
• RN, Surgical Tech, CRNA and/or designee moves patients and visitors to safety explaining, 
“The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety”. 
• RN or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with sensory 
or mobility disabilities 
• Charge Nurse, Supervisor, Manager and/or designee ensures all employees are accounted for 
• Charge Nurse, Supervisor, Manager and/or designee ensures all patients are accounted for 
• Charge Nurse, Supervisor, Manager and/or who ensures each room is empty 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves  
• The medical gas shut off valves are located 
o In the hall outside the Cath Lab 
o On the hall wall between Operating Rooms and PACU 
o On both hall walls outside the Procedure Room across from the Control desk. 
o In the hall between the OR and the Equipment Storage Room 
o In the hall between the OR and the small biomed room 
o At the Control desk 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Equipment used to transport a patient may include: crash cart, oxygen tank and/or portable 
transport monitors.  
• Oxygen tanks will be located in the “Medical Gas Storage” room.  
• A crash cart is located in the Core.  
• Patients maybe under anesthetics, have spinals and/or not able to walk, staff will be required to 
transport these patients.  
• All patients will be non-ambulatory. For Horizontal evacuation, staff will use stretchers, beds, or 
cribs to transport. For Vertical evacuation, staff will sure best resources available based on 
patient’s needs to transport.  CH-ECLS-012 7511 
Page 3 of 3 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire Extinguishers are located:  
o Outside the Sterile Core door in the back hall 
o In the hall near the Med Gas Storage Room 
o In the hall next to the Control desk 
o In the hall outside the Cath Lab across from Stairwell 2. 
• Manual Pull Stations are located at Stairwell 2 and Stairwell 4. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Medical gases supplied to each OR and procedure room needs to be turned off 
• The “Medical Gas Storage” room contains combustible products 
• Each OR will have combustible transport O2 tanks  
• OR core will have stored combustible products 
• All surgical areas will have special badge access, Code RED Response Team will be allowed in 
by staff designee    
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors toward PACU. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors towards the On Call 
Rooms by the Front hallway. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is through the double doors toward PACU then down 
Stairwell 4 to muster between the Physician and Staff Parking areas. 
• The secondary vertical evacuation route is through the double doors past the On Call Rooms then 
down Stairwell 1 to muster in the center of the Public Parking area. 