CH-ECLS-012 7580 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Guest Services - PBX Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Guest Services - PBX 
(7580) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7580 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located at the double doors heading outside the building and at the 
double door toward the hall past Clean Linen. 
  CH-ECLS-012 7580 
Page 2 of 2 
• Adjacent smoke compartments are located through the double doors alongside the Laboratory 
and through the double doors toward the main lobby. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
(Normal operating hours 7 days a week 24 hours per day.) 
• All available staff will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• All available staff will ensure path to exit is clear. 
• All available staff will assist those with limited English proficiencies and those with disabilities. 
• All available department leaders ensures all employees are accounted for 
• All available department leaders ensures each room is empty.   
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The closest fire extinguisher is located on the wall directly outside the department. 
• The closest manual pull station is located on the wall by the exit vestibule. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
PBX 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors alongside the lab toward 
Materials Management and if needed exiting the building to muster in the Staff Parking Area. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is down the hall exiting into the main lobby. 
• This department will only have horizontal evacuation. 
 
Guest Services – Front Desk 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors towards Imaging.  
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is down the hall into the ED waiting area and, if 
needed, exiting the building to muster in the Public Parking Area. 
• This department will only have horizontal evacuation. 
 
Guest Services – Surgery 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors towards Pre/Post Op.  
• The primary vertical evacuation route is down stairwell 3 exiting the building at the main 
entrance to muster in the Public Parking Area. 
 