CH-ECLS-012 6217 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policy Manual: Pre-Op Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Pre-Op 6217 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 6217 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
o In hall outside patient rooms 6, 4, 2, 1, 12, 9, and 10 
o At stairwell 4 CH-ECLS-012 6217 
Page 2 of 3 
o In the hall outside the Soiled Workroom 
  
• Adjacent smoke compartments are located  
o through the double doors toward the front hallway near visitor elevators 
o through the double doors entering the OR area 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
The hours of operation are Monday-Friday 5:00a-7:30pm; Saturday 5:00am-5:30pm; and Sundays, 
On Call only.   
• The CNA or designee will clear the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving them to the 
Clean Utility room, medicine room and/or nurse’s lounge.  
• The CSR or designee will close doors. 
• The Charge nurse or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed 
• The Nurses will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an 
emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• The Charge nurse or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Department Leadership or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• Department Leadership or designee will  ensure all patients are accounted for 
• Department Leadership or designee will ensure each room is empty.  
• The Charge nurse or designee will confirm Area of Refuge occupants or those needing assistance 
have been evacuated. 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves  
• The medical gas shut off valves are located:  
o In the hall outside the procedure rooms 
o In the hall outside patient room 14 across from the EVS closet 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• For horizontal will use wheelchairs and stretchers for those not ambulatory.  
• For vertical evacuations, we will use stretcher mattresses and sheets.   
• We anticipate most patients to be ambulatory.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguishers are located: 
o Inside the Equipment storage room across from patient room 14 
o At the nurse’s station near the Clean Supply Room 
o In the hall outside patient room 11 across from patient room 10 
o In the hall outside the patient toilet/shower close to the Play Area 
 
• Manual Pull Stations are located: 
o At the entrance to Stairwell 4  
o At the entrance to Stairwell 3 CH-ECLS-012 6217 
Page 3 of 3 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors toward the waiting area near 
the visitor elevators. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors entering the OR area. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is through the double doors towards the waiting area near 
the Visitor Elevators then down Stairwell 3 to muster at the Public Parking Area.  
• The secondary vertical evacuation route is through the double doors towards PACU then down 
Stairwell 4 to muster between the Physician and Staff Parking Areas. 
 