CH-ECLS-012 (7570) 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy - Inpatient Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Pharmacy - Inpatient 
(7570) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7570 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
o Both doors exiting department 
o Outside Clinical Pharmacist office CH-ECLS-012 (7570) 
Page 2 of 2 
o Near the Crash Cart Exchange 
o In the far corner of the Pharmacy Compounding Area 
o Outside the Sterile Compound room 
o Outside the Sterile IV room 
  
• Adjacent smoke compartments are Located: 
o Through double doors toward Administration/Visitor Elevators 
o Through double doors leading to hallway outside Sterile Supply/Surgical Materials 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• The Charge Pharmacy Technician or designee will clear the hallway of any carts or equipment. 
• The Charge Pharmacist or designee will close all doors in the Inpatient Pharmacy. 
• All available staff in the inpatient pharmacy will assist in moving patients and visitors to safety 
explaining, “The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety”. 
• Charge Pharmacist or designee will assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and 
those with sensory or mobility disabilities. 
• The Charge Pharmacist or designee will ensure that all inpatient pharmacy employees are 
accounted for. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The closest Fire Extinguisher is located outside the Sterile Compounding room inside the main 
Pharmacy Compounding area. 
• The closest Manual Pull Station is located on the wall outside Stairwell 1 by the On Call rooms. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Our combustible products are stored in a flammable safety cabinet. 
• The Inpatient Pharmacy front door and narcotic vault requires badge access.  The Charge 
Pharmacist or designee will ensure the Code RED Response Team gains access into the 
department. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors toward the Visitor elevators. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors passing the Visitor 
elevators and then go through double doors passing the Patient elevators. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is down the hall towards Stairwell 1. 
• The secondary vertical evacuation route is through the double doors heading toward the Visitor 
Elevators then down Stairwell 3. 
• The muster location for the inpatient pharmacy department will be in the public parking area in 
front of the main entrance to the hospital for both primary and secondary vertical evacuation 
routes. 