CH-ECLS-012 7509 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policy Manual: PT/OT/ST Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for PT/OT/ST (7509) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7509 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
o At entrance to hall towards visitor elevators 
o At double doors towards PEDS 1 CH-ECLS-012 7509 
Page 2 of 3 
o At double doors towards PEDS 2 
• Adjacent smoke compartments are located via double doors toward PEDS 2 or via double doors 
towards PEDS 1. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Hours are Monday through Friday 7:00am through 3:30pm. 
• All available staff will ensure path to exits are clear.   
• All available staff will close all doors. 
• All available staff will assist in moving patient’s and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital 
is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety.” 
• All available staff will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities. 
• Department leadership will ensure all employees are accounted for. 
• Department leadership will ensure all patients are accounted for. 
• Department leadership will ensure each room is empty. 
• Department leadership or designee will confirm Area of Refuge occupants or those needing 
assistance have been evacuated. 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves  
• The medical gas shut off valves are located in the hall outside the entrance to the gym by the 
storage rom. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Equipment for transporting patients in the event on an emergency include wheelchairs, walkers, 
crutches, and sheets which are all stored in the supply closet. 
• Patient population in the therapy gym is variable and determination of ambulatory status will be 
a case by case basis depending on the patient being served at the time of the emergency. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The closest fire extinguisher is located in the hall next to the Linen Chute room. 
• The nearest manual pull station is located in front of Stairwell 3 by the visitor elevators. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Med gas canisters will be stored in storage room. 
• Main door to department will have key code or badge access (TBD).  Any available therapy staff 
will have access during business hours.  The House Manager will have access to gym during 
afterhours.   
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors into PEDS 2. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors into PEDS 1. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is through PEDS 2 down Stairwell 7.  Evacuation would 
progress to muster in the physician parking area in the rear of the building. CH-ECLS-012 7509 
Page 3 of 3 
• The secondary vertical evacuation route is through PEDS 1 down Stairwell 1.  Evacuation would 
progress to muster to the east of the Ambulance Canopy, east of the building. 