CH-ECLS-012 (7571) 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy – St. Jude Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Pharmacy – St. Jude 
(7571) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7571 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
o Outside the department inside the infusion area 
o Outside the department in the staff hallway CH-ECLS-012 (7571) 
Page 2 of 2 
  
• The adjacent smoke compartment is located through the double doors in the staff hallway 
towards the staff breakroom. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• The St. Jude Pharmacist or designee will clear the hallway of any carts or equipment. 
• The St. Jude Pharmacist or designee will close all doors in the St. Jude Pharmacy. 
• The St. Jude Pharmacist or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed 
• The St. Jude Pharmacist or designee will assist in moving patients and visitors to safety 
explaining, “The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• The St. Jude Pharmacist or designee will assist in preventing people from using elevator 
• The St. Jude Pharmacist or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) 
and those with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• The St. Jude Pharmacist or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• The St. Jude Pharmacist or designee will ensure each room is empty.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The closest Fire extinguisher is located outside the department, through the double doors 
entering the staff hallway to the left right before entering the patient elevator lobby. 
• The closest manual pull station is located near the visitor elevators outside Stairwell 3. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Our combustible products are stored in a flammable safety cabinet. 
•  The St. Jude Satellite Pharmacy requires badge access.  The St. Jude Pharmacist or designee will 
ensure the Code RED Response Team gains access into the department. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors entering the staff hallway. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is through the St. Jude Infusion Center exiting into 
the waiting area. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is down the long hallway towards Stairwell 7. 
• The secondary vertical evacuation route is through the St. Jude Infusion Center then into the 
lobby outside the Visitor Elevator then down Stairwell 3. 
• Should the primary vertical evacuation route be used, the muster location shall be in the 
physician parking area located in front of the medical office building.  
• Should the secondary vertical evacuation route be used, the muster location shall be in the public 
parking area in front of the main entrance to the hospital 