CH-ECLS-012 (102-10312-4692) 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Plant Services Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Plant Services  
Policy 
Reference #: 
CH-ECLS-012 (102-
10312-4692) 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: November 2021 Review Date:  
Revision Date: 1/25/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
o Outside of Office to the Left towards stairwell 
o Outside of Office to the Right towards Loading Dock CH-ECLS-012 (102-10312-4692) 
Page 2 of 2 
o Inside Boiler Room Near Boiler 
  
• Plant Services is divided into two separate smoke compartments with the adjacent smoke 
compartment accessible via the double doors towards Materials Management. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• All available staff will assist patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• All available staff will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or any disabilities 
• Director or Designee ensures all employees are accounted for 
• Mechanic or Designee will clear means of egress of all Items.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Manual Pull Station is at Stairwell and at Back Door Exiting Boiler Room 
• Fire extinguisher is outside department in hall toward stairwell. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Dependent upon where fire is located certain pieces of equipment needs to be shut down by 
Designee  
o Boiler Room 
▪ Chillers, Boilers, Pumps, Natural Gas Valve 
o Generator Building 
▪ Natural Gas Valves and Diesel Gas Valves  
• Used/stored combustible products 
o Paint – spray cans in 6th floor storage area 
• Plant Services Doors are badge access  
o Key can be used to unlock these doors 
▪ Plant Services has these keys on their Key Rings. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary Evacuation: Exit through Boiler room into Back Parking Lot Muster near Cooling 
Tower 
• Secondary Evacuation: Exit left out of office into stairwell exit to Muster Point 
• Primary Muster Point: Back gate near Chiller 
• Secondary Muster Point: Back parking lot near Loading Dock 