CH-ECLS-012 7516 
Page 1 of 2 
 
 
Policy Manual: Sterile Processing/Surgical 
Materials Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Sterile Processing 
(7516) 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 7516 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located near the separation between SPD and Materials and at both 
exits entering the hallway. CH-ECLS-012 7516 
Page 2 of 2 
  
• The Adjacent smoke compartment is located via double doors towards the hall outside 
Pharmacy. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• The supervisor, techs and/or designee clears the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving 
them to the equipment storage area.  
• The supervisor, techs and/or designee will close doors and windows. 
• The unit manager, supervisor and/or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed. 
• Designee will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an 
emergency exercise to ensure your safety”. 
• All available staff will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Unit manager and/or supervisor will ensure all employees are accounted for. 
• The supervisor, techs and/or designee will ensure each room is empty.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguishers are located near double doors entering into back hallway, inside hall near 
Biomed room, and within dirty room. 
• The nearest Manual Pull Station is located near Stairwell 1 by the On Call rooms. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Autoclaves, V-PRO, cart washer and instrument washers are turned off and shutdown.  
• Cleaning products, stored surgical supplies and instrument wraps are combustible products in the 
department.  
• SPD unit is a secured area that would require a special badge access or door key.  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through double doors towards the Pharmacy. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is down Stairwell 2 exiting the building at the EMS 
entrance then mustering between the helipad and physician parking. 
 