CH-ECLS-102-10312 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Security Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Security 102-10312 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-102-10312 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date: 02/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are located on both sides of the double doors entering the main lobby. 
• The Adjacent smoke compartment is located via double doors toward the Main Lobby or via 
double doors toward the Imaging Departments. CH-ECLS-102-10312 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• Any available team member will close the door 
• Any available team member will  move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital 
is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Any available team member will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Any available team member will ensure all employees are accounted for 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The closest fire extinguisher is located outside the Meds Rooms, ED Entrance Bay and MOB 
Lobby. 
• The closest manual pull station is located in the Emergency Room Lobby (ED front facility), the 
service hallway outside of the PBX office/dispatch center (rear facility) and CH –MOB main 
lobby/corridor area. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The horizontal evacuation route is via double doors entering either Main Lobby or Imaging area. 
• This department will only have horizontal evacuation. 