CH-ECLS-012 4129 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policy Manual: St. Jude’s Infusion Suite Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for St. Jude’s Infusion 4129 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 4129 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
o Outside Infusion Bays 4, 7, and 11 
o In doorway entering into waiting area CH-ECLS-012 4129 
Page 2 of 3 
o Outside Private Infusion 1 
o Outside patient bathroom 
o Outside clean supply 
o In doorway exiting into back hallway 
  
• The adjacent smoke compartment is located: 
o Through single door passing family waiting area entering St. Jude Clinic 
o Through double doors in back hallway  towards St. Jude Clinic 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Normal operating hours are Monday Thru Thursday 8-4:30 Friday 8-3 
• All available employees or designee clears the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving 
them to the appropriate storage area.  
• All available employees or designee will close doors. 
• All available employees or designee confirms automatic fire doors closed  
• All available employees or designee will assist patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The 
hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• All available employees or designee will prevent people from using elevator 
• All available employees or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) 
and those with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Department leadership or designee ensures all employees are accounted for 
• Department leadership or designee ensures all patients are accounted for 
• Department leadership or designee ensures each room is empty.  
• Department leadership or designee will ensure that emergency kit with heparin/saline supplies 
will be brought to evacuation location. 
• Department leadership or designee will confirm Area of Refuge occupants or those needing 
assistance have been evacuated. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Evacuation equipment might include wheel chairs, sheets, or other devices.  Sheets will be 
located in the supply room.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguisher is located outside Infusion Bay 9 near Infusion Observation 
• The nearest manual pull station is located outside Stairwell 3 by the visitor elevators. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• We have oxygen tanks stored in the clinic. 
• All patients are ambulatory, but some may be receiving blood transfusions or receiving chemo.  
• Most doors to our clinic require either badge access or a key code. 
  
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The horizontal evacuation route and destination is the St. Jude Clinic via the single door entering CH-ECLS-012 4129 
Page 3 of 3 
the family waiting area or through the double doors in the back hallway. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is down Stairwell 5 and muster to employee parking area. 