CH-ECLS-012 4129 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policy Manual: St. Jude Clinic  Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for St. Jude Clinic 4129 
Policy 
Reference #: CH-ECLS-012 4129 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to 
guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are Located: 
o At exit to back hallway outside equipment room 
o Outside nurse work room CH-ECLS-012 4129 
Page 2 of 3 
o Outside Exam 10 Isolation 
o At exit to front hallway 
o At exit to back hallway outside exam 6 
o At receptionist desk 
o Exiting waiting area toward main elevators 
  
• Adjacent smoke compartments are Located: 
o Through single door entering St. Jude Infusion 
o Through double doors entering PEDS 3 Inpatient 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Normal operating hours are Monday Thru Thursday 8-4:30 Friday 8-3 
• All available employees or designee clears the hallway by moving items to the nearest open 
room.  
• All available employees or designee will close doors. 
• All available employees or designee confirms automatic fire doors closed 
• All available employees or designee will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The 
hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• All available employees or designee will prevent people from using elevator 
• All available employees or designee  will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) 
and those with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Department leadership or designee ensures all employees are accounted for 
• Department leadership or designee ensures all patients are accounted for  
• Department leadership or designee ensures each room is empty.   
• Department leadership or designee will confirm Area of Refuge occupants or those needing 
assistance have been evacuated. 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves  
• The medical gas shut off valves are located outside Exam 4. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Evacuation equipment might include wheel chairs, sheets, or other devices.  Sheets will be 
located in the supply room. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire Extinguishers are located: 
o Inside electric and data rooms 
o In hall between bathrooms 
o In hall next to Med Gas Shut Off Valves 
o At doorway entering department from front hallway 
o In back hallway across from staff break room 
o At entrance to department from back hall before entering double doors 
 CH-ECLS-012 4129 
Page 3 of 3 
• The nearest Manual Pull Station is located outside Stairwell 3 near the visitor elevators. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• We have oxygen tanks stored in the clinic. 
• All patients are ambulatory, but some may be receiving blood transfusions or receiving chemo.  
• Most doors to our clinic require either badge access or a key code. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route enters the St. Jude Infusion Suite through either the 
double doors of the back hallway or the single door off the waiting room. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is down Stairwell 5 and muster to employee parking area. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route enters the PEDS 3 inpatient area through the double 
doors at either the front or back halls. 
• The secondary vertical evacuation route is down Stairwell 4 and muster to staff parking. 