 
CH-ECLS-012 7582_Department Code RED Safety and Response Plan for Gift Shop/RxOne (7582)  
1 
 
 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Department Code RED Safety and Response Plan for 
Gift Shop/RxOne (7582) 
PAGES:  2 
 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
CH-ECLS-012 7582 (02/01/2019) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/01/2019   
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
05/17/2020 
POLICY NUMBER:  
CH-ECLS-012 7582 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions that indicate the 
presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present by addressing aspects of fire 
prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the 
event of a fire. 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH) written Code RED 
Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction of unit manager 
or designee. 
 
Each OLOLCH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency Operations Plan 
(ECEP001) and the OLOLCH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (CH-ECEP007) to guide the preparation and 
response in the event of a fire. 
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
5/17/2020 9:35 AM 
 
 
CH-ECLS-012 7582_Department Code RED Safety and Response Plan for Gift Shop/RxOne (7582)  
2 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are located: 
o at the double doors exiting into the front hallway 
o in the hallway outside the Gift Shop workroom 
o at the doorway entering hall from break room 
 
• The department is split into two separate smoke compartments.  The public area is in one smoke compartment 
with the employee only rooms in a different smoke compartment.   
o Adjacent smoke compartments are located through the retail area double doors turning right towards 
the main reception area or through the double doors in the back hall towards the back of the kitchen. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Department is open Monday through Friday from 7:00am to 5:30pm  
• Any available team member clears the hallway of anything blocking path to exit 
• Any available team member closes doors and pharmacy roll down window.  
• Any available team member moves patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an 
emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Any available team member assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with sensory or 
mobility disabilities 
• Department leadership ensures all employees are accounted for 
• Department leadership ensures each room is empty 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguishers are located at the double doors exiting the main retail area and in the hallway outside the 
Blood Bank. 
• The nearest manual pull stations are located at the front entrance of the hospital and at the two doors exiting 
the eating area of the cafeteria. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors towards the public eating area. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is through the double doors towards the main reception area. 
• The Gift Shop/Lake Children’s Pharmacy will only have horizontal evacuation. 
• Employees will muster in the parking lot by the main hospital entrance. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• PH.2444_Environmental Safety  
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  