CHMP-006 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Children’s Hospital Section/ 
Chapter: Medications/Pharmacy 
Title: Pediatric Parental Nutrition Policy   
Policy 
Reference #: CHMP-006 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: June 27, 2011 Review Date: June 7, 2024 
Revision Date: October 2, 2020 
    
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide pertinent information regarding the order, preparation, and administration of parenteral 
nutrition (PN) solutions. 
 
POLICY: 
I. Ordering 
A. Basic serum chemistries should be present and evaluated prior to ordering and initiating PN.    
1. Chemistries will be ordered in consultation with the physician at a minimum of every   
seven days.  
B. Parenteral nutrition consults for pediatric patients are to be entered by 1200 daily.  The 
standard hang time is 1700. 
1. Consults received after 1200 will be processed to hang at 1700 the following day.  
C. Preprinted PN order forms are to be utilized when electronic orders are not available.  
Continued use beyond the initial PN order requires a new PN order daily. 
D. If central access is not obtained by 1200, PN will be written for peripheral administration 
E. A maximum dextrose concentration of 10% will be used for peripheral PN.  In the neonate, 
clinical needs may warrant increasing to 12.5% and will be noted in the progress note. 
 
II. Preparation 
A. Parenteral nutrition solutions are to be prepared and dispensed by the Our Lady of the Lake 
(OLOL) Children’s Hospital pharmacy.  Inpatient use of a patient’s personal parenteral 
nutrition solutions compounded by an outside facility that is not currently infusing at the 
time of arrival is not allowed. 
B. Parenteral nutrition will have 50mL of overfill. 
 
III. Administration 
A. Intravenous parenteral nutrition is administered by a registered nurse. 
B. Parenteral nutrition solution along with the administration set and filter shall be infused and 
discarded within 24 hours of the administration set being attached. 
C. Lipids, tubing, and filter will change at each order interval. 
D. An IV pump is required to administer the therapy. 
E. The parenteral nutrition catheter line should not be used for central venous pressure 
monitoring. 
F. When no other route can be obtained for IV piggyback or IV push medications, 
compatibility should be verified with pharmacy prior to administration. 
 
IV. Documentation CHMP-006 
Page 2 of 2 
A. Document the double check in the electronic medical record.  
 
REFERENCES: 
 
 
Infusion Nurses Society.  (2021).  Infusion Therapy Standards of Practice (8th Ed.) .  Journal of 
Infusion Nursing, 44(1S).  
 
 