CHMP-009 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Medications_Pharmacy 
Subject:  Palivizumab (Synagis®) Section:  Medications_Pharmacy 
Date of Origination:  October 8, 2020 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
June 7, 2024 
Serial Code:  CHMP-009 
  
PURPOSE: 
To guide patient selection for the use of palivizumab in the Children’s Hospital. 
 
POLICY:  
Patients who are not admitted for RSV may receive palivizumab (Synagis®) IM Injection for prophylaxis 
against RSV infection if they meet at least one set of the following criteria AND have a length of stay greater 
than 14 days OR are admitted to the NICU with anticipated discharge in 24 to 48 hours. Palivizumab may only 
be given during the months of RSV season, which is typically November through March but may vary 
according to community infection rate.  Palivizumab should not be given to patients who have already received 
nirsevimab or for whom nirsevimab is available.  
 
 
Set 1: Patient must meet both of the following criteria (Maximum 5 doses) 
1. 12 months of age or younger at the start of RSV season 
2. Born at 28 weeks, 6 days gestation or less. 
 
Set 2: Patient must meet both of the following criteria (Maximum 5 doses) 
1. 12 months of age or younger at the start of RSV season. 
2. Born at 31 weeks, 6 days gestation or less and required greater than 21% oxygen for at least the first 
28 days after birth. 
 
Set 3: Patient must meet both of the following criteria (Maximum 5 doses) 
1. 12 months of age or younger at the start of RSV season 
2. Hemodynamically significant heart disease (should be discussed with cardiologist) 
a. Including: acyanotic heart disease on medication to control congestive heart failure and will 
require cardiac surgical procedures; moderate to severe pulmonary hypertension; cyanotic 
heart disease 
b. Excluding: secundum atrial septal defect, small ventricular septal defect, pulmonic stenosis, 
uncomplicated aortic stenosis, mild coarctation of the aorta, patent ductus arteriosus, lesions 
adequately corrected by surgery 
 
Set 4: Patient must meet both of the following criteria (Maximum of 5 doses) 
1. 12 months of age or younger at the start of RSV season 
2. One of the following conditions identified 
a. Significant congenital abnormality of the airway 
b. Neuromuscular condition that compromises handling of respiratory tract secretions 
 CHMP-009 
Page 2 of 2 
Set 5: Patient must meet both of the following criteria (Maximum 5 doses) 
1. 24 months of age or younger at the start of RSV season 
2. Born at 31 weeks, 6 days gestation or less and continue to require medical therapy for chronic lung 
disease within the 6 months of the start of the second RSV season. 
a. Since May the patient has needed supplemental oxygen, diuretic therapy, or chronic systemic 
corticosteroid therapy. 
 
Set 6: Patient receiving palivizumab at home and monthly dose is due while admitted. 
 