CHMP-004 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Children’s Hospital Section/ 
Chapter: Medications/Pharmacy 
Title: Administration of Buffered Lidocaine Via Jet 
Injection for Local Anesthesia 
Policy 
Reference #: CHMP-004 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: May 24, 2010 Review Date: June 7, 2024 
Revision Date:  
    
 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
Provide uniform standard for the registered nurse to use a jet-injector to administer buffered lidocaine as a 
local anesthetic prior to an invasive painful procedure. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
A. Jet-injector – Injection device using some form of compressed gas to force medication through a 
micro-orifice at a high velocity through the skin and into the underlying subcutaneous tissue.  The 
gas escapes from the device and does not come in contact with the patient’s skin. 
B. J-tip syringe – A single use, sterile, needle-free syringe with a self-contained, compressed gas 
cartridge. 
C. Buffered lidocaine – A combination of sodium bicarbonate and lidocaine solutions to provide an 
anesthetic effect. 
 
POLICY: 
 
A physician order must be obtained prior to the use of J-tip device.  
 
1. Weight requirement – 1% buffered lidocaine may be used in a pediatric patient weighing at least 4 kg. 
2. Maximum total dose – The maximum total dose of 1% buffered lidocaine that may be administered to 
a pediatric patient weighing at least 4 kg is 4 doses of 0.25 ml or 1 ml total (2.5mg/kg) in any 2-hour 
time period.    
3. Identify patient per institutional policy and assess if patient is allergic to lidocaine.  Do not use 
buffered lidocaine for known allergy to lidocaine. 
4. Provide age-appropriate explanation to patient and family prior to using J-tip device. 
5. Obtain 1% solution of buffered lidocaine and J-tip syringe.  Review expiration date. 
6. Avoid bruised or injured skin and select appropriate site for buffered lidocaine. 
7. Avoid placement over blood vessel. 
8. Don gloves and disinfect site with appropriate antimicrobial agent.   
9. Allow site to air dry.  This is important to avoid injecting alcohol into the tissue. 
10. Remove luer-lock tip from J-tip syringe. 
11. Move the skin in a lateral direction away from the vein to avoid injecting directly over the vein. 
12. Slide the colored safety ring down until it stops. 
13. Press J-tip syringe firmly perpendicular on the skin at the selected site. 
14. Holding the syringe firmly, achieving a dimpling of the skin, press the trigger for at least 2 to 3 
seconds.  The “hissing” sound (release of gas from the syringe) is normal.  Avoid “sliding” or CHMP-004 
Page 2 of 2 
“angling” the syringe while giving the injection. 
15. Remove J-tip and wipe site with alcohol or a dry 4 x 4.  A small “skin wheal” and/or small drop of 
blood maybe present.  If blood cultures are ordered, prepare the skin in accordance with institutional 
policy. 
16. Discard J-tip syringe in sharps’ container. 
17. Wait approximately 2-3 minutes for maximum absorption of Lidocaine and then p roceed with vein 
puncture or procedure per institutional policy. 
18. Document medication administration and procedure per institutional policy. 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
J-tip (2017).  J-tip Needle free Injection System.  National Medical Products, Inc.  http://jtip.com/ . 
 