CHON-004 
Page 1 of 4 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:   
Subject:  High and Low Risk Hazardous Drug 
(Chemotherapy) Spill Procedure 
Section:  Oncology 
Date of Origination:  June 22, 2009 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
April 5, 2013 
April 12, 2024 
Serial Code:  CHON-004 
  
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to define the activities necessary to properly decontaminate areas where high risk 
hazardous drug (HD) administration occurs as well as provide instructions on proper spill management and 
disposal of HDs. 
 
This policy will review high risk hazardous drug Group 1 related spills in outpatient infusion, clinic and/or the 
inpatient setting.   
 
DEFINITIONS: 
A. USP800: United States Pharmacopeia (USP) General Chapter <800> Hazardous Drugs – Handling in 
the Healthcare Setting is a guidance document comprised of best practices handling hazardous drugs in 
healthcare settings.  Standards written USP800 are now federally enforceable as of December 1. 2019. 
B. Hazardous Drug (HD): NIOSH defines any drug having any of the following six characteristics in 
humans or animals: 
o Carcinogenicity 
o Teratogenicity or other developmental toxicity 
o Reproductive toxicity 
o Organ toxicity at low doses 
o Genotoxicity 
 
Structure and toxicity profiles of new drugs that mimic existing drugs determined hazardous by any of the 
above criteria: 
o High Risk HD: following OLOL policy of HDs, High Risk HDs are considered to be NIOSH 
Group 1 drugs: Antineoplastic HDs 
o Low Risk HD: following OLOL policy of HDs, Low Risk HDs are considered to be NIOSH 
Group 2 and 3 drugs: Non-Antineoplastic and Reproductive Risk HDs. 
o Deactivation: Deactivation renders a compound inert or inactive. 
o Decontaminate: Decontamination occurs by inactivating, neutralizing, or physical removing HD 
residue from non-disposable surfaces and transferring the HD residue to disposable materials for 
proper removal from an area. 
o Spill Response Team (SRT): The SRT will consist of the following personnel: 
• The person who created and/or found the spill 
• The unit or clinic supervisor (or designee) where the spill occurred 
• A team member from Pharmacy 
• A team member from Environmental Services 
 CHON-004 
Page 2 of 4 
o Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) 
Gloves: Per USP800 gloves used as PPE when handling HDs shall meet American Society for 
Testing and Materials (ASTM) standard D6978 (or its successor). 
Gown: Per USP800 gowns used as PPE when handling HDs shall meet the following criteria: 
• Be disposable 
• Shown to resist permeability by HDs 
• Close in the back and have no openings to the front 
• Be long sleeved with closed, elastic or nit, cuffs 
• Must not have any seams or closures HDs could pass through 
o Respirator: a full-face piece, chemical cartridge-type respirator, or powered air purifying type 
mask.  This type of mask should only be worn when attending to HD spills larger than what can be 
contained with a spill kit. 
o HD Spill: An HD spill is the unintentional leakage or spill of a hazardous drug from otherwise 
closed container.  For purposes of this policy, HD Spills and spill management will be referred to for 
High-Risk HDs. 
o Large High-Risk HD Spill:  A large HD spill is any high-risk HD spill that cannot be contained 
by a single chemo spill kit, requiring the use of multiple spill kits. 
o Small High-Risk HD Spill: A small HD spill is any high-risk HD spill that can be contained by a 
single chemo spill kit or decontaminant wipes. 
o Hazardous Bodily Fluid Spill: Hazardous bodily fluid spill refers to any patient currently 
receiving or has received a High-Risk HD within the last 48 hours during this current hospital 
admission, where any bodily fluids have spilled or soiled any locations or surfaces in the patient care 
area.  
       
POLICY:  
I.  High Risk Hazardous Drug (HD) Spill (Group 1 drugs): Only High-Risk HDs, also known as antineoplastic 
drugs, will follow the outline in this policy.   
 
A. Wherever chemotherapy, or a high-risk HD, is being administered, a spill kit must be readily available.  
If a chemo spill kit is not readily available in supply room of unit, obtain one from pharmacy or central 
supply.  The following items should be available to manage a high-risk HD spill: 
• Goggles 
• Two pairs of ASTM D6978 rated chemo gloves 
• One N95 mask (not surgical mask) 
• Gown shown to resist hazardous drug permeation with back closure 
• Shoe covers 
• Sheets of absorbent materials 
• Spill control pillows 
• A sharps container 
• A small scoop to collect glass fragments 
• HD waste-disposal bag 
 
B. Personal Contamination Guidelines 
1. Immediately remove contaminated gown, gloves, and personal clothing and dispose items in a 
chemotherapy disposal bag/bin.  
•  
• Personal contaminated clothing must not be taken home under any circumstances. 
 CHON-004 
Page 3 of 4 
2. Wash affected skin immediately with soap (not germicidal cleaner) and water. 
• For eye exposure, immediately flood the affected eye with water or isotonic eyewash 
for at least 15 minutes. 
3. Obtain medical attention.  Contact your supervisor and report to ECU.  Employees Health should be 
contacted during office hours. 
4. Safety event should be entered in safety event reporting system. 
 
C. Containment, identification, and high-risk HD spill area 
1. It is the responsibility of the person creating or finding the high-risk HD spill is responsible for 
containing the spill.  If the spill is not able to be managed by a single spill kit, the SRT should be 
activated for help cleaning the high-risk HD spill. 
2. The RN will identify the spill area, post a warning sign, and wall off the area to prevent unauthorized 
personnel from becoming exposed to cytotoxic agents. 
3. Isolate the area of the spill to reduce the risk of exposure to additional personnel if not already done 
by persons calling the HD SRT. 
4. Prior to entering the spill area, don a coated chemotherapy, back closing gown, double shoe covers, 
thick gloves (over double chemo gloves if broken glass) or double chemo gloves tested to ASTM 
standard D6978, and personal full-faced dual chamber respirator (or half respirator and goggles) 
where warranted. 
5. Gather spill kit supplies and enter area of spill. 
6. If the spill is liquid, place absorbent towels on top of spill gently to prevent splashing of HD if not 
already in place. 
7. If the spill is solid, place absorbent towels wetted with water on top of the spill. 
8. Use the absorbent towels to contain the spill and carefully place the contaminated towels in the HD 
waste bag provided in the spill kit. 
9. Clean up any broken glass fragments using utility gloves (thick rubber gloves) placed over double 
chemotherapy gloves and place into pierce proof container along with any contaminated sharps. 
Place in yellow RCRA waste container (Black Bin) along with any soft supplies that are heavily 
contaminated with HD.  If a yellow waste container is not immediately available, please in RCRA 
Black Bin. 
10. Once the visible spill has been removed, use absorbent towels wetted with the designated 
decontamination agent to decontaminate the area.  Theses wipes will be placed in RCRA waste 
(Black Bin) regardless of the drug spilled. 
11. Allow the agent to dry. 
12. Clean the area with the designated germicidal detergent/sporicidal solution.  Solution will be brought 
from pharmacy when the HD SRT is called.  Bleach wipes may be used otherwise. 
13. Place all wipes used in the cleaning process into the trace yellow waste. 
14. Once the spill has been cleaned, remove PPE and discard in  yellow bin. Wash hands.  
15. Patient area can be reopened at the completion of spill procedure cleaning. 
 
D. Documentation of Spills 
1. Spills and spill cleanup must be documented as a safety event in the safety event reporting system by 
person who had the spill or those who notified the HD SRT.  Further investigation should occur by 
the unit manager or supervisor to avoid similar high-risk HD spills in the future. 
 
E. Linen 
1. Laundry Personnel:  Contaminated linen will be double bagged in yellow bag and placed in hospital 
laundry chute.   CHON-004 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
F. Low Risk hazardous Drug (HD) Spill (Group 2 and 3 drugs: Non-Antineoplastic and Reproductive Risk 
HDs) 
1. Obtain a spill kit 
2. Wear double chemo gloves and gown 
3. Wear a face shield if splashing is possible, if available 
4. Discard linen in a hazardous drug labeled linen bag 
5. Discard trash and disposable items in a chemotherapy labeled bag and place in 
chemotherapy plastic container 
6. For non-employees exposed to HD-spill, enter a safety event into the electronic reporting 
system and report to emergency room for evaluation.  
 
G. Training  
1. All personnel who may be required to clean up a spill of HD must receive proper training in 
spill management and the use of PPE. 
  
REFERENCES: 
 
Chemotherapy and Biotherapy: Guidelines and Recommendations for Practice (4th Edition 2015) 
 
Herring, R.A, (ED.). (2019) The Pediatric Chemotherapy and Biotherapy Curriculum. (4th ed.).     Glenview, 
IL: Association of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Nurses. 
 
 
USP General Chapter <800> Hazardous Drugs – Handling in Healthcare Settings USP42-NF37 Published on 
June 1st, 2019 