CHON-001 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Oncology 
Subject:  Chemotherapy Extravasation Protocol Section:   
Date of Origination:  June 22, 2009 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
April 8, 2022 
October 6, 2023 
Serial Code:  CHON-001 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide pertinent information regarding the proper procedure for the management of extravasation of 
cytotoxic drugs 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Some chemotherapeutic agents are considered vesicants and may cause serious tissue damage if they leak into 
tissue outside of the vein (extravasate).  Extravasation is the inadvertent administration of a vesicant into the 
surrounding tissues that can cause pain, burning, inflammation, necrosis, sloughing, and / or ulceration of the 
tissue.  Irritants are those agents that can inflame tissue but will not cause tissue necrosis if extravasation 
occurs; reactions range from mild erythema and burning to pain and inflammation at the injection site.  Flare 
reactions may include erythema, urticaria, and phlebitis along the vein.  The degree of tissue damage related to 
an extravasation is dependent upon the vesicant potential of the agent and the concentration and quantity of 
drug extravasated. 
 
INDICATIONS - RECOGNITION OF EXTRAVASATION: 
1. Patient complains of burning, stinging, pain, or any acute change at the insertion site. 
2. Induration, erythema, swelling at the injection site, coolness to touch, or blanching site.  Frequent 
examination of IV site is essentially important in patients who are unable to report pain, such as patients in a 
coma or infants. 
 
POLICY:  
The extravasation protocol should be initiated as soon as an extravasation of a vesicant/irritant is suspected. 
 
Initiate the following steps in the event of any extravasation of a chemotherapeutic agent: 
1.   Stop the administration of the chemotherapy infusion.  
2.   Put on chemotherapy PPE to minimize personal exposure to any chemotherapeutic agent in blood. 
3. Withdraw as much drug from the site as possible through the existing needle and IV tubing then discontinue 
the IV access. 
4. Elevate and immobilize the site. 
5. Notify the physician at the time of the occurrence and obtain orders for treatment. 
6. Confirm with the physician if an antidote is indicated and administer if necessary. 
7. Apply warm or cool compresses for 15 minutes at least 3-4 times a day for the first 24-48 hours. (See chart 
below as a reference) 
8. Do not rub or press on the area. 
9. Observe the site for pain, erythema, induration, and/or necrosis. 
10. Document the following: 
a. Date CHON-001 
Page 2 of 3 
b. Time 
c. Type of access 
d. Location of access 
e. Drug sequence 
f. Drug administration technique 
g. Approximate drug amount extravasated 
h. Patient response 
i. Appearance of the site 
j. Physician notification 
k. Follow up measures 
l. Document the incident according to institutional policy.  Notify risk management, if indicated. 
m. A safety event should be completed through the electronic events reporting system.  
11. If the patient is an ambulatory patient, and the antidote requires a multi-day treatment, which falls on the 
weekend or a holiday, the patient will be admitted to the hospital for the subsequent treatment. 
 
Drug Name Classification Application Suggested Antidote if 
applicable  
Arsenic trioxide None or Irritant None None 
Asparaginase (all forms) None  None None 
Bleomycin None or Irritant Cold None 
Busulfan Irritant Cold None 
Carboplatin Irritant (>10 mg/ml) Cold None or Sodium 
Thiosulfate or Dimethyl 
Sulfoxide 
Carmustine Irritant or Vesicant Cold None 
Cisplatin  
Vesicant (greater than 0.4 
mg/ml)  
Cold Sodium Thiosulfate or 
Dimethyl Sulfoxide 
• Indicated only for volumes 
greater than 20 ml at greater 
than 0.4mg/ml 
Cyclophosphamide Irritant Cold Sodium Thiosulfate 
Cytarabine None None None 
Dacarbazine Irritant or Vesicant Cold Sodium Thiosulfate 
(concentrated dacarbazine) or 
Dimethyl Sulfoxide  
Dactinomycin Vesicant Cold None 
Daunorubicin Vesicant Cold  
Dexrazoxane (now preferred 
over Dimethyl Sulfoxide) IV 
• Do not use Dimethyl 
Sulfoxide and 
Dexrazoxane together. 
Doxorubicin Vesicant Cold Dexrazoxane (now preferred 
over Dimethyl Sulfoxide)  
• Do not use Dimethyl 
Sulfoxide and 
Dexrazoxane together. 
Docetaxel Irritant or Vesicant Cold None 
 
Etoposide Irritant or Vesicant Warm Hyaluronidase  CHON-001 
Page 3 of 3 
 
Fluourouracil Irritant Cold None or Dimethyl 
Sulfoxide 
Idarubicin Vesicant Cold Dexrazoxane (now preferred 
over Dimethyl Sulfoxide) 
• Do not use Dimethyl 
Sulfoxide and 
Dexrazoxane together. 
Ifosfamide Irritant Cold None vs Dimethyl 
Sulfoxide 
Irinotecan Irritant Cold None 
Melphalan Irritant or Vesicant Cold Sodium Thiosulfate 
Methotrexate  None None None 
Mitomycin Vesicant Cold Sodium Thiosulfate or 
Dimethyl Sulfoxide 
 
Mitoxantrone  Irritant or Vesicant Cold Dexrazoxane (now preferred 
over Dimethyl Sulfoxide) 
• Do not use Dimethyl 
Sulfoxide and 
Dexrazoxane together. 
Nelarabine None  None None 
Oxaliplatin Irritant or Vesicant  
DO NOT APPLY 
COLD 
Corticosteroids may 
decrease inflammation. 
Paclitaxel Irritant or Vesicant Cold Hyaluronidase 
Topotecan Irritant Cold None 
Vinblastine Vesicant Warm Hyaluronidase 
Vincristine Vesicant Warm Hyaluronidase 
Vinorelbine Vesicant Warm Hyaluronidase 
 
 
  
REFERENCES: 
Herring, R.A, (ED.). (2019) The Pediatric Chemotherapy and Biotherapy Curriculum. (4th ed.). pg. 186     
Glenview, IL: Association of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Nurses. 
 