ECLS-012 (4700) 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: OLOL Livingston             
Security Services Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Security Services  
(102-4700-10313) 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 (Security 
Services 4700) 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: March 24, 2018 Review Date: February 1, 2024 
Revision Date: February 1, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• An Illuminated Exit Sign is posted at the Entry/Exit of the Emergency Room Front Entrance  
• An Illuminated Exit Sign is posted at the Entry /Exit to the East Stairwell right of Emergency 
Room Waiting Area 
 
 ECLS-012 (4700) 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Security Services is an active participant of the CODE RED RESPONSE TEAM. A Security 
Representative or designee will immediately respond to all Code Red events 
a. When possible each responder will bring a fire extinguisher. 
b. The responding Security Representative/Designed will assist with traffic control and provide 
general direction as required for routing individuals to safety. 
c. Security/ Designee will remain in location awaiting further instructions from the Fire Department 
or designee. 
d. Security Services will assist in managing a planned evaluation as directed House Manager.  
e. Security Services will manage all major entrances while providing direction to all First 
Responders arriving at the facility. 
f. Frist Responders escorted or may be issued a badge and map for incident location  
g. Security Services maintains access to all facility doors Internal/ External for emergency purposes 
through badge access or an emergency key systems. 
h. Security Services may explain to patient and visitors, “The hospital is conducting an emergency 
to ensure your safety” 
i. Security Services may assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Nearest pull station is to the left of main Entrance/ Exit door of the Emergency Room Entrance 
by the Security Desk 
• Secondary pull station is to the east(right) of Emergency Waiting Area 
• Nearest fire extinguisher (in wall mounted cabinet) is located 60 feet directly in front of the 
Security Desk(front of Subway) 
• Secondary fire extinguisher is in the hallway left of the Emergency Waiting Area(across from 
restrooms)  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
Internal  
• Security Staff will meet at Security Desk 
 
External 
• Security Staff will exit Emergency Room Entrance by the Security Desk to the front 
parking lot 
  