ECLS-012 (4577) 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Livingston Central Supply Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Livingston Central 
Supply  
(102-4577-10313) 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 (4577) 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: June 5, 2018 Review Date: February 1, 2024 
Revision Date: February 1, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exit signs located in central supply and in the back hallway going towards the dock and 
physician parking lot 
 
 
 ECLS-012 (4577) 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• During operating hours, central staff will work with the managers/supervisors to ensure the 
safety of patients in the lab/imaging waiting area, paying special attention to those patients with 
mobility issues 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• There are no medical gas shutoff valves located in the central supply area 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• All laboratory/imaging outpatients are ambulatory or present to the departments with their own 
personal mobility equipment 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguisher is located in the hallway leading to the dock 
• Manual pull station located in hallway leading to the dock and physician parking door.  
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Badge access to central supply from outside and inside hall doors.  Enter through hallway door. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Exit down the hallway, through the employee entrance, and continue out to the end of the 
parking lot 
• If access through the employee entrance is not accessible, exit through the dock doors and 
continue out to the end of the parking lot 
 