OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R2 (3008) 
Page 1 of 3 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA204-R2 
FIRE (CODE RED) RESPONSE PLAN– LIVINGSTON LAB (102-3008-10313) 
        Date Review Date Revision Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 6/11/19 2/1/2024 2/1/2024 
Supervisory Review   Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review   5/1/18 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of Lab Administration or designee. 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
If a Fire occurs in the Laboratory: 
• Perform RACE and Pass.   
• Evacuation will proceed as outlined below.   
  If the Fire occurs in an area other than lab, remain in place: 
• Until given the all-clear or 
• Instructed to evacuate or 
• It becomes apparent that evacuation is necessary (smoke compartment has been breached). OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R2 (3008) 
Page 2 of 3 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exit signs located in outpatient lab waiting area and in the back hallway going towards the 
employee parking lot 
• Adjacent Smoke compartment accessible through double doors entering into corridor near 
Emergency Room Waiting 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
NOTE:  The Laboratory operates 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.  Responses during evening and night 
shifts will be performed by the Section designee. 
• During operating hours, outpatient lab staff will ensure the safety of patients in the waiting area, 
paying special attention to those patients with mobility issues 
• Laboratory Supervisor, Laboratory Senior Technologist, of the Charge Tech will ensure that all 
employees are accounted for 
• Outpatient Laboratory staff will ensure that all registered lab patients are accounted for 
• Outpatient Laboratory staff will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• Outpatient Laboratory staff will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves: 
• There are no medical gas shutoff valves located in the laboratory area 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• All laboratory patients are ambulatory or present to the lab with their own personal mobility 
equipment 
 
Location of Fire Pull Stations – There are no pull stations inside of the Laboratory.  The nearest 
pull station is located: 
• Manual pull station located outside the laboratory by the stairwell near the employee parking 
lot entrance 
 
Location of Fire Extinguishers: 
• Fire extinguisher is located in the main laboratory, on the wall near the Supervisor’s office 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Flammables cabinet in lab 
• Badge access to main lab from outside door. Enter through outpatient area. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o Exit down the hallway, through the employee entrance, and continue out to the end of 
the parking lot 
o Team Members outside of the Laboratory when a Code Red is called will shelter in OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R2 (3008) 
Page 3 of 3 
place and will not attempt to return to the laboratory until an all-clear is given.   If it 
becomes necessary to evacuate from the current location, Lab Team Members should 
attempt to make their way to the Lab Rendezvous point if it is safe to do so.     
 
• Secondary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o If access through the employee entrance is not accessible, exit through the main doors 
in front of the building and continue out to the end of the parking lot 
 
 
 
RELATED POLICIES 
LBA204-Emergency Preparedness 
ECEP001-Emergency Operations Plan  
ECEP007-OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan  
ECLS-012-Department Specific Code Red Response Plan (Template) 
 
REVISIONS 
5/1/18 (created), 6/11/19 