 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Compliance  
SUBJECT: 
Disclosures of Protected Health 
Information to Other Entities 
PAGES: 
16 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
September 23, 2013 
 
REVISION DATE:  
July 25, 2016 
POLICY NUMBER:  
COR-301 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) and its wholly owned 
subsidiaries (collectively referred to herein as “Entity”).   
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish guidelines for disclosing Protected Health Information (PHI) for treatment, 
payment, and health care operations to other covered entities and health care providers as well 
as for situations where PHI may be disclosed to an outside entity without a patient’s 
authorization or without the patient’s agreement or objection.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Correctional Institution” means any penal or correctional facility, jail, reformatory, detention 
center, work farm, halfway house, or residential community program center operated by, or 
under contract to, the United States, a State, a territory, a political subdivision of a State or 
territory, or an Indian tribe, for the confinement or rehabilitation of persons charged with or 
convicted of a criminal offense or other persons held in lawful custody. 
 “Covered Entity” means a health plan, health care clearinghouse, or a health care provider that 
transmits any health information in connection with a transaction covered by HIPAA, such as 
electronic claims submission. 
  “Entity” means OLOLRMC and its wholly owned subsidiaries 
  “Health Care Operations” means functions that are common to a Covered Entity but which 
are not related to treatment. Such functions include, but are not limited to, quality assessment or 
improvement, care management, peer review and training, patient safety activities, insurance 
underwriting, legal services, compliance, and auditing services, business planning and general 
 2 
administration.  
  “Health Care Provider” means (A) a hospital, critical access hospital, skilled nursing facility, 
comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation facility, home health agency, or hospice program, (B) a 
provider of medical- or health-related services (including physicians’ services, PT/OT, 
diagnostic and dialysis services, ambulance services, durable medical equipment and supplies, 
and drugs or biologicals), and (C) any other person or organization who furnishes, bills or is 
paid for providing health care in the normal course of business.  
“Health Oversight Agency” means agency or authority of the United States, a State, a territory, 
a political subdivision of a State or territory, or an Indian tribe, or a person or entity acting 
under a grant of authority from or contract with such public agency, including the employees or 
agents of such public agency or its contractors or persons or entities to whom it has granted 
authority, that is authorized by law to oversee the health care system (whether public or private) 
or government programs in which health information is necessary to determine eligibility or 
compliance, or to enforce civil rights laws for which health information is relevant. 
“Inmate” means a person incarcerated in or otherwise confined to a correctional institution. 
  “HIPAA Privacy Rules” means the privacy requirements in the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act of 1996 including all pertinent regulations (45 CFR Parts 160 and 164) 
issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services as such statute and regulations 
have been amended by Subtitle D of the Health Information Technology for Economic and 
Clinical Health Act, Title XIII of Division A and Title IV of Division B of the American 
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.  
   “Marketing” means to make a communication about a product or service that encourages 
recipients of the communication to purchase or use the product or service unless, the 
communication is made to described a health-related product or service that is provided by, or 
included in a plan of benefits of the Entity; for treatment of the individual or for case 
management or care coordination for the individual or to direct or recommend alternative 
treatments, therapies, health care providers or settings of care to the individual.  
“Organized Health Care Arrangement” means an arrangement or relationship, recognized in 
the HIPAA privacy rules, that allows two or more Covered Entities (CE) who participate in 
joint activities to share protected health information (PHI) about their patients in order to 
manage and benefit their joint operations. 
“Payment” encompasses activities of a health plan to obtain premiums, determine or fulfill 
responsibilities for coverage and provision of benefits, and furnish or obtain reimbursement for 
health care delivered to an individual as well as activities of a health care provider to obtain 
payment or be reimbursed for the provision of health care to an individual. 
  “Protected Health Information or PHI” means all information, including demographic data, 
that relates to an individual’s past, present or future physical or mental health or condition, the 
provision of health care to an individual, or the past, present, or future payment for the 
provision of health care to an individual, and that identifies an individual or for which there is a 
reasonable basis to believe it can be used to identify an individual.  Individually identifiable 
health information includes many common identifiers (e.g., name, address, birth date, Social 
Security Number).  Individually identifiable health information in employment records held by 
an Entity in its role as an employer is not PHI (e.g., employment-related testing and employer  3 
health assessments.) 
  “Psychotherapy Notes” means notes recorded (in any medium) by a health care provider who 
is a mental health professional documenting or analyzing the contents of conversation during a 
private counseling session or a group, joint, or family counseling session and that are separated 
from the rest of the individual's medical record. Psychotherapy Notes exclude medication 
prescription and monitoring, counseling session start and stop times, the modalities and 
frequencies of treatment furnished, results of clinical tests, and any summary of the following 
items: diagnosis, functional status, the treatment plan, symptoms, prognosis, and progress to 
date. 
“Public Health Authority” means an agency or authority of the United States, a State, a 
territory, a political subdivision of a State or territory, or an Indian tribe, or a person or entity 
acting under a grant of authority from or contract with such public agency, including the 
employees or agents of such public agency or its contractors or persons or entities to whom it 
has granted authority, that is responsible for public health matters as part of its official mandate. 
“Research” means a systematic investigation, including research development, testing, and 
evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledge. 
  “Sponsored Organization” means a legal entity either wholly-owned by OLORMC or a 
subsidiary entity of an entity wholly-owned by OLOLRMCF that is also a Covered Entity. 
 “Team Members” means employees of any Entity. 
“Treatment” means the provision, coordination, or management of health care and related 
services by one or more health care providers, including the coordination or management of 
health care by a health care provider with a third party; consultation between health care 
providers relating to a patient; or the referral of a patient for health care from one health care 
provider to another. 
 “Workforce Member” means Team Members, volunteers, trainees, and other persons whose 
conduct, in the performance of work for the Covered Entity, is under the direct control of the 
Covered Entity, whether or not they are paid by the Covered Entity. 
 
POLICY:   
1. PHI may be disclosed to other covered entities and health care providers for purposes of 
their treatment, payment, or health care operations or to certain outside entities without 
the patient’s authorization. 
 
2. If the disclosure is required by law, the PHI disclosed must be limited to the relevant 
requirements of such law. If the disclosure is expressly authorized, but is not required by 
statute or regulation, the PHI disclosed must be the minimum amount necessary for the 
purpose of the disclosure. 
 
3. Disclosures of PHI under this policy shall be included in an accounting of disclosures. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
  4 
1. Disclosures for Another Covered Entity’s Treatment, Payment and Healthcare 
Operations.  PHI may be disclosed to other covered entities or health care providers for 
treatment, payment, or health care operations without the patient's authorization. 
A. PHI may be disclosed to another covered entity for health care operations 
activities of the covered entity that receives the information, if each entity either 
has or had a relationship with the individual who is the subject of the PHI being 
requested, the PHI pertains to such relationship.  
 
2. Disclosures Consistent with Notice.  A sponsored organization that is required to have a 
Notice of Privacy Practices shall not use or disclose protected health information in a 
manner inconsistent with such notice. 
 
3. Disclosures by Whistleblowers and Workforce Member Crime Victims.   
 
A. Disclosures by whistleblowers 
A sponsored organization has not violated the requirements of the Privacy Rule or this 
policy if a workforce member or a business associate discloses protected health 
information, provided that: 
1. The workforce member or business associate believes in good faith that the sponsored 
organization has engaged in conduct that is unlawful or otherwise violates professional 
or clinical standards, or that the care, services, or conditions provided by the sponsored 
organization potentially endangers one or more individuals, workers, or the public; and 
2. The disclosure is to: 
i. A health oversight agency or public health authority authorized by law to 
investigate or oversee the conduct or conditions of the sponsored organization or 
to an appropriate health care accreditation organization for the purpose of 
reporting the allegation of failure to meet professional standards or misconduct 
by the sponsored organization; or 
ii. An attorney retained by or on behalf of the workforce member or business 
associate for the purpose of determining the legal options of the workforce 
member or business associate with regard to the conduct described above. 
B. Disclosures by workforce members who are victims of a crime 
A sponsored organization has not violated the requirements of the Privacy Rule or this 
policy if a member of its workforce who is the victim of a criminal act discloses 
protected health information to a law enforcement official, provided that: 
1. The protected health information disclosed is about the suspected perpetrator of the 
criminal act; and 
2. The protected health information disclosed is limited to: 
i. Name and address;  5 
ii. Date and place of birth; 
iii. Social security number;iv. ABO blood type and rh factor; 
v. Type of injury; 
vi. Date and time of treatment; 
vii. Date and time of death, if applicable; and 
viii. A description of distinguishing physical characteristics, including height, 
weight, gender, race, hair and eye color, presence or absence of facial hair (beard 
or moustache), scars, and tattoos. 
  
4. Disclosures for Public Health Activities. The sponsored organization may disclose PHI 
for public health activities and purposes to: 
A. A public health authority that is authorized by law to collect or receive such 
information for the purpose of preventing or controlling disease, injury, or 
disability, including, but not limited to, the reporting of disease, injury, vital 
events such as birth or death, and the conduct of public health surveillance, 
public health investigations, and public health interventions; or, at the direction 
of a public health authority, to an official of a foreign government agency that is 
acting in collaboration with a public health authority.  
B. A public health authority or other appropriate government authority authorized 
by law to receive reports of child abuse or neglect. 
 
C. A person subject to the jurisdiction of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
with respect to an FDA-regulated product or activity for which that person has 
responsibility, for the purpose of activities related to the quality, safety or 
effectiveness of such FDA-regulated product or activity.  Such purposes include: 
i. To collect or report adverse events (or similar activities with respect to 
food or dietary supplements), product defects or problems (including 
problems with the use or labeling of a product), or biological product 
deviations; 
ii. To track FDA-regulated products; 
iii. To enable product recalls, repairs, or replacement, or lookback (including 
locating and notifying individuals who have received products that have 
been recalled, withdrawn, or are the subject of lookback); or 
iv. To conduct post marketing surveillance. 
 
D. A person who may have been exposed to a communicable disease or may 
otherwise be at risk of contracting or spreading a disease or condition, if the 
sponsored organization or public health authority is authorized by law to notify 
such person as necessary in the conduct of a public health intervention or 
investigation. 
5. Disclosures to Person’s Involved in the Individual’s Care.  The sponsored organization 
may disclose to a family member, other relative, or a close personal friend of the 
individual, or any other person identified by the individual, the protected health 
information directly relevant to such person's involvement with the individual's care or 
payment related to the individual's health care 
  6 
6. Notification purposes.  The sponsored organization may release medical information to 
notify, or assist in the notification of (including identifying or locating), a family 
member, a personal representative of the individual, or another person responsible for 
the care of the individual of the individual's location, general condition, or death. All 
releases for notification purposes must be in done accordance with the instances listed 
below. 
 
A. Disclosure with the individual present- if the individual is present for, or 
otherwise present for, a use or disclosure and has the capacity to make healthcare 
decisions, the Entity may use or disclose the PHI if it: 
i. Obtains the individual’s agreement 
ii. Provides the individual with the opportunity to object to the disclosure, 
and the individual does not express an objection; or 
iii. Reasonably infers from the circumstances, based on the exercise of 
professional judgment that the individual does not object to the 
disclosure. 
B. Disclosure when the individual is not present- if the individual is not present, or 
the opportunity to agree or object cannot practicably be provided due to the 
individual’s incapacity, the Entity may, in the exercise of professional judgment, 
determine whether the disclosure is in the best interests of the individual.  If so, 
only the PHI that is directly relevant to person’s involvement with the 
individual’s health care. 
 
A sponsored organization may use professional judgment and its experience with 
common practice to make reasonable inferences of the individual’s best interest 
in allowing a person to act on behalf of the individual to pick up filled 
prescriptions, medical supplies, X-rays, or other similar forms or PHI.  
 
C.  Disclosures for Disaster Relief – A sponsored organization may use or disclose 
PHI to a public or private entity authorized by law or by its charter to assist in 
disaster relief efforts, for the purpose of coordinating with such entities.  .  Uses 
and disclosures of PHI for persons involved in the patients care and notification 
apply to such uses and disclosure to the extent that Entity, in the exercise of 
professional judgment, determines that the requirements do not interfere with the 
ability to respond to the emergency circumstances.  
 
7. Disclosures about Victims of Abuse, Neglect or Domestic Violence.  The sponsored 
organization may disclose PHI, that is limited to the relevant requirements of the law, 
about an individual who is reasonably believed to be a victim of abuse, neglect, or 
domestic violence to a government authority, including a social service or protective 
services agency, authorized by law to receive reports of such abuse, neglect, or domestic 
violence if:  
A. The patient or patient’s personal representative agrees, or 
 
B. The discourse is expressly authorized by statue or regulation, and 
i. The sponsored organization, in the exercise of professional judgment,  7 
believes the disclosure is necessary to prevent serious harm to the patient 
or other potential victims; or 
ii. If the patient is unable to agree because of incapacity, a law enforcement 
or other public official authorized to receive the report represents that the 
PHI is not intended to be used against the patient and that an immediate 
enforcement activity that depends on the disclosure would be materially 
and adversely affected by waiting until the patient is able to agree. 
 
C. If the sponsored organization makes such a disclosure, the patient shall be 
informed that such a report has been or will be made, except if: 
i. The sponsored organization, in the exercise of professional judgment, 
believes informing the patient would place the patient at risk of serious 
harm; or 
a. The sponsored organization would be informing a personal 
representative who is reasonably believed to be responsible for 
the abuse, neglect or other injury, and that informing such person 
would not be in the best interests of the patient. 
 
8. Employer.  An employer, about an individual who is a member of the workforce of the 
employer, if: 
A. The sponsored organization is a covered health care provider who provides 
health care to the individual at the request of the employer; to conduct an 
evaluation relating to medical surveillance of the workplace; or to evaluate 
whether the individual has a work-related illness or injury;  
 
B. The PHI that is disclosed consists of findings concerning a work-related illness 
or injury or a workplace-related medical surveillance; 
 
C. The employer needs such findings in order to comply with its legal obligations 
to record such illness or injury or to carry out responsibilities for workplace 
medical surveillance; and  
i. The sponsored organization provides written notice to the individual that 
PHI relating to the medical surveillance of the workplace and work-
related illnesses and injuries is disclosed to the employer by giving a 
copy of the notice to the individual at the time the health care is 
provided, or if the health care is provided on the work site of the 
employer, by posting the notice in a prominent place at the location 
where the health care is provided.  
 
9. School.  A school, about an individual who is a student or prospective student of the 
school, if: 
A. The PHI that is disclosed is limited to proof of immunization; 
 
B. The school is required by State or other law to have such proof of immunization 
prior to admitting the individual; and 
  8 
C. The sponsored organization obtains and documents the agreement to the 
disclosure from either: 
i. A parent, guardian, or other person acting in loco parentis of the 
individual, if the individual is an unemancipated minor; or 
ii. The individual, if the individual is an adult or emancipated minor. 
 
10. Disclosures for Health Oversight Activities.  The sponsored organization may disclose 
PHI to a health oversight agency for oversight activities (e.g., audits, investigations, 
inspections, licensure or disciplinary actions) authorized by law or other activities 
necessary for appropriate oversight of the health care system; government benefit 
programs for which PHI is relevant to beneficiary eligibility; entities subject to 
government regulatory programs for which PHI is necessary for determining 
compliance with program standards; or entities subject to civil rights laws for which 
PHI is necessary for determine compliance. Except when the health oversight activity 
does not include an investigation or other activity in which the individual is the subject 
of the investigation or activity and such investigation or other activity does not arise out 
of and is not directly related to: 
A. The receipt of health care; 
 
B. A claim for public benefits related to health; or 
 
C. Qualification for, or receipt of, public benefits or services when a patient's health 
is integral to the claim for public benefits or services. 
 
11. Disclosures about Decedents. The sponsored organization may disclose PHI to: 
A. A coroner or medical examiner for the purpose of:  
i. Identifying a deceased person; 
ii. Determining a cause of death; or 
iii. Other duties as authorized by law. 
 
B. A funeral director as necessary to carry out their duties with respect to the 
decedent. 
 
C. If necessary for the funeral director to carry out their duties the sponsored 
organization may disclose the PHI prior to, and in reasonable anticipation of, the 
patient's death. 
 
D. To organ procurement organizations or other entities engaged in the 
procurement, banking or transplantation of cadaveric organs, eyes or tissue for 
the purpose of facilitating the donation and transplantation. 
 
E. A researcher or Principal Investigator if: 
i. The researcher represents the use or disclosure is sought solely for 
research on the PHI of decedents, 
ii. The sponsored organization receives confirmation or documentation of 
the death of such individuals, and  9 
iii. The disclosure is necessary for research purposes only. 
 
12. Disclosure for Cadaveric organ, Eye or Tissue Donation. The sponsored organization 
may use or disclose PHI to organ procurement organizations or other entities engaged in 
the procurement, banking, or transplantation of cadaver organs, eyes, or tissue for the 
purpose of facilitating organ, eye or tissue donation and transplantation. 
 
 
13. Disclosure for Research. The sponsored organization my uses or disclose PHI for 
research, regardless of the source of funding of the research provided that: 
 
A.  Board approval of waiver or authorization- The sponsored organization obtains 
documentation that an alteration to or waiver, in whole or in part, of the 
individual authorization required by PRI 08.011has been approved by either: 
i. An institutional Review Board (IRB), established in accordance with 
federal law or; 
ii. A privacy board that: 
a. Has members with varying backgrounds and appropriate 
professional competency as necessary to review the effect of the 
research protocol on the individual’s privacy rights and related 
interests; 
b. Includes at least one member who is not affiliated with the 
sponsored organization, not affiliated with any entity conducting 
or sponsoring research, and not related to any person who is 
affiliated with any of such entities; and 
c. Does not have any member participating in a review of any 
project in which the member has a conflict of interest.  
 
B.  Reviews Preparatory to Research -The sponsored organization may disclose 
PHI (except Psychotherapy notes) for preparatory research if it obtains 
researcher representations that: 
i. The use or disclosure is sought solely to review PHI as necessary to 
prepare a research protocol or for similar purposes preparatory to 
research;  
ii. The PHI will not be removed from the sponsored organization in the 
course of the review; and 
iii. The PHI for which the use or disclosure is sought is necessary for the 
research purposes. 
iv. A researcher who is a member of the sponsored organization's workforce 
(or that of a business associate of the sponsored organization) may use its 
own PHI to contact prospective research subjects; however, a researcher 
that is not an employee or a member of the sponsored organization’s 
workforce may not contact individuals for recruitment purposes without 
written approval from an Institutional Review Board. 
 
C.  Research on Decedent’s Information – The sponsored organization obtains from  10 
the researcher: 
i. Representation that the use or disclosure is sought solely for research on 
the PHI of decedents: 
ii. Documentation, at the request of the sponsored organization, of the death 
of such individuals, and 
iii. Representation that the PHI for which use or disclosure is sought is 
necessary for research purposes. 
D. Documentation of Waiver Approval – For a use and disclosure to be permitted 
based on documentation of approval of an alteration or waiver, under board 
approval of waiver, the documentation must include all of the following: 
i. Identification and date of action – a statement identifying the IRB or 
privacy board and the date on which the alteration or waiver of 
authorization was approved; 
ii. Waiver criteria – A statement that the IRB or privacy board has 
determined that the alteration or waiver, in whole or in part, of 
authorization satisfies the following criteria: 
a.  The use or disclosure of PHI involves no more than minimal risk 
to the individuals; 
b. The alteration or waiver will not adversely affect the privacy 
rights and the welfare of individuals; 
c. The research could not practicably be conducted without the 
alteration or waiver; 
d. The research could not practicably be conducted without access 
to and use of the PHI; 
e. The privacy risks to the individuals whose PHI is to be used or 
disclosed are reasonable in relation to the anticipated benefits, if 
any, to the individuals, and the importance of the knowledge that 
may reasonably be expected to result from the research;  
f. There is an adequate plan to destroy the identifiers at the earliest 
opportunity consistent with conduct of research, unless there is a 
health or research justification for retaining identifiers, or such 
retention is otherwise required by law; 
g. There are adequate written assurances that the PHI will not be 
reused or disclosed to any other person or entity, except as 
required by law, for authorized oversight of the research project, 
or for other research for which the use or disclosure of PHI would 
be permitted by this rule.  
iii. Protected Health information needed – A brief description of the PHI for 
which use or access has been determined to be necessary by the IRB or 
privacy board as determined. 
iv. Review and approval procedures – A statement that the alteration or 
waiver of authorization has been reviewed and approved under either 
normal or expedited review procedures as follow: 
a. An IRB must follow the requirements of the Common Rule 
(45CFR46) including the normal review procedures or the 
expedited review procedures required under federal law;  11 
b. A privacy board must review the proposed research at convened 
meetings at which a majority of the privacy board members are 
present, including at least one member who satisfies the criterion 
for non-affiliation (stated above) and the alteration or waiver of 
authorization must be approved by the majority of the privacy 
board members present at the meeting unless the privacy board 
elects to use an expedited review procedure. 
c. A privacy board may use an expedited review procedure if the 
research involves no more than minimal risk to the privacy of the 
individuals who are the subject of the PHI for which use and 
disclosure is being sought.  If the privacy board elects to use an 
expedited review procedure, the review and approval of the 
alteration or waiver of authorization may be carried out by the 
chair of the privacy board, or by one or more members of the 
privacy board as designated by the chair. 
v. Required signature- The documentation of the alteration or waiver of 
authorization must be signed by the chair or other member, as designated 
by the chair,  of the IRB or the privacy board, as applicable.  
 
14. Disclosures to Avert a Serious Threat to Health or Safety. The sponsored organization 
may, disclose PHI, if it is believed in good faith that use or disclosure of PHI: 
A. Is necessary to prevent or lessen imminent threat to health or safety of person or 
public and is made to a person able to prevent or lessen the threat; and is to a 
persons or persons reasonably able to lessen the threat; or 
 
B. Is necessary for law enforcement to identify or apprehend an individual because 
of a statement by the individual admitting participation in the crime that the 
sponsored organization reasonably believes may have caused serious physical 
harm to the victim or where it appears the individual has escaped from custody 
of a correctional institution or lawful custody.  Disclosure is not permitted if the 
information is learned in course of treatment to affect propensity to commit the 
criminal conduct; counseling/therapy; or referral for such treatment, counseling 
or therapy. 
 
15. Disclosures for Specialized Government Functions.  
A. A sponsored organization entity may use and disclose the PHI of individuals 
who are Armed Forces personnel for activities deemed necessary by appropriate 
military command authorities to assure the proper execution of the military 
mission, if the appropriate military authority has published by notice in the 
Federal Register the following information:  
i. Appropriate military command authorities; and  
ii. The purposes for which the PHI may be used or disclosed. 
 
B. A sponsored organization may use and disclose the PHI of individuals who are 
foreign military personnel to their appropriate foreign military authority for the 
same purposes for which uses and disclosures are permitted for Armed Forces  12 
personnel under the notice published in the Federal Register as outlined above.  
  
C. A sponsored organization entity may disclose PHI to authorized federal officials 
for the conduct of lawful intelligence, counter-intelligence, and other national 
security activities authorized by the National Security Act and implementing 
authority.    
 
D. A sponsored organization may disclose PHI to authorized federal officials for 
the provision of protective services to the President or other persons authorized 
by 18 U.S.C. 3056, or to foreign heads of state or other persons authorized by 22 
U.S.C. 2709(a)(3), or to for the conduct of investigations authorized by 18 
U.S.C. 871 and 879.  
 
16. Correctional Institutions and Law Enforcement Custodial Situations.  A sponsored 
organization may disclose to a correctional institution or a law enforcement official 
having lawful custody (an individual is no longer an inmate when released on parole, 
probation, supervised release, or otherwise is no longer in lawful custody) of an inmate 
or other individual PHI about such inmate or individual, if the correctional institution or 
such law enforcement official represents that such PHI is necessary for:   
A. The provision of health care to such individuals;  
 
B. The health and safety of such individual or other inmates;  
 
C. The health and safety of the officers or employees of or others at the correctional 
institution;  
 
D. The health and safety of such individuals and officers or other persons 
responsible for the transporting of inmates or their transfer from one institution, 
sponsored organization, or setting to another;  
 
E. Law enforcement on the premises of the correctional institution; or 
 
F. The administration and maintenance of the safety, security, and good order of 
the correctional institution.  
 
17. Disclosures for Law Enforcement Purpose to a Law Enforcement Official.  The 
sponsored organization may disclose PHI for a law enforcement purpose to a law 
enforcement official if the disclosure is: 
A. Required by law, including the reporting of certain types of wounds or other 
physical injuries, or 
 
B. In compliance with and as limited by the relevant requirements of: 
i. A court order or court-ordered warrant, or a subpoena or summons issued 
by a judicial officer; 
ii. A grand jury subpoena; or 
iii. An administrative request (e.g., subpoena, summons, investigative  13 
demand) or similar process authorized under law, provided that: 
a. The information sought is relevant and material to a legitimate 
law enforcement inquiry; 
b. The request is specific and limited in scope to the extent 
reasonably practicable in light of the purpose for which the 
information is sought; and 
c. De-identified information could not be reasonably used. 
 
C. In response to law enforcement official's request for PHI for the purpose of 
identifying or locating a suspect, fugitive, material witness, or missing person, 
provided that only the following information is disclosed: 
i. Name and address; 
ii. Date and place of birth; 
iii. Social security number; 
iv. ABO blood type and rh factor; 
v. Type of injury; 
vi. Date and time of treatment and or death; and 
vii. A description of distinguishing physical characteristics (height, weight, 
gender, race, hair and eye color, presence or absence of facial hair, scars 
and tattoos). 
viii. No information may be disclosed as it relates to the patient's DNA, DNA 
analysis, dental records, or typing, samples or analysis of body fluids or 
tissue. 
 
D. In response to law enforcement official's request for an individual's PHI, and the 
individual is or is suspected to be a victim of a crime, if: 
i. The individual aggress, or 
ii. The sponsored organization is unable to obtain the patient's agreement 
because of incapacity or other emergency circumstances, provided that: 
a. The law enforcement official represents that such PHI is needed 
to determine whether a violation of law by a person other than the 
victim has occurred, and such information is not intended to be 
used against the victim; 
b. The law enforcement official represents that immediate law 
enforcement activity that depends upon the disclosure would be 
materially and adversely affected by waiting until the patient is 
able to agree to the disclosure; and 
c. The disclosure is in the best interests of the patient as determined 
by the sponsored organization, in the exercise of professional 
judgment. 
 
E. For the purpose of alerting law enforcement of the death of the individual if the 
sponsored organization has a suspicion that such death may have resulted from 
criminal conduct. 
 
F. Is PHI the sponsored organization believes in good faith constitutes evidence of  14 
criminal conduct that occurred on the premises of the sponsored organization. 
 
G. Related to the sponsored organization’s provision of emergency healthcare in 
response to a medical emergency, other such emergency on the premises of the 
sponsored organization, if the disclosure appears necessary to alert law 
enforcement to: 
i. The commission and nature of a crime; 
ii. The location of such crime or of the victim(s) of such crime; and 
iii. The identity, description, and location of the perpetrator of such crime. 
 
18. Disclosures for Workers' Compensation. The sponsored organization may disclose PHI 
as authorized by and to the extent necessary to comply with laws relating to workers' 
compensation or other similar programs. 
19. Judicial or Administrative Proceedings.  PHI may be disclosed in response to a court, or 
administrative tribunal, provided that only the PHI expressly authorized by the order is 
disclosed. 
A. PHI may be disclosed via a subpoena, discovery request, or other lawful process, 
that is not accompanied by an order of a court or administrative tribunal if: 
i. The sponsored organization receives written satisfactory assurance from 
the party seeking the PHI that the patient or the patient's personal 
representative has been given notice of the request as demonstrated by 
the following, or 
a. The party issuing the subpoena has made a good faith attempt to 
provide written notice to the patient or the patient's personal 
representative; 
b. The written notice included sufficient information about the 
litigation or proceeding to permit the patient or the patient's 
personal representative to raise an objection to the court or 
administrative tribunal; and 
c. The time for the patient to object has elapsed, and no objections 
were filed, or any objections filed were resolved by the court or 
administrative tribunal and the disclosures are consistent with that 
resolution. 
d.  
B. The sponsored organization receives written satisfactory assurances from the 
party seeking the information that: 
i. The parties to the dispute have a agreed to a qualified protective order 
and have presented it to the court or administrative tribunal with 
jurisdiction over the dispute; or 
ii. The party seeking the PHI has requested a qualified protective order from 
such court or administrative tribunal. 
 
C. If the requestor cannot demonstrate satisfactory assurance as noted above, the 
sponsored organization may: 
i. Make reasonable efforts to provide notice to the patient sufficient to meet 
the satisfactory assurances section above or to seek a qualified protective  15 
order; or 
ii. A notice in writing should be provided to the requestor stating that 
records will not be produced until HIPAA compliance is demonstrated 
(e.g., satisfactory assurances, qualified protective order, order of the 
court or administrative tribunal, patient or patient's personal 
representative's HIPAA compliant authorization). 
 
20. Disclosures to the Media- The Privacy Rule strictly limits what PHI the sponsored 
organization may disclose to anyone, including the news media.  Members of the medial 
do not have different rights from those of any other individual.  The general rule is that 
except for treatment, payment and operations purposes, an individual’s PHI may be 
released only if the individual authorizes the release. 
 
A. Permitted Uses and Disclosures Generally 
A sponsored organization may use or disclose protected health information in 
directories, 
provided that the individual: 
 
1. Is informed in advance of the use or disclosure; 
2. Has the opportunity to opt-out of the facility directory; and 
3. Does not object to being included in the directory. 
 
The opportunity to opt out of the facility directory may be exercised orally at the point 
of registration or at any time during the patient’s stay 
 
B.  Media Inquiries 
1. If a member of the media inquires about a patient by name, a sponsored 
organization may 
release facility directory information to that member of the media if the 
sponsored organization has followed the steps outlined above. 
 
2. The protected health information from the facility directory that may be released 
to a member of the media who inquires about an individual by name includes 
only the following: 
 
a. The individual’s name; 
 
b. The individual’s location in the facility, unless this information would reveal 
the p atient to be  in a psychiatric or substance abuse unit (this in formation 
may NOT be released); 
 
c. A one word description of the individual’s general condition, such as 
undetermined, good, fair, serious, or critical.  This description should not 
communicate specific health information about the individual. 
 
C.  When a patient is incapacitated  16 
1. If an individual is incapacitated and unable to authorize or object to the disclosure of 
protected health information, a person who has the authority to make health care 
decisions for the incapacitated person has the right to authorize or object to the release 
of protected health information to the media.  This class of persons could include 
conservators, designated agents, those with power of attorney for health care, or the 
closest available relative. 
 
2. If a patient is incapacitated or is involved in emergency treatment and does not have 
the opportunity to object to being included in the facility directory, and there is no 
person available who has the authority to make health care decisions for the 
incapacitated person, a sponsored organization may disclose some or all of the 
protected health information in the facility directory to the media if: 
a. Such disclosure is consistent with a prior expressed preference of the individual, 
if any, that is known to the covered health care provider; 
b. The disclosure is in the individual’s best interest as determined by the health care 
provider, in the exercise of professional judgment, and 
c. The member of the media inquires about the person by name. 
 
 
D.   Death of a Patient 
1. HIPAA privacy protections continue to apply to an individual’s protected 
healthinformation even after an individual’s death. Therefore, no one word 
description of the individual’s condition, such as “deceased”, may be released to the 
media unless the inquiry references the individual by name. 
 
2. Patient death is a very sensitive issue. Before releasing a one word description 
such as “deceased” from the facility directory, sponsored organizations should 
exercise extreme care and should verify that the patient’s family has been notified 
and does not object to disclosure of this information. 
 
3. Additional information about an individual’s death, including date, time and cause 
of death, may not be released without written authorization from the legal 
representative of the deceased. This information typically comes from the 
individual’s physician rather than from a hospital, skilled nursing facility or other 
entity. 
4. Although a sponsored organization or hospital may report information about an 
individual’s death to other agencies such as the coroner or law enforcement, this 
does not permit the sponsored organization to release the same information to the 
media. 
 
E.   Public Figures and Celebrities 
1. This policy and other HIPAA privacy policies and procedures for release of 
information and permissible disclosure apply equally for all patients, including 
public figures or celebrities. 
   
2. In situations where covered entities anticipate increased media interest, sponsored  17 
organizations may want to confirm with the individual or the individual’s 
representative whether there is any objection to the disclosure of facility directory 
information to the media. 
 
F. Minors and Emancipated Minors 
1. The HIPAA privacy rule defers to state law with respect to the rights of parents to 
obtain access to or control the disclosure of protected health information concerning 
their minor children.  Generally, if the parent or guardian has the authority to make 
medical decisions on behalf of a minor child, the parent or guardian also has the right 
to object to or authorize disclosure of protected health information concerning the 
minor.  Conversely, if a minor has legal authority to consent to a health care treatment, 
the minor also has the ability to object or authorize release of protected health 
information even if the parent or guardian has not given authorization. 
2. Minors who have been legally emancipated generally have the authority to make 
health care decisions for themselves, including the ability to object to or authorize the 
disclosure of their protected health information. 
G. Disasters 
1. Disasters require covered entities to operate in emotional and quickly changing 
environments.  The need to keep the public informed must be balanced with the privacy 
rights of patients and their families.  In these situations, sponsored organizations may 
release information for the public good, but must take care to protect information that 
can be linked to a specific individual.  The HIPAA privacy rules relating to release of 
protected health information do not change in disaster situations.  A member of the 
media must still ask about a patient by name before any information can be released. 
 
2. In disaster situations involving multiple casualties, it may be necessary to share 
patient information such as location, general condition or death with other hospitals 
and recognized rescue/relief organization such as the Red Cross prior to next-of-kin 
being notified.  Where possible, notify next-of-kin first. 
 
3. Sponsored organizations may tell the media the number of patients that have been 
brought to the facility by gender or age group and the general cause of their treatment 
(earthquake, fire, etc.) as long as the information released does not identify a specific 
individual. 
 
H. Matters of Public Record/Public Domain 
The fact that protected health information about an individual has been disclosed 
through other means does not increase or change what a sponsored organization may 
disclose to the media. For example, even if the police, the fire department or the 
health department has disclosed information about an accident or other health 
situation, a sponsored organization is still restricted to providing a one-word 
description of an individual’s general condition if and only if someone inquires about 
the patient by name and the patient has not objected to the disclosure. 
  18 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), Standards for Privacy of 
Individually Identifiable Health Information 45 C.F.R. § 164.512(b), (d), (g), (h), 
(i)(1)(ii), (i)(1)(iii), (j), (k), (l).      
APPENDIX: 
N/A 
 