 
1 
 
  
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT:   
Compliance 
SUBJECT:   
General Rules 
NUMBER OF PAGES: 
4 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
None 
EFFECTIVE 
DATE: September 
23, 2013 
 
REVISION DATE: 
July 25, 2016 
 
POLICY NUMBER: 
COR - 304 
 
SCOPE:  
   Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) and its wholly 
owned Sponsored Organizations (collectively referred to herein as “Entity”) that use, disclose, 
create, receive, maintain or transmit Protected Health Information, as defined below.   
PURPOSE:   
   To serve as a guiding policy for ensuring compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 including all pertinent regulations (45 CFR Parts 160 and 164) 
issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, as amended by Subtitle D of 
the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act, Title XIII of 
Division A and Title IV of Division B of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 
2009 (collectively referred to herein as “HIPAA Privacy Rules). 
POLICY:   
   Each Entity that is a Covered Entity under the HIPAA Privacy Rules must maintain a 
privacy program that complies with FMOLHS policies and the HIPAA Privacy Rules.  The 
CEO of each Entity that is a Covered Entity shall designate a Privacy Officer, who will act at 
the direction of the FMOLHS Compliance Officer in communicating and monitoring privacy 
policies and procedures, act as a contact person responsible for receiving privacy complaints, 
coordinate investigations of potential privacy breaches and provide information and education 
on privacy practices. 
DEFINITIONS: 
 “Covered Entity” means a health plan, health care clearinghouse, or a health care provider 
who transmits any health information in connection with a transaction covered by HIPAA, 
such as electronic claims submission. 
 
2 
 
“Entity” means OLOLRMC and its wholly owned Sponsored Organizations. 
 “HIPAA Privacy Rules” means the privacy requirements in the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act of 1996 including all pertinent regulations (45 CFR Parts 160 and 164) 
issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services as such statute and regulations 
have been amended by Subtitle D of the Health Information Technology for Economic and 
Clinical Health Act, Title XIII of Division A and Title IV of Division B of the American 
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.  
“Individually Identifiable Health Information” means information that is a subset of health 
information, including demographic information collected from an individual that is created or 
received by health care provider, health plan, employer, or health care clearinghouse, and 
relates to the past, present, or future physical or mental health or condition of an individual, 
the provision of health care to an individual, or the past, present, or future payment for the 
provision of health care to an individual; and: (A) that identifies the individual; or (B) with 
respect to which there is a reasonable basis to believe the information can be used to identify 
the individual.  
 “Protected Health Information” or “PHI” means all information, including demographic 
data, that relates to an individual’s past, present or future physical or mental health or 
condition, the provision of health care to an individual, or the past, present, or future payment 
for the provision of health care to an individual, and that identifies an individual or for which 
there is a reasonable basis to believe it can be used to identify an individual.  Individually 
identifiable health information includes many common identifiers (e.g., name, address, birth 
date, Social Security Number).  Individually identifiable health information in employment 
records held by an Entity in its role as an employer is not PHI (e.g., employment-related 
testing and employer health assessments.) 
  “Sponsored Organizations” means an entity either wholly-owned by OLOLRMC, or a 
subsidiary of an entity wholly-owned by OLOLRMC that is also a Covered Entity, as those 
terms are defined in the HIPAA Privacy Rules. 
“Team Member” means an Entity employee.  
“Workforce Member” means team members, volunteers, trainees, and other persons whose 
conduct, in the performance of work for the Covered Entity, is under the direct control of the 
Covered Entity, whether or not they are paid by the Covered Entity. 
PROCEDURE: 
 A. Generally:  PHI shall not be used or disclosed except as permitted or required by law. 
 
B. Notice of Privacy Practices Required: Patients served must be given a Privacy Notice 
outlining the uses and disclosures of PHI that may be made, and notifying them of their 
rights and our legal duties with respect to PHI.  [Privacy Notice] 
 
C. Permitted and Required Uses and Disclosures:  PHI may or shall be disclosed as 
follows: 
 To the patient/ individual [Individuals' Rights Related to PHI]; 
 To carry out Treatment, Payment, and Healthcare operations (TPO) activities, 
within specified limits [Use or Disclosure of PHI for TPO Purposes];  
3 
 
 Pursuant to and in compliance with a current and valid Authorization 
[Authorization for Use or Disclosure of PHI]; 
 In keeping with a Business Associate arrangement [Disclosures to Business 
Associates]; 
 As otherwise provided for in the HIPAA privacy regulations  
 
D. Minimum Necessary:  When using or disclosing PHI, or when requesting PHI from 
another entity, reasonable efforts must be made to limit the PHI used or disclosed to 
the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the use/disclosure [Minimum 
Necessary Requirements]. 
 
E. Personal Representatives:  A person acting in the role of personal representative must 
be treated as the individual regarding access to relevant PHI unless: 
 The patient  is an un-emancipated minor, but is authorized to give lawful consent, 
or may obtain the health care without consent of the personal representative, and 
minor has not requested that the person be treated as a personal representative, or 
the personal representative has assented to agreement of confidentiality between 
the provider and the minor; 
 There is a reasonable basis to believe that the patient has been or may be subjected 
to domestic violence, abuse or neglect by the personal representative or that 
treating that person as a personal representative could endanger the individual, and, 
in the exercise of professional judgment, it is determined not to be in the best 
interests of the individual to treat that person as a personal representative. 
[Personal Representative] 
 
F. Agreed Upon Restrictions: A patient has a right to request a restriction on any uses or 
disclosures (release of information) of his/her PHI, though the Entity need not agree to 
the requested restriction, and cannot agree to a restriction relating to disclosures 
required under law (i.e. disclosures to the U. S. Secretary of Health and Human 
Services for HIPAA enforcement purposes).  [Uses and Disclosures of PHI subject to 
an agreed upon restriction] 
 
G. Confidential Communications:  A patient has a right to request to receive 
communications of PHI by alternative means or at alternative locations, and reasonable 
requests must be accommodated.  [Right to request restriction of use and disclosure – 
confidential communication] 
 
H. Accounting for Disclosures:  An individual has a right to an accounting of disclosures 
of his/her PHI for up to a six (6) year period.  [Accounting for Disclosures of PHI] 
 
I. De-identified PHI:  Health information may be considered not to be individually 
identifiable in the following circumstances: 
 A person with appropriate knowledge and experience with generally acceptable 
statistical and scientific principles and methods determines that the risk is very 
small that the information could be used, alone or with other reasonably available 
information, to identify the individual who is the subject of the information; or 
 The following identifiers of the individual (and relatives, employers or household 
members) is removed:  names; information relating to the individual's geographic  
4 
 
subdivision if it contains fewer than 20,000 people; elements of dates (except year) 
directly related to the individual, and all ages and elements of dates that indicate 
age for individuals over 89, unless aggregated into a single category of age 90 and 
older; telephone numbers; fax numbers; email addresses; social security numbers; 
medical record numbers; health plan beneficiary numbers; account numbers; 
certificate or license numbers; vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including 
license plate numbers; device identifiers and serial numbers; Web Universal 
Resource Locators (URLs); Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers; biometric 
identifiers; full face photographic images; and, any other unique identifying 
number, characteristic or code.[Requirements for de-identification/re-identification 
of PHI] 
 
J. Complaint Process: The Entity must have in place a process for patients to make 
complaints about the Entity’s HIPAA policies and procedures and/or the Entity’s  
compliance with those policies and procedures.  [Privacy Notice, Patient Rights] 
 
K. Documentation: The Entity must maintain written or electronic copies of all policies 
and procedures, communications, actions, activities or designations as are required to 
be documented under this manual for a period of six (6) years from the later of the date 
of creation or the last effective date.  NOTE:  This is the documentation 
requirement under HIPAA, but does not necessarily reflect any longer retention 
period for particular documentation that may be mandated by state or federal 
law on another basis. 
 
REFERENCES: 
• Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), Standards for Privacy 
of Individually Identifiable Health Information - 45 CFR Parts 160 and 164 
• Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act, Title XIII of 
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 
ATTACHMENTS: 
n/a 
 