COR-101 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Corporate Compliance Section:  
Title: Billing, Coding and Claims Submission 
Standards and Compliance 
Policy Reference #: COR/101 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: September 28, 1998 Last Review Date: August 23, 2023 
Last Revision Date: September 7, 2017 
 
PURPOSE 
This policy is intended to provide all employees, management, contractors and agents of Our Lady of 
the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) with detailed information regarding the False Claims Act 
(FCA) and Whistleblower protections.  This policy also outlines OLOL’s billing, coding and claims 
submission standards.   
 
OLOL is committed to full compliance with the FCA and the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 (DRA).  
OLOL has implemented a Corporate Compliance Program to assist with healthcare billing, coding, and 
claim submissions compliance.  Healthcare billing, coding and claims submission compliance refers to 
OLOL’s ability to operate within the laws, rules, regulations, and policies set by the federal and state 
governments, insurance programs and Medicare carriers, administrative contractors and the Louisiana 
Medicaid program.  As a sponsored organization of Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System 
(FMOLHS), OLOL follows certain FMOLHS policies including the FMOLHS Compliance Program.  
The Compliance Program summary can be found in FMOLHS policy COMP 08 001.   
 
POLICY 
OLOL strictly prohibits the submission or participation in the submission of any false claim.  Employees 
and business partners shall not make or submit any false or misleading entries on any bills or claims 
forms, and no person shall engage in any arrangement, or participate in such an arrangement at the 
direction of another employee (including any officer, manager or supervisor of OLOL) that results in 
prohibited conduct.  Coding and billing staff are responsible for following the policies and procedures 
outlined in their departmental policy and procedure manual.  Nothing in this compliance policy is 
intended to change the specific procedures outlined in these manuals.  This policy is intended to 
reinforce OLOL’s commitment to accurate, timely, and complete billing. 
 
Employees who are aware of, or suspect, any type of false or fraudulent billing are required to report the 
activity to a manager, supervisor or to the Corporate Compliance Officer (Refer to FMOLHS policy 
COMP 08 003).  Employees are required to report suspected billing fraud regardless of whether it is 
carried out willfully and knowingly or is being done inadvertently or accidentally.  Knowing of a 
potential violation and failing to report it may result in disciplinary action.  Employees are also required 
to contact someone in management or the Corporate Compliance Officer for interpretations and 
clarification of existing policies.   
Any false statement on a bill or claim form may subject the employee to disciplinary action up to and 
including termination.  OLOL may also be required to report violations to the appropriate authorities.  
Federal and State authorities may impose harsh fines and penalties for violations of the laws. COR-101 
Page 2 of 4 
OLOL’s Corporate Compliance Program promotes a culture of open communication and problem 
resolution between management and employees.  To assure that individuals feel comfortable reporting 
concerns, OLOL has established a confidential disclosure program and has instituted a strict non-
retaliation policy to provide protection from any form of retaliation to anyone that reports a concern in 
good faith.  (Refer to FMOLHS Policy COMP 08 003) 
 
PROCEDURE 
OLOL’s billing and coding processes promote and reinforce current federal and state statutes and 
regulations regarding the submission of claims and Medicare cost reports.  These processes create a 
mechanism for the billing and reimbursement staff to communicate effectively and accurately with the 
clinical staff regarding OLOL’s intent to:  
• Provide for proper and timely documentation of all physician and other professional/technical 
services prior to coding and billing so that services that are billed have appropriate supporting 
documentation; 
• Maintain documentation and keep available for audit and review.  The documentation, within the 
patient’s medical records, identifies the individuals providing the service.  The hospital consults with 
its medical staff to establish other appropriate documentation guidelines; 
• Emphasize that the diagnosis and procedures reported on the reimbursement claim are based on the 
documentation in the medical record and other documentation necessary for accurate code 
assignment; and 
• Provide that the compensation for billing department coders and billing consultants does not provide 
financial incentives to improperly upcode claims.  Coding and billing personnel and consultants are 
required to use the most accurate coding. 
 
It is against the policies of OLOL to intentionally or knowingly: 
• Bill for services or supplies that were not provided; 
• Misrepresent the diagnosis for the patient to justify the services or equipment furnished; 
• Alter claim forms to obtain a higher payment amount; 
• Engage in a pattern of duplicate billing to obtain reimbursement to which the provider is not 
entitled, e.g., billing both Medicare and the beneficiary for the same service or billing both 
Medicare and another insurer in an attempt to get paid twice; 
• Solicit, offer, or receive a kickback, bribe, or rebate in exchange for a Medicare or Medicaid 
referral, e.g., paying for a referral of patients in exchange for the ordering of diagnostic tests and 
other services or medical equipment; 
• Un-bundle or “explode” charges, e.g., the billing of a multichannel set of lab tests to appear as if 
the individual test had been performed; 
• Complete Certificates of Medical Necessity (CMNs) for patients not personally and professionally 
known by the provider; 
• Misrepresent the services rendered (upcoding or the use of procedure codes not appropriate for the 
item or service actually furnished), amounts charged for services rendered, identity of the person 
receiving the services, dates of services, etc.; 
• Bill for non-covered services as covered services; COR-101 
Page 3 of 4 
• Utilize split billing schemes (e.g., billing procedures over a period of days when all treatment 
occurred during one visit); 
• Engage in a pattern of routine waiver of beneficiary co-payments or deductibles; 
• Engage in a pattern of billing, certifying, prescribing or ordering services that are not medically 
necessary or, if medically necessary, not to the extent rendered;  
• Request or obtain additional payment for covered services from the beneficiary; 
• Bill or submit claims for supplies or equipment which are clearly unsuitable for the patient’s needs 
or are so lacking in quality or sufficiency for the purpose as to be virtually worthless; 
• Bill or submit claims which involve flagrant and persistent over-utilization of services without 
proper regard for results, the patient’s ailments, condition, medical needs, or the physician’s orders; 
• Misrepresent dates, frequency, duration, or description of services rendered, or the identity of the 
recipient of the services or the individual who rendered the services; 
• Fail to comply with limiting charge requirements on billing Medicare or TRICARE beneficiaries; 
• Intentionally submit incorrect, misleading, or fraudulent information to any payer of medical 
services; 
• Intentionally falsify, destroy, or withhold records relating to the billing and claims submission 
function; 
• Fail to properly use coding modifiers; 
• Knowingly misuse provider identification numbers, which results in improper billing.   
 
OVERVIEW OF THE FALSE CLAIMS ACTS 
The federal False Claims Act (FCA) outlines the liability for individuals who file or cause to be filed 
false or fraudulent claims.  A fraudulent claim is something that is untrue or a lie.  The government can 
use the FCA against both organizations and individuals who commit billing fraud.  It is applied to any 
person who does the following: 
• Knowingly presents or causes to be presented, a false or fraudulent claim for payment or approval to 
an officer or employee of the United States government; 
• Knowingly makes, uses or causes to be made or used, a false record or statement to get a false or 
fraudulent claim paid or approved by the government; 
• Conspires to defraud the government by getting a false or fraudulent claim allowed or paid; or 
• Knowingly makes uses or causes to be made or used, a false record or statement to conceal, avoid , 
or decrease an obligation to pay or transmit property to the government 
Anyone who violates the FCA is liable for civil penalty of not less than $5,500 and not more than 
$11,000 per claim, plus three times the amount of damages the government sustains.  The government 
may also prohibit or exclude violators from participating in Medicare, Medicaid and other government 
programs.  Intentional submission of a false claim is subject to federal criminal enforcement and may 
also be liable to the United States government for the cost of civil action brought to recover any 
penalties or damages. 
Louisiana has its own False Claims Act entitled, “Louisiana Medical Assistance Programs Integrity 
Law.”  The Louisiana statute is very similar to the federal False Claims Act; however, it also includes 
prohibitions against anti-kickback activities.  Under the Louisiana statute, “no person shall solicit 
receive, offer, or pay any remuneration, including but not limited to kickbacks, bribes, rebates, or COR-101 
Page 4 of 4 
withhold payments, directly or indirectly, overtly or covertly, in cash or in kind” for patient referrals or 
for  purchasing, leasing, or ordering of medical goods, supplies, services or facilities.  The unauthorized 
use, possession or distribution of lists of individuals eligible for medical assistance is considered an 
illegal act. 
Violations of the kickback and bribe provisions may result in a civil fine in an amount not to exceed 
$10,000 per violation or an amount equal to three times the value of the illegal remuneration, whichever 
is greater.  False claims are also subject to treble damages.  In addition to actual damages, the court may 
impose a civil fine up to $10,000 for each false claim or fraudulent claim committed in the areas 
outlined above. 
The federal and state False Claims Acts authorizes what is known as qui tam actions and awards to qui 
tam plaintiffs.  These provisions permit individuals to 1) sue, on behalf of the government, persons or 
entities who knowingly have presented the government with false claims; and 2) share in any proceeds 
ultimately recovered as a result of the suit.  
The FCA includes provisions to discourage employers from retaliating against employees for initiating 
qui tam law suits.  Any employee who is terminated, demoted, suspended or in any way discriminated 
against for bringing forth an action under the FCA has a right to sue the employer for reinstatement, 
back pay and other damages. 
The FCA includes a provision that reduces the penalties for providers who promptly self-disclose a 
suspected FCA violation.  This protocol allows providers to conduct their own investigations, take 
appropriate corrective measures, calculate the damages and submit the findings that involve more 
serious problems than just simple errors. 
 
REFERENCES 
• Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 
• 31 U.S.C. Money and Finance Subchapter III 
• La. Rev. Statue 46:437 Medical Assistance Programs Integrity Law 
 
 
Revised:  Philip LeBlanc, Compliance Officer, September 7, 2017 
 
Reviewed:  Philip LeBlanc, Compliance Officer, August 23, 2023 