1 
 
  
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT:   
Compliance 
SUBJECT:   
HIPAA Personal Representatives 
NUMBER OF PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
EFFECTIVE 
DATE:  September 
23, 2013 
 
REVISION DATE: 
July 25, 2016 
POLICY NUMBER: 
COR - 305 
 
SCOPE:  
   Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (“OLOLRMC”) and its wholly 
owned Sponsored Organizations (collectively referred to herein as “Entity”) that use, disclose, 
create, receive, maintain or transmit Protected Health Information, as defined below.   
PURPOSE:   
   To serve as a guiding policy for ensuring compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 including all pertinent regulations (45 CFR Parts 160 and 164) 
issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, as amended by Subtitle D of 
the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act, Title XIII of 
Division A and Title IV of Division B of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 
2009 (collectively referred to herein as “HIPAA Privacy Rules). 
POLICY:   
   Entity must, except in the case of an emancipated minor or an abuse, neglect, or 
endangerment situation, treat a personal representative as the individual.  
DEFINITIONS: 
 “Covered Entity” means a health plan, health care clearinghouse, or a health care provider 
who transmits any health information in connection with a transaction covered by HIPAA, 
such as electronic claims submission. 
“Entity” means OLOLRMC and its wholly owned Sponsored Organizations. 
 “HIPAA Privacy Rules” means the privacy requirements in the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act of 1996 including all pertinent regulations (45 CFR Parts 160 and 164) 
issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services as such statute and regulations 
2 
 
have been amended by Subtitle D of the Health Information Technology for Economic and 
Clinical Health Act, Title XIII of Division A and Title IV of Division B of the American 
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.  
“Individually Identifiable Health Information” means information that is a subset of health 
information, including demographic information collected from an individual that is created or 
received by health care provider, health plan, employer, or health care clearinghouse, and 
relates to the past, present, or future physical or mental health or condition of an individual, 
the provision of health care to an individual, or the past, present, or future payment for the 
provision of health care to an individual; and: (A) that identifies the individual; or (B) with 
respect to which there is a reasonable basis to believe the information can be used to identify 
the individual.  
 “Protected Health Information” or “PHI” means all information, including demographic 
data, that relates to an individual’s past, present or future physical or mental health or 
condition, the provision of health care to an individual, or the past, present, or future payment 
for the provision of health care to an individual, and that identifies an individual or for which 
there is a reasonable basis to believe it can be used to identify an individual.  Individually 
identifiable health information includes many common identifiers (e.g., name, address, birth 
date, Social Security Number).  Individually identifiable health information in employment 
records held by an Entity in its role as an employer is not PHI (e.g., employment-related 
testing and employer health assessments.) 
  “Sponsored Organizations” means an entity either wholly-owned by OLOLRMC, or a 
subsidiary of an entity wholly-owned by OLOLRMC that is also a Covered Entity, as those 
terms are defined in the HIPAA Privacy Rules. 
“Team Member” means an Entity employee.  
“Workforce Member” means team members, volunteers, trainees, and other persons whose 
conduct, in the performance of work for the Covered Entity, is under the direct control of the 
Covered Entity, whether or not they are paid by the Covered Entity. 
PROCEDURE: 
ADULTS AND EMANCIPATED MINORS: 
If, in accordance with law, a person has the authority to make health care decisions for an adult or 
an emancipated minor, Entity must treat this person as a personal representative, with respect to 
medical information relevant to such personal representation. 
 
UN-EMANCIPATED MINORS: 
If, in accordance with law, a parent, guardian or other person acting in loco parentis  has the 
authority to make health care decisions for an un-emancipated minor, Enity must treat this person 
as a personal representative with respect to medical information relevant to such personal 
representation.   
 
Exceptions:  In the situations listed below, un -emancipated minors have the authority to make 
healthcare decisions.  Therefore a personal representative would NOT have authority to act on 
behalf of the un-emancipated minor. 
  
• The minor consents to health care service; no other consent to health care service is required 
by law, regardless of whether the consent of another person has also been obtained; and the 3 
 
minor has not requested that such person be treated as a personal representative. 
 
• The minor, under Louisiana law, may obtain health care service without consent of a parent, 
guardian, or other person acting in loco parentis, and the minor, a court, or another person 
authorized by law consents to health care. (Pregnancy, HIV testing and treatment) 
 
• A parent, guardian, or other person acting in loco parentis  consents to an agreement of 
confidentiality between Entity and the minor with respect to health care service. 
 
DECEASED INDIVIDUALS: 
If in accordance with law an executor, administrator, or other person has authority to act on behalf 
of a deceased individual or the individual’s estate, Entity  must treat this person as a personal 
representative with respect to medical information relevant to such personal representation. 
 
ABUSE, NEGLECT, ENDANGERMENT SITUATIONS: 
Notwithstanding Louisiana law or any other requirement to the contrary, Entity may elect not to 
treat a person as the personal representative of an individual if Entity has reasonable belief that: 
 
• The patient has been or may be subjected to domestic violence, abuse, or neglect by this 
person; or 
• Treating this person as a personal representative could endanger the patient.   Entity may 
exercise professional judgment and decide that it is not in the best interest of the patient to 
treat this person as his/her personal representative. 
 
Note: If a patient is a competent adult, he or she should be asked to sign all forms and make all 
requests pursuant to HIPAA (an emancipated minor should be treated as an adult and can act on 
his or her own behalf). 
 
Note:  The last four digits of the current account number should be used as the patient’s 
password/unique identifier. 
 
REFERENCES: 
• Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), Standards for Privacy 
of Individually Identifiable Health Information - 45 CFR Parts 160 and 164 
• Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act, Title XIII of 
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 
ATTACHMENTS: 
n/a 
 