C:\Users\aidan\Desktop\OLOL Project\ladies-of-the-lake\OneDrive Feb 12 2025\Corporate Compliance\COR-107.doc 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Corporate Compliance Section: N/A 
Title: Medical Necessity – Reasonable & 
Necessary Services 
Policy Reference #: COR/107 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: September 28, 1998 Last Review Date: August 23, 2023 
Last Revision Date: March 7, 2013 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
Claims should only be submitted for medically necessary services. 
 
POLICY: 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) recognizes that licensed health 
care professionals must be able to order any services that are considered appropriate for the 
diagnosis and treatment of their patients.  However, Medicare and other government and private 
health care plans will only pay for those services that meet appropriate coverage or medical 
necessity standards in the case of Medicare, reasonable and necessary services. 
 
OLOLRMC submits claims for services that the hospital has reason to believe are medically 
necessary and are ordered by a physician or other appropriately licensed individual.  
Additionally, such claims should be submitted only when appropriate documentation supports 
the claim and only when such documentation is maintained and available for audit and review.  
Documentation must show that the service was rendered, to what extent it was rendered and why 
the service was medically necessary.  Upon request, the hospital will provide documentation to 
authorized payers, such as patient’s medical records and physicians’ orders, to support the 
medical necessity of a service that the hospital has provided.   The Medical Management 
Department maintains the “medical necessity” definitions and rules of the various government 
and private plans when available in order to address coverage determinations.    
 
OLOLRMC does not bill for services that do not meet the applicable, known payor standards 
unless the patient is advised in advance and in writing of the non-coverage for services and elects 
to have the procedures anyway.  Such claims will be submitted in accordance with the 
instructions from the patient’s payers.   
 
Revised:  Philip LeBlanc, Compliance Officer, March 7, 2013 
 
Reviewed:  Philip LeBlanc, Compliance Officer, August 23, 2020 
 
 