1 
 
  
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT:   
Compliance  
SUBJECT:   
Authorization for Use or Disclosures of 
Protected Health Information 
NUMBER OF PAGES: 
6 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
OOHIM006 
EFFECTIVE 
DATE: September 
23, 2013 
 
REVISION DATE: 
July 25, 2016 
POLICY NUMBER: 
COR – 303 
 
 
SCOPE:  
   Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (“OLOLRMC”) and its wholly 
owned Sponsored Organizations (collectively referred to herein as “Entity”) that use, disclose, 
create, receive, maintain or transmit Protected Health Information, as defined below.     
PURPOSE:   
   To establish the requirements for patient authorizations to use or disclose Protected Health 
Information. 
POLICY:   
   A patient’s authorization compliant with the HIPAA Privacy Rules is not required for any 
Covered Entity’s own payment, treatment and healthcare operations activities.  Any other 
disclosure may be made only with an authorization or except as described below. 
DEFINITIONS: 
  “Covered Entity” means a health plan, health care clearinghouse, or a health care provider that 
transmits any health information in connection with a transaction covered by HIPAA, such as 
electronic claims submission. 
  “Entity” means OLOLRMC and its wholly owned Sponsored Organizations. 
  “Health Care Operations” means functions that are common to a Covered Entity but which are 
not related to treatment. Such functions include, but are not limited to, quality assessment or 
improvement, care management, peer review and training, patient safety activities, insurance 
underwriting, legal services, compliance, and auditing services, business planning and general 
administration.  
  “Health Care Provider” means (A) a hospital, critical access hospital, skilled nursing facility, 
2 
 
comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation facility, home health agency, or hospice program, (B) a 
provider of medical- or health-related services (including physicians’ services, PT/OT, 
diagnostic and dialysis services, ambulance services, durable medical equipment and supplies, 
and drugs or biologicals), and (C) any other person or organization who furnishes, bills or is paid 
for providing health care in the normal course of business.  
  “HIPAA Privacy Rules” means the privacy requirements in the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act of 1996 including all pertinent regulations (45 CFR Parts 160 and 164) 
issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services as such statute and regulations 
have been amended by Subtitle D of the Health Information Technology for Economic and 
Clinical Health Act, Title XIII of Division A and Title IV of Division B of the American 
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.  
  “Protected Health Information or PHI” means all information, including demographic data, 
that relates to an individual’s past, present or future physical or mental health or condition, the 
provision of health care to an individual, or the past, present, or future payment for the provision 
of health care to an individual, and that identifies an individual or for which there is a reasonable 
basis to believe it can be used to identify an individual.  Individually identifiable health 
information includes many common identifiers (e.g., name, address, birth date, Social Security 
Number).  Individually identifiable health information in employment records held by an Entity 
in its role as an employer is not PHI (e.g., employment-related testing and employer health 
assessments.) 
  “Psychotherapy Notes” means notes recorded (in any medium) by a health care provider who is 
a mental health professional documenting or analyzing the contents of conversation during a 
private counseling session or a group, joint, or family counseling session and that are separated 
from the rest of the individual's medical record. Psychotherapy Notes exclude medication 
prescription and monitoring, counseling session start and stop times, the modalities and 
frequencies of treatment furnished, results of clinical tests, and any summary of the following 
items: diagnosis, functional status, the treatment plan, symptoms, prognosis, and progress to 
date. 
  “Sponsored Organization” means a legal entity either wholly-owned by OLOLRMC or a 
subsidiary entity of an entity wholly-owned by OLOLRMC that is also a Covered Entity. 
  “Team Members” means employees of any Entity. 
 “Workforce Member” means Team Members, volunteers, trainees, and other persons whose 
conduct, in the performance of work for the Covered Entity, is under the direct control of the 
Covered Entity, whether or not they are paid by the Covered Entity. 
PROCEDURE: 
Need for Authorization for Use and Disclosure of PHI 
   An authorization received before the use or disclosure of PHI is required for the following 
disclosures:   
A. Uses and disclosures of PHI for purposes other than an Entity’s own treatment, payment 
and Healthcare Operations, unless otherwise permitted under an exception under the 
HIPAA Privacy Rules.  For example, no authorization is required if a Covered Entity 
discloses PHI to a business associate for the purpose of creating de-identified information 
or uses certain PHI (e.g., name and medical condition in general, non-specific terms, etc.) 3 
 
to create a directory for the Covered Entity.   
B. Uses and disclosures for marketing except for: 
1. Face-to-face communication made by any Covered Entity to an individual; or 
2. A promotional gift of nominal value provided by a Covered Entity. 
3. Any treatment communications about health-related products and services by a Health 
Care Provider to an individual, including communications for case management and 
care coordination for the individual or to direct or recommend alternative treatments, 
therapies, Health Care Providers, or settings of care are not considered “marketing.”  If 
financial remuneration is received, however, in exchange for making the 
communications or describing the product, an authorization is required and the Covered 
Entity must notify patients that remuneration will be received by the Covered Entity.  
Consult with Legal Services Department any time a third-party will remunerate or 
reimburse an Entity for a communication. 
C. Sale of PHI, meaning disclosure of PHI by a Covered Entity in exchange for direct or 
indirect remuneration from the entity to which the PHI is disclosed unless certain 
conditions are met.  Consult with Legal Services Department any time remuneration from 
the recipient is involved in a disclosure of PHI unless it meets the conditions in paragraph I 
of the procedure below. 
D. Deceased Individual’s PHI, the privacy rule extends protection of PHI about deceased 
individuals to remain in effect for as long as Entity maintains the information. The Entity 
must: 
1. Treat an executor, administrator, or other person who has authority to act on behalf of a 
deceased individual as a personal representative with respects to PHI.   
 
2. Protect the PHI about a deceased individual in the same manner and to the same extent as 
required for the PHI of living individuals, except for uses and disclosures for research 
purposes. 
 
The privacy rule does allow for disclosure of a deceased person’s medical information to 
health care providers for the purposes of treatment of family members.  If medical 
information about a deceased person is relevant to the treatment of a family member, the 
family member’s physician may obtain that information. 
 
 Permitted Disclosures: Disclosures of PHI about deceased individuals may be allowed in 
the following instances: 
• Disclosures to coroners and medical examiners 
• Disclosures to funeral directors to carry out their duties with respect to the decedent. 
E. Use or disclosure of PHI created for research generally requires an authorization unless 
such use or disclosure is permitted pursuant to IRB research uses/disclosures.  Such 
authorizations must include the basic elements specified in section c below, and also 
contain: 
 
1. A description of the extent to which PHI will be used to carry out treatment, 
payment or health care operations; 4 
 
2. A description of any PHI that will not be used or disclosed for purposes otherwise 
permitted, provided that the limitation may not preclude disclosures required by 
law or to avert serious threat to health or safety; 
3. The authorization must refer to any  privacy notice expected to be given to the 
individual and must state that the statements in the privacy notice are binding, 
and; 
4. This authorization may be combined in the same document with the consent to 
participate in research, or the privacy notice. 
F. Psychotherapy notes, except: 
1.  To carry out the following treatment, payment or health care operations: 
a. Use by the originator of the notes for treatment; 
b. Use or disclosure in training programs in which trainees, students, or practitioners 
in mental health learn under supervision to practice or improve their skills in 
group, joint, family, or individual counseling; or 
c. Use or disclosure by an Entity to defend itself in a legal action or other proceeding 
brought on by the individual. 
2. Use and disclosure with respect to oversight of the originator of the notes. 
Conditioning Treatment, Payment, Health plan Enrollment or Eligibility for Benefits upon 
Signing an Authorization 
   The provision of treatment, payment, health plan enrollment or eligibility for benefits to an 
individual may not be conditioned upon signing an authorization except for:  
1. Research-related treatment, but the Covered Entity must, in an authorization form 
authorizing both disclosure/use and treatment, clearly differentiate between the 
conditioned and unconditioned components and provide the individual an opportunity to 
opt in to any research activities in the unconditioned portion of the authorization; 
2. Health plan enrollment or eligibility for benefits, if the authorization sought relates to the 
individual or is for the plan’s underwriting or risk rating determinations, and the 
authorization is not for a use or disclosure of psychotherapy notes; and 
3. Health care that is solely for the purpose of creating information for disclosure to a third 
party (e.g., employment drug testing). 
Compound Authorizations:  An authorization for use and disclosure of PHI may not be combined 
with any other document to create a compound authorization. 
Authorization Requirements 
   A valid authorization must meet the following requirements: 
A. Written in plain English; 
B. Separate independent document, except: 
1. An authorization for the use or disclosure of PHI created for a research study may be 
combined with any other type of written permission for the same or another research 
study (e.g., consent to participate in the research study); or 
2. An authorization for a use or disclosure of psychotherapy notes may be combined 5 
 
only with another authorization for a use or disclosure of psychotherapy notes; 
C. The following information must be included: 
1. A description of the information to be used or disclosed that identifies the information 
in a specific and meaningful fashion; 
2. The name or other specific identification of the person(s), or class of persons, 
authorized to make the requested use or disclosure; 
3. The name or other specific identification of the person(s), or class of persons, to 
whom the applicable Entity may make the requested use or disclosure; 
4. A description of each purpose of the requested use or disclosure.  “At the request of 
the individual” is sufficient when the individual initiates the authorization; 
5. An expiration date or an expiration event that relates to the individual or the purpose 
of the use or disclosure.  “End of research study,” “none,” or similar language is 
sufficient if the authorization is for use or disclosure of PHI for research; 
6. A statement of the individual's right to revoke the authorization in writing and the 
exceptions to the right to revoke and a description of how the individual may revoke 
the authorization or a reference to the applicable Entity’s Notice of Privacy Practices 
for further instructions; 
7. A statement that the provision of treatment and payment may not be conditioned on 
obtaining this authorization unless otherwise allowed (e.g., research related 
treatment); 
8. A statement that information used or disclosed pursuant to the authorization may be 
subject to re-disclosure by the recipient and no longer be protected by this rule;  
9. A statement that the individual may  inspect or copy the PHI to be used or disclosed 
in response to the authorization;  
10. If the use or disclosure of the requested information will result in any direct or 
indirect remuneration to the applicable Entity from a third party, a statement that such 
remuneration will result; 
11. If an Entity seeks an authorization from an individual for its own use or disclosure of 
PHI, the applicable Entity shall provide the individual with a copy of the signed 
authorization; and 
12. The signature of the individual and date.  If the authorization is signed by a personal 
representative (as defined by state law) of the individual, a description of such 
representative's authority to act for the individual. 
All of these requirements are contained in the FMOLHS Authorization for Release of 
Information form attached as Attachment A. 
How to Revoke an Authorization 
   An authorization must be revoked in writing.  The authorization will continue to be valid if the 
applicable Entity has taken action in reliance on the authorization, or if the authorization was 
obtained as a condition of obtaining insurance coverage. 
Retention Period 6 
 
   Signed authorization shall be retained for a minimum of six (6) years. 
Invalid Authorization 
   A previously executed authorization is not valid if the document has any of the following 
defects, and thus, no PHI may be disclosed: 
A. The expiration date has passed or the expiration event is known by the applicable Entity to 
have occurred; 
B. The authorization has not been filled out completely with respect to a required element; 
C. The authorization is known by the applicable Entity to have been revoked; or 
D. Any material information in the authorization is known by the applicable Entity to be false. 
Retrieval Fees 
   Costs associated with retrieval may be charged to the patient in the amount of .39 cents per 
page.  Other requestors (e.g., attorney, insurance company, subpoenas) may be charged a 
retrieval fee and the costs to copy the information. 
REFERENCES: 
• Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), Standards for Privacy of 
Individually Identifiable Health Information 45 CFR Part 164, including §§ 164.501 and 
164.508. 
ATTACHMENTS: 
• Attachment A – [Authorization form] 
 
 
 