COR-201 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Corporate Compliance Section: N/A 
Title: Background Checks for Employees & 
Vendors 
Policy Reference #: COR/201 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: September 28, 1998 Last Review Date: August 23, 2023 
Last Revision Date: November 11, 2014 
 
PURPOSE 
It is critical for the success of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) Corporate 
Compliance Program to employ individuals and to contract with vendors, who are trustworthy, law 
abiding and committed to upholding OLOL’s compliance standards. 
 
POLICY 
 
Employees 
OLOL will perform employee background checks on all new employees prior to their hire date.  
Employee background checks include but are not limited to a criminal records check and verification 
that the employee is not listed as excluded from federal procurement and non-procurement programs as 
well as state exclusion programs.   
 
If OLOL determines through a criminal record check that an applicant was previously convicted of or 
pleaded guilty to a felony, misdemeanor or other offense, then the hospital may remove such applicant 
from consideration for the available hospital job position.  Similarly, should OLOL learn during its 
review of an applicant’s qualifications that the applicant failed to follow ethical or compliance standards 
of a prior employer, the hospital may refuse to hire the applicant as an employee.  Additionally, if 
OLOL verifies that the employee is excluded from a federal or state exclusions programs, OLOL will 
refuse to hire the applicant.  This is not to be taken to mean that OLOL cannot refuse to hire an applicant 
due to other reasons as stipulated in the Human Resources Department policies. 
 
Monthly, OLOL completes a recheck to verify that current employees are not listed as excluded from 
federal procurement and non-procurement programs.  If an employee is found to have been added to the 
exclusion list for participation in federal or state exclusion programs, the employee will be subject to 
immediate termination of their employment.  Additionally, OLOL will ensure that the employee’s pay 
will not be included in the Cost Report for the time period they were employed and on the exclusion list.   
OLOL will also reimburse funds received from a governmental program if the employee on the 
exclusion list is a direct patient caregiver.  
 
OLOL shall also perform such additional background checks and follow any additional hiring 
procedures regarding applicants for particular job positions as may be required by law. 
 
Contracted Vendors 
Background checks are also conducted monthly for contracted vendors and include verification that the 
vendor is not excluded from federal or state exclusion programs. 
 
Documentation of background checks for all employees are kept in the Human Resources Department.   
 COR-201 
Page 2 of 2 
Revised:  Philip LeBlanc, Compliance Officer, September 7, 2017 
 
Reviewed:  Philip LeBlanc, Compliance Officer, August 23, 2020 
 