e —— s —
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER

Credit Card Prwnleges Policy Reference #: —
| Supersedes#: [ |
Date of Origination: May 15,2009 Last Date Reviewed: | July 1, 2011

Last Date Revised: | July 1, 2011

APPLIES TO:
Our Lady of the Lake, Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) and its wholly owned subsidiaries.

PURPOSE:
The purpose of this policy is to ensure proper usage of organizational credit cards.

DEFINITIONS:

Card Administrator — Accounting: For the purpose of this policy and procedure, procurement
cardholders will use the Card Administrator in OLOLRMC Accounting. The Card Administrator
provides administrative support to procurement cardholders and performs the duties described in the
Monitoring section of the Procedures below. (Contact number is 225.765.8931)

Card Administrator — Executive Administration: For the purpose of this policy and procedure, executive
credit cardholders will use the Card Administrator in Executive Administration. The Card Administrator
provides administrative support to executive cardholders and performs the duties described in the
Reconciliation section of the Procedures below. (Contact number is 225.765.7727)

Organization — refers to Our Lady of the Lake RMC or any of its wholly owned subsidiaries,
respectively.

POLICY:

Credit cards provide approved staff with a method for making allowable purchases on behalf of
OLOLRMC or its wholly owned subsidiaries. The decision of who in the organization is eligible to
receive a credit card depends on departmental needs. Authorization of credit card privileges is as
follows:

e Procurement card approved by VP Finance

e Executive credit card approved by OLOLRMC CFO
Cardholders are responsible for the protection and use of the credit cards. Cardholders should never
hand out cards to others to use freely.

PROCEDURES:

Credit Card Limits:

Policy Reference Number
Page 1 of 7


Credit card limits are established based on the position held within the organization, i.e., CEO,
President, CFO, COO, VP, Dean, Department Director, etc. Credit card limits are approved by the
OLOLRMC CEO and maintained in the OLOLRMC Accounting Department. Changes to limits must be
approved by the OLOLRMC CEO.

Purchases/Receipt of Goods/Services:

A cardholder, as a matter of practice, should use established, preferred vendors whenever possible.
Credit cards should never be used to circumvent the established procurement process of Purchase Orders
or Payment Authorization Vouchers. The cardholder procedures for purchases and/or receipt of goods
are as follows:

1. Inform the supplier/vendor that your purchase is on behalf of Our Lady of the Lake Hospital or
respective subsidiary. Request all applicable corporate discounts be applied.

2. Instruct the vendor not send an invoice to Accounts Payable. The vendor will be paid through
the use of the credit card.

3. For all purchases made, obtain an itemized receipt at the time of purchase, in the form of a store
receipt, packing slip, order form, or itemized invoice.

4. All receipts MUST contain the following:
a. Date of purchase

s

Vendor name
c. Total cost of each item purchased
d. Last 4 digits of card number or other card identifier

5. For ordered merchandise, inform the supplier/vendor of the proper delivery/shipping
instructions. All packages should be addressed as follows:

Your Name

C/o Our Lady of the Lake Materials Management Department
5000 Hennessy Blvd

Baton Rouge, LA 70808

Note: Materials Management will not remove the packing slip. These receipts must be retained
by you, the cardholder, for reconciliation purposes.

6. Verify the goods received via mail, UPS, or freight carrier are what were ordered.

Reconciliation of Purchases for Procurement Cardholders:

To facilitate reconciliation and approval of the monthly memo statement, it is mandatory that you retain
supplier documentation each time a transaction occurs whether the purchase was made in person or
ordered via website or phone. A copy of the monthly memo statement along with copies of all receipts
must be turned in by the 5th of the following month for all purchases since the last memo statement was
received. The memo statement cutoff is the 26" of every month.

You will receive a monthly memo statement by the 26 of the month via email notification. Your
monthly memo card statement will detail charges billed during the billing cycle. This statement will
contain the date, supplier name, and the amount charged. It is your responsibility to keep all receipts for

Policy Reference Number
Page 2 of 7


each transaction. Once the statement is received, you must complete the following steps:

1. Access the JP Morgan website to review your statement and verify the accuracy of all
transactions. Code each transaction to the appropriate cost center and account distribution. (This
coding is completed on the JP Morgan website.)

2. Compare your documentation (receipts) to the transactions listed on the statement.

3. Follow up on any exceptions and if necessary, file a Cardholder Statement of Disputed Items
form (Attachment A) for erroneous charges. Refer to the Resolving Errors/Disputes section for
additional instructions. For a missing receipt you must complete a Cardholder Statement of
Missing Document (Attachment C).

4. Report all exceptions or billing errors to the Card Administrator via email.

5. Tape all documentation (detailed receipts) to an 8 1/2 x 11 sheet of paper. Print and sign (blue
ink) the monthly memo statement. Submit this packet to your direct supervisor for approval. In
the absence of your direct supervisor, the OLOLRMC or respective subsidiary VP Finance can
provide approval.

6. Once approved by your direct supervisor, the card holder will forward the packet, including the
memo credit card statement, and all documentation (receipts), to the Card Administrator by_the

Sth of the following month.

Loss of credit card privileges can result as a result of repeated violations due to missing documentation
and/or not submitting approved statements and documentation on a timely basis.

Reconciliation of Purchases for Executive Cardholders:

To facilitate reconciliation and approval of the monthly credit card statement, it is mandatory that you
retain vendor documentation each time a transaction occurs whether the purchase was made in person or
ordered via website or phone. For all purchases since the last statement notification, a copy of the
current monthly statement along with supporting receipts must be turned in by the 10th day following
receipt of the email notification from the Card Administrator. The due date will be included in the
notification email.

Your monthly credit card statement will include detail charges billed during the billing cycle. This
statement will contain the date, vendor name, and the amount charged. It is your responsibility to keep
all receipts for each transaction. Once the statement is received, you must complete the following steps:

1. Review the statement and verify the accuracy of all transactions. Code each transaction to the
appropriate cost center and account distribution.

2. Compare your documentation (receipts) to the transactions listed on the statement.

3. Follow up on any exceptions and if necessary, file a Cardholder Statement of Disputed Items
form (Attachment A) for erroneous charges. Refer to the Resolving Errors/Disputes section for
additional instructions. For a missing receipt you must complete a Cardholder Statement of
Missing Document (Attachment C).

4. Report all exceptions or billing errors to the Card Administrator via email.

5. Tape all documentation (detailed receipts) to an 8 1/2 x 11 sheet of paper. Print and sign (blue
ink) the monthly card statement. Submit this packet to your direct supervisor for approval. The

Policy Reference Number
Page 3 of 7


OLOLRMC CFO will approve the monthly statement and supporting documentation for the
CEO, COO and subsidiary CEO/President. In the absence of your direct supervisor, the
OLOLRMC CFO may provide approval.

6. Once approved by your direct supervisor, the card holder will forward the packet, including the
credit card statement, and all documentation (receipts), to the Card Administrator by due date
included in the email notification, i.e., 10 days following the receipt of the notification.

Loss of credit card privileges can result as a result of repeated violations due to missing documentation
and/or not submitting approved statements and documentation on a timely basis.

Resolving Errors/Disputes:
You (the cardholder) must complete a Cardholder Statement of Disputed Items form (Attachment A) for
any of the following reasons:
¢ Non receipt of merchandise
o Contact Materials Management and have them verify that the package was not received.
o Contact supplier and inquire when the item was delivered and to what location.
o Request proof of Delivery from supplier.
o

If satisfactory resolution cannot be reached, complete the Cardholder Statement of
Disputed Items form and contact the Card Administrator.

¢ Incorrect quantity delivered or Defective Merchandise
o Contact the supplier and attempt to resolve the issue over the phone. Return unwanted
merchandise and request delivery of correct merchandise.

o If the item must be returned to the supplier, obtain a Return Merchandise Authorization
from the supplier.

o If satisfactory resolution cannot be reached, complete the Cardholder Statement of
Disputed Items form and contact the Card Administrator.

e Statement Discrepancies (Incorrect price charges, unrecognized item on a statement, or
credit for returns not processed)
o Contact the supplier and try to reconcile the difference. Keep a record of all your
telephone calls to the supplier along with any notes concerning the status of the
discrepancy and attach a copy of the sales receipt.

o If satisfactory resolution cannot be reached, complete the Cardholder Statement of
Disputed Items form and contact the Card Administrator.

Under no circumstances should the cardholder request or receive a cash refund. All refunds should be
credited to the cardholder’s credit card.

Miscellaneous Charges:

Restocking Fees — If restocking fees are charged, you (the cardholder) must reconcile the restocking
charge on the monthly memo statement. Restocking Fees will be charged to the cardholder’s
department.

Freight Charges — Freight charges should be separated. Freight charges are charged to the

Policy Reference Number
Page 4 of 7


department/741221 as an expense.

Monitoring:

Card Inventory - On a semi-annual basis, the Card Administrator will provide a list of cardholders for
each OLOLRMC or subsidiary VP or CFO. Each VP/CFO should confirm the list of cardholders for
their departments/organization is appropriate and that the cardholders have been issued a credit card.
OLOLRMC Finance Department staff will conduct an inventory of the credit cards and send a report
with the results of the inventory to the OLOLRMC VP Finance/CFO for review. Credit Cards not
accounted for will be immediately removed from service.

Credit Card Statements — The Card Administrator reviews all approved credit card statements to
ensure proper credit card procedures are followed. The Card Administrator also reviews to ensure each
charge has a corresponding receipt for each individual statement and appropriate approvals are present.
The Accounting Department verifies sales taxes accruals and that the vendor does not appear on the
sanctioned vendors listing.

Additionally, the Card Administrator will perform the following:
o Performs the final reconciliation of all cardholder’s transactions on the monthly invoice
statement. Payment is made during the month following the charge activity.

e Submits a Cardholder Statement of Disputed Items form to the issuing bank/credit card company
within 10 days from the statement date on which the disputed charge appeared (see Resolving
Errors/Disputes section).

e Maintains your original documentation for audit purposes and long-term record retention in
accordance with the Record Retention Policy.

Other high level monitoring is performed on a periodic basis by the OLOLRMC CFO and VP Finance
through a random review of monthly credit card statements and supporting documentation for
compliance to this policy and procedure.

In the event, patterns of chronic abuse or non-compliance by the cardholder is noted by the supervisor or
in the course of other reviews, and depending on the severity of the abuse, the following actions may be
taken by management:

o Warning letter issued to cardholder and direct supervisor notified.

e Credit card privileges suspended for 3 months

e Loss of credit card privileges

e Team member reimbursement of expenses

e Employment Terminated

¢ Criminal Prosecution
If it is determined a cardholder will lose their cardholder privileges, the Procurement card shall be
surrendered to the OLOLRMC VP Finance; the Executive credit card shall be surrendered to the

OLOLRMC CFO. Any request for re-instatement of privileges shall be submitted to the OLOLRMC
CFO for consideration. The applicant will be notified of the decision.

Policy Reference Number
Page 5 of 7


Lost or Stolen Credit Cards:

Should your Credit card become lost or stolen, it is your responsibility, as the cardholder, to
immediately notify the card issuer of the loss. The telephone number of the card issuer is shown on the
back of the credit card.

In addition, it is your responsibility, as the cardholder to notify the Card Administrator and your direct
supervisor within one (1) workday after the discovery of the loss or theft.

You will be required to file an Affidavit of Unauthorized Use (Attachment B) with the Card
Administrator within five (5) workdays. The affidavit will include complete information on the lost or
stolen card, the date the loss/theft occurred, the purchases that you made prior to the loss/theft, and any
other pertinent information that may be considered relevant or pertinent to the loss/theft. If the credit
card is known to be stolen, a police report may be required and a copy of the police report attached to
the Affidavit of Unauthorized Use (Attachment B).

New/Replacement Cards:
New or replacement cards for expired, lost, or stolen credit cards must be picked up and signed for in
person from the respective Card Administrator.

Excluded Purchases/Cardholder Violation:

Personal Purchases are excluded transactions of the credit card. Personal purchases are any purchases
not purchased for use and ownership of the organization. If a personal purchase is made, the
organization will be reimbursed immediately for the amount of the personal purchase. Continued
violations will result in the loss of privileges, card cancellation, and/or disciplinary action up to and
including termination of employment.

Cash or Cash Type Transactions are excluded transactions of credit card privileges. If a cash
transaction is made, the organization will be reimbursed immediately for the amount of the cash type
transaction. Continued violations will result in the loss of privileges, card cancellation, and/or
disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment.

Chronic Failure to provide Supporting Documentation is a cardholder violation. Each transaction of
the credit card must be supported by an itemized receipt or other acceptable means of documentation
that verifies the date of purchase, the vendor name, each item purchased and the price of each item. If
an unsupported transaction is made, the organization will be reimbursed immediately for the amount of
the unsupported transaction unless administrative approval is received (Cardholder Statement of Missing
Document - Attachment C). Continued violations will result in the loss of privileges, card cancellation,
and/or disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment.

Cardholder Controls:

Team members who need a change to Cardholder Controls (credit limit, single purchase limits) must
notify the respective Card Administrator via email of the need for the change within 72 hours prior to
the purchase. The Card Administrator will request approval from the OLOLRMC VP Finance to change
the Cardholder Controls for a user. The team member will be notified of the decision. Cardholder

Policy Reference Number
Page 6 of 7


Controls are listed on the Commercial Card Classic Cardholder Account Form. A copy of the form can
be requested via email from the Card Administrator.

Purchase Groups are groups specifically identified for a user of the procurement card to make specific
purchases. All purchase groups are assigned by the OLOLRMC VP Finance at the time the card is
activated. Team members are responsible for reviewing their purchase groups and understanding what
type of purchases are allowed based on those assigned groups. Purchase Groups can be obtained from
the Card Administrator. All additions/deletions/changes to a purchase group must be requested via
email to the Card Administrator. In the case of an emergency, additions/deletions/changes to a purchase
group may be requested via telephone to the Card Administrator. The team member will be notified of
the decision.

Transfer and Termination:

If you, as a cardholder, leave your department for any reason (transfer, resignation, retirement, extended
leave (FMLA), termination, etc.), your credit card must be collected and cancelled. Human Resources is
required to collect the card from the team member prior to severance and forward the card to the
respective Card Administrator. The Card Administrator will cancel and destroy the card, and notify the
respective VP that the card has been removed from service.

In the event of a transfer to another department, team members should request a transfer of the credit
card to the new department prior to the effective transfer date. To do so, the team member must submit a
request via email to the respective Card Administrator. The Card Administrator will request approval
from the OLOLRMC CFO or respective VP Finance to transfer the card. If request for transfer is not
made prior to the transfer, or if the transfer is declined, the credit card will be cancelled. The team
member will then be responsible for surrendering the credit card to the OLOLRMC CFO or respective
VP Finance.

In the event Human Resources does not collect the card when a team member severs employment from
the organization, Human Resources shall immediately notify the respective Card Administrator to insure
the credit card is cancelled. The verbal notification should be followed up in writing via email
notification to the Card Administrator.

SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS

Cardholder Statement of Disputed Items (Attachment A)
Affidavit of Unauthorized Use (Attachment B)
Cardholder Statement of Missing Document(s) (Attachment C)

Approved by:

Kérat Nt

K. Scott Wester, Chief Executive Officer

Policy Reference Number
Page 7 of 7


Attachment A

CARDHOLDER STATEMENT OF DISPUTED ITEMS

Our Lady of the Lake RMC

Subsidiary:

Cardholder Name: Card Number:
Merchant Name: Disputed Amount: $

I dispute the charge(s) described herein as follows: [Check Appropriate Box(es)]

I certify that the charge listed above was not made by me nor were goods or services
represented by the above transaction received by me or by a person authorized by me.

I do not recognize the transaction as listed above. Please inform me of merchant name
and description of merchandise purchases.

Although I did engage in the above transaction, I dispute all or part of the charge in the

amount of $ .1 have contracted the merchant and requested a credit
adjustment that I did not receive or was not satisfactory.
O I have been charged twice for the same transaction. Posting dates: and

A credit slip was listed as a sale on my statement. Enclosed is a copy of the credit
memorandum.
The amount of the sales slip was increased from $ to$ . Enclosed is
my copy of the sales slip prior to alteration.
I received a price adjustment (credit slip) on the above transaction, and it has not
appeared on my statement. Enclosed is a copy of the credit memorandum.
Other, please explain completely.
1 am disputing the chard due to:

Signature:

Daytime phone:

Date:


Attachment B
AFFIDAVIT OF UNAUTHORIZED USE

OF
CREDIT CARD

State of Louisiana

East Baton Rouge Parish

being duly sworn according to law, disposes and states that
(he/she) is the holder of credit card number expiring
as issued by s
(city), (state). Deponent states that this card was discovered
(lost/stolen)  on (date) at (locationy  and
(credit card issuer) Was notified on (date)

by (means) that the card is missing.

Deponent further states that no persons other than those named here have ever been given this
credit card or authorized in any way to use this card. Further, that (he/she) has not received any
benefit or portion of the proceeds of any transaction or withdrawals made with this credit card on

(amounts,  dates,
locations). Further, that the deponent (does/does not) know who used the card or who obtained
possession of the card.

Deponent further states that this affidavit is made voluntarily and for the purpose of obtaining
proceeds of said transactions and establishing the fact that said transactions were made by
someone other than Deponent without actual authority and were wholly unauthorized by
Deponent. Deponent will testify, declare, or certify under oath to the truth of any or all of the
forgoing statement before any court, tribunal officer, or person in any case now pending or that
may later be brought in connection with the unauthorized transaction(s).


Attachment C
CARDHOLDER STATEMENT OF MISSING DOCUMENT(S)
Our Lady of the Lake RMC

Subsidiary:

Cardholder:

Card Number:

Item Description Date of Purchase Vendor Cost

|
|
L

Detailed Explanation of Missing Documentation:

The undersigned cardholder responsible for said missing documentation hereby state that the above facts
are true and correct to the best of his/her knowledge.

Signature of cardholder Date

Signature of Vice President Date

Note: This statement shall be attached to the Cardholder’s Memo Statement and Transaction log.


