  
 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject:  Physical Environment &  
 Equipment Maintenance 
Date of  Origination:  01/04/93                       
Last Date Revised: 02/01/2018 
 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Outpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Section:  Exercise Sessions 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CREX06 
 
 
Distribution:                    Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department  
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services   
 
Purpose: 
 
To establish environmental safety and cleanliness guidelines for the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation 
exercise facility. 
 
Applies To:                      All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
 
Policy: 
 
Physical Environment 
Plant Services of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center is responsible for the maintenance and 
repair of the physical structure of the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation exercise facility (e.g.; lighting, 
electrical outlets, televisions, doors, flooring, ceiling, etc.). 
 
The Housekeeping department of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center is responsible for daily 
cleaning of the exercise facility. Cleaning supplies for the exercise equipment are obtained through 
Housekeeping services of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center. Cleaning supplies may be 
stored in the cleaning closet of the Lake Health Center.   The floor under the treadmills is vacuumed 
weekly. 
 
Clean towels are stored in a covered towel cart behind the Lake Health Center reception desk, or may be 
available from Housekeeping. Soiled towels are put into the towel bin in the outpatient exercise area and 
stores in the aerobics room of the Lake Health Center and picked up daily by the hospital linen services. 
 
Hand washing may be done in the restrooms of the outpatient exercise facility or in locker rooms of the 
Lake Health Center.  Hand cleaning gel is also available in the Outpatient Department and on all Inpatient 
units. 
 
Temperature in the exercise facility will be maintained between 65 and 72 degrees F. during exercise 
sessions. (AACVPR Guidelines for Cardiac Rehabilitation and Secondary Programs, third edition, p.179). 
High temperatures can increase cardiovascular demand for temperature regulation and decrease exercise 
tolerance. Low temperature increases myocardial work. Increases in blood pressure because of 
vasoconstriction reduce the exercise tolerance of symptom -limited patients. (Exercise Testing and 
Exercise Prescription for Special Cases, 1987, James Skinner, editor) 
 
Drinking water is easily accessed and available from water fountains in the outpatient exercise area and 
the Lake Health Center exercise area. Water is also available from fountains outside the men and 
women’s locker rooms. 
  
 
Equipment 
 
The Biomedical Department of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center is responsible for the 
calibration of the exercise equipment in the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation exercise facility. Calibration 
of appropriate equipment is to be done regularly on a yearly basis or upon request by the 
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Manager or staff.  FitServe Inc. is also contracted to service the exercise 
equipment as needed. 
 
Exercise equipment will be regularly cleaned on a weekly basis, or as needed, by the Cardiopulmonary 
Rehabilitation staff in order to keep the equipment clean and disinfected so that the possibility of 
spreading any disease may be minimized.  
 
 