 
 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Physical Medicine and Cardiac Rehabilitation  
Date of  Origination:  09/03/98                       
Last Date Revised: 06/27/2024 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: CRNP 
Section: Inpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CRNP07 
 
 
Distribution:              Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department 
 
Formulated By:         Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services 
 
Purpose: 
 
To establish guidelines and responsibilities for transfer of cardiac patients between Cardiopulmonary 
Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy. 
 
 
Applies To:                  All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
 
Policy: 
 
After assessment, if a patient is determined to be inappropriate or unsafe for Cardiac Rehabilitation, an order for 
physical therapy will be requested from the patient’s physician. Criteria determining inappropriateness includes: 
gait abnormality, musculoskeletal or neurological deficiency, or other abnormality, which would preclude the 
patient from walking with Cardiac Rehabilitation. 
 
If Cardiac Rehabilitation is ordered for a patient who also has orders for physical therapy, rehabilitative activity 
will be the responsibility of the Physical Medicine Department. When the patient achieves functional capability 
for rehabilitative ambulation, Cardiac Rehabilitation will be notified and orders for physical therapy will be 
discontinued. 
 
Variances that would necessitate the need for physical therapy services include: 
 (1)   The need for skilled gait training by a physical therapist in the presence of a gait deviation 
 (2)  The need for functional transfer training that necessitates the skills of a Physical therapist 
 (3)  The need for functional bed mobility training that necessitates the skills of a physical therapist 
 (4) The need for development of functional strength training program to increase strength for functional 
activities such as bed mobility, transfers, and gait. 
 
Procedure: 
 
All post cardiac surgical patients are to be seen BID every day by physical therapy for progressive ambulation. A 
patient with an order for physical therapy will be followed by Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation for educational 
purposes only until that patient has been determined to be functional and able to ambulate by the Physical 
medicine Department. Upon notification by Physical medicine that the patient  is functional and able to begin 
rehabilitative ambulation, rehabilitative activity will be transferred to the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation 
Department. Functionality for the recovering patient will be considered to be the ability to ambulate 
independently with no more than 25 to 50% assistance from a therapist. 
 
Verbal notification by Physical Medicine to any member of the Cardiopulmonary Rehab staff is acceptable for 
the transfer of responsibility for activity, but will be followed by written notification of  Physical Medicine D/C 
order through the computer system. 
 