CRNP02 
Page 1 of 5 
 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Inpatient Reconditioning Program 
Date of  Origination:  09/01/86                       
Last Date Revised:  06/27/2024 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: CRNP 
Section: Inpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CRNP02 
 
 
Distribution:                    Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department  
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services   
 
Purpose: 
 
The Phase I Cardiopulmonary Reconditioning Program is an in -hospital program during the "acute" phase of 
illness.  Components of the program consist of low -level range of motion activity progressing to ambulation, 
patient and family education, and Dietary intervention. This program is guided by the patient's primary referring 
physician, cardiologist, or cardiothoracic surgeon. 
 
The main purpose of the Cardiopulmonary Reconditioning Program is to assist the patient in recovery to 
functional ability to perform Activities of Daily Living, with the long-range goal of restoring optimal physical, 
psychological, and occupational conditions wherein the patient can realize that through his/her own efforts 
he/she may return to an active and productive life. 
 
The educational aspect of the program is to provide the patient and family with tools to enable them to cope with 
the hospitalization experience, to render emotional and physical support for enhancing recovery, and to assist in 
identifying risk factor modifications in lifestyle that would be appropriate after discharge.  Planned sessions for 
individual and group instruction cover various topics relating to coronary artery disease including: preoperative 
and post operative teaching, anatomy of the heart the disease and healing process, medications, diet, smoking 
cessation, and prevention of future cardiac events , hypertension management, physical activity , healthcare 
follow-up, and life-style/risk factor modification. 
 
Objectives of the Inpatient Reconditioning Program: 
 
1. To provide early ambulation and exercise to offset the debilitating effect of bed rest. 
2. To maintain work capacity, mobility, and flexibility. 
3. To provide the patient with knowledge of anatomy and physiology of the heart, heart disease processes and 
routine plan of care. 
4. To educate the patient and family on risk factors and assist them in risk factor reduction. 
5. To provide knowledge of medication and dietary regime. 
6. To educate the patient and family about the role of stress in coronary heart disease. 
7. To incorporate the patient and family into realistic discharge plans. 
8. To provide individual interviews and request counseling as needed. 
9. To encourage lifestyle modification to decrease the risk of future cardiac episodes. 
 
Applies To:                      All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
Policy: 
 CRNP02 
Page 2 of 5 
Entrance Criteria for Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Individuals with cardiovascular disease, coronary artery bypass surgery, certain electrocardiographic 
abnormalities, Congestive Heart Failure, and those who are in need of other post -cardiac event reconditioning 
are accepted into the Cardiac Rehabilitation program.  A physician's referral must be submitted prior to 
admittance. Entrance criteria may include patients with a history of: 
 
 
•  Previous myocardial infarction 
• Stable angina 
• Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery 
• Other open-heart surgery procedures 
• Valvular heart disease 
• Coronary insufficiency 
• Cardiomyopathies 
• Other forms of heart disease 
 
Entrance Criteria for Pneumoplasty Rehabilitation: 
Individuals meeting the criteria for lung volume reduction surgery who are accepted by the Pulmonary Disease 
Clinic (PDC), and CVT (Surgeons), and who have accomplished established exercise goals in an outpatient 
pulmonary rehabilitation program. 
 
Relative Contraindications to Exercise: 
The following criteria are relative contraindications to exercise: 
• Unstable angina 
• Uncontrolled hypertension 
• Uncontrolled atrial or ventricular 
arrhythmias 
• Uncontrolled tachycardia 
• Congestive heart failure (severe) 
• Advanced heart block 
• Uncontrolled diabetes 
• Dissecting aneurysm 
• Ventricular aneurysm (symptomatic) 
• Malignant ventricular arrhythmias 
• Severe COPD 
• Severe pericarditis or myocarditis 
• Recent embolism 
• Thrombophlebitis 
• Moderate to severe aortic stenosis 
• Acute systemic illness 
• Orthopedic problems that would inhibit low -level 
exercise 
 
If any of the above criteria is demonstrated by the patient, exercise is withheld for 24 hours and then resumed 
when the patient's condition is no longer beyond the above parameters, unless the physician orders otherwise. 
During the exercise session, if the patient develops any of the above signs or symptoms, the session is terminated 
and the patient is allowed 24 hours of rest.  The activities are then resumed unless the physician orders 
otherwise. When the activities are resumed, if the patient's response continues not to meet the established 
criteria, the attending physician is notified and activities are withheld until the physician decides the appropriate 
action. 
 
Procedure: 
 
Referral Procedures 
 Patients are admitted into the Cardiopulmonary Reconditioning Program by an order from their physician.  The 
physician need only place a written request on the Doctor's Order Sheet for Cardiopulmonary Reconditioning 
and indicate the program he/she desires. 
 
This request may be received through the hospital computer system.  Planning and implementation will begin as 
soon as the order is received in the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation office.  The patient's general condition must 
stabilize before Cardiopulmonary Reconditioning will be started.  All aspects of the program may be reviewed 
and guided by the referring physician, placing recommendations on the Doctor's Orders or Progress Records.  
Further guidance and review may be given and obtained by direct contact with a Cardiopulmonary CRNP02 
Page 3 of 5 
Rehabilitation team member or manager who would pass such information along to the team members.  Great 
emphasis is placed on physician involvement in Cardiopulmonary Reconditioning as the "team leader" for the 
particular patient. 
 
Upon receipt of the order, the team will begin each patient by at least: 
 Order received before 12 noon - begun by that same afternoon.  
 Order received after 12 noon - begun by the next morning. 
 
Cardiopulmonary Reconditioning is available seven days a week, including all holidays, Monday through 
Friday, Inpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation is available between the hours of 7:00am and 3:00pm.  On weekends 
and holidays, hours are variable according to the need and staffing ability. 
 
Inpatient Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Programs 
Cardiac Reconditioning: 
An activity level continuum is utilized to recondition all patients following cardiac surgery or cardiac-
related events, such as an MI. Details of the continuum levels and goals are noted on the Inpatient Daily 
Assessment and Daily Activity form, or through the hospital computer charting system. 
 
Monitoring Criteria 
Unless otherwise specified by the patient’s physician, the following criteria are used to monitor the patient's 
response and progression through the monitored exercise: 
 · Heart Rate:  
 Remain under 120 bpm during reconditioning activity with Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation staff. 
 The patient is instructed when exercising on his/her own, not to exercise if pulse is 120 bpm or 
 greater. 
· Systolic Blood Pressure:  
 Should not be increased more than 15-20 mmHg. 
  Should not be decreased more than 10 mmHg below the standing resting blood pressure level.  
· Diastolic Blood Pressure: 
  Should not be increased more than 20 mmHg with exercise. 
· Symptoms: 
Before or during activity, the patient should be free of chest pain, pressure, severe dyspnea, or 
excessive fatigue. 
· Signs: 
  No ataxia. 
  No symptomatic change in facial expression. 
· Conduction Disturbances: 
  The patient should be free of complex ventricular ectopy. 
· Congestive Heart Failure: 
  In cases of mild failure, weight gain should not be more than 2-3 pounds (edema). 
· Oxygen Saturation: 
  A resting SaO2 of at least 90%, as measured by pulse oximetry,  before activity is performed. 
  During activity, SaO2 level should consistently remain above 85%. 
 
 
Multidisciplinary Team Members and Duties 
Upon receipt of the physician’s order, Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation will initiate the appropriate C ardiac 
Reconditioning/Education. 
 
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation CRNP02 
Page 4 of 5 
The Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Manager will be responsible for coordinating the multi-departmental team 
members, as well as acting as a liaison between the physician and the team members. 
 
The CR Nurse or Clinical Exercise Physiologist will make an initial patient assessment. Information will be 
obtained from the patient, the patient's chart, and the nursing staff.  The exact step to initiate the program will 
also be established at this time, contacting the physician, if necessary.  An introductory visit may then be made 
to each patient offering an explanation and description of the program.  All appropriate information will then be 
charted. 
 
Daily checks on each patient may then be made to assess and summarize the patient's tolerance to the activity, 
education and needs from a multi-disciplinary standpoint.  The established criteria will be used for monitoring 
the patient's response and progression through the exercise and ambulation regimes.  A summary and plan of 
action for the present day may then be documented by choosing the appropriate activity level and noting any 
other relevant information. 
 
Appropriate literature for each patient will be individually selected and given.  Individual teaching will follow, 
as deemed appropriate for each individual patient's needs.  Documentation of these instructions will be charted. 
 
The Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department will be responsible for conducting organized programs of 
progressive physical activities as appropriate for each of the referred patients.  Individual exercise sessions will 
be conducted twice daily on weekdays, and at least once daily on weekends and holidays.  
  
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation may adapt the activities at their discretion, using their judgement as to each 
patient's tolerance.  Further instructions may be left with the nursing and/or patient for additional activity 
sessions, if appropriate.  Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation and Nursing Staff will monitor the patient during the 
exercise sessions using the established criteria.  The patient's responses to activity will be charted. 
 
Prior to discharge from the medical center, the patient will receive instructions in their home walking program, 
as appropriate to each individual patients needs.  This is documented as an element of Discharge Instructions. 
 
Physical Medicine 
Occupational therapy and/or physical therapy will be ordered, via the physician, on an as needed basis. See 
policy specified under Cardiac Rehabilitation and Physical  Medicine. 
 
Nursing Staff 
The nurse is an important team member in evaluation of the patient's response to the cardiopulmonary 
rehabilitation program and should work closely with the other team members to effectively assess each patient.  
They will participate with the cardiopulmonary rehabilitation team in observing and assessing each patient 
during the actual exercise sessions according to the established criteria for monitoring the patient's response and 
progression through the activities.  Documentation of rhythm strips during exercise may also be included. 
 
Nutrition 
A Registered Dietitian, or a designated associate may visit and counsel any patient participating in the 
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Program, as appropriate for each patient's individual needs. The diet therapies 
for cardiac patients, reflective of "Dietary Guidelines for Americans" as recommended by the American Heart 
Association and NIH, are outlined below, but any other restriction may be added by the physician, as he/she 
desires. 
 
 1. Cardiac Reconditioning Diet-Stage One (CR-I) 
 CRNP02 
Page 5 of 5 
  A. Diet Description 
  1. Low Sodium Restriction (Two Gram Sodium) 
  2. Low Cholesterol (300 milligrams per day) 
  3. Low Total Fat (30% of calories): emphasis on decreasing saturated fat 
  4. Achieve and maintain desirable body weight 
  5. No Caffeine 
 
 B. Target Group: Cardiac Reconditioning patients with serious hypertension, and/or edema, and/or 
              CHF. 
 
 2. Cardiac Reconditioning Diet-Stage Two (CR-II) 
 
  A. Diet Description 
   1. No Added Salt (Three to Four Grams Sodium) 
   2. Low Cholesterol (300 milligrams per day) 
   3. Low Total Fat (30% of calories):  emphasis on decreasing saturated fat 
   4. Achieve and maintain desirable body weight 
   5. Low Caffeine (< 2 cups per day) 
  B. Target Group: Cardiac Reconditioning patients with mild hypertension and/or edema. 
 
 
Evaluation 
The patients participating in the Cardiopulmonary Reconditioning Program will be continuously evaluated, 
using a multi-disciplinary approach, through discussion, questions, and interaction with all of the team members. 
Each patient's progress in the program will be discussed among the team members and evaluated as to his/her 
response.  The referring physician's participation is welcomed and encouraged in the evaluation process. Each 
discipline should consider this evaluation of the patient's tolerance to activity, understanding of instructions, 
and/or expected compliance in their documentation. 
 
 