 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Discharge Requirements  
              Outpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Date of  Orientation:  01/04/93                       
Date of Last Review: 02/01/2018 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Outpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Section:  General Policies 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CROP11 
 
Distribution:                    Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department  
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services   
 
Purpose: 
 
To establish the goals and guidelines for a patient to be discharged from the ECG monitored (Phase II) 
Outpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation Program and Maintenance (Phase III) Cardiac Rehabilitation. 
 
Applies To:                      All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
Policy:    
 
ECG MONITORED (PHASE II) CARDIAC REHABILITATION 
The duration of the Phase II Cardiac Rehabilitation Program will be not less than 4 weeks (12 sessions) and 
not more than 12 weeks (36 sessions) unless special circumstances warrant a change in policy. Patients may 
be discharged from the Cardiac Rehabilitation Program at any time upon request from the referring 
physician. Otherwise, the following goals will serve as guidelines for discharge from Phase II Cardiac 
Rehabilitation:  
 
Functional Capacity 
·  The expected functional capacity should be related to the vocational and recreational demands which 
 are pertinent to a given individual. 
 · At the very least, a 5 MET capacity would allow a safe range of metabolic reserve for most of the  
   necessary daily activities. The American College of Sports Medicine recommends that an 8 MET       
   capacity be met prior to beginning an independent or minimally supervised exercise program. (ACSM 
   Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription, 5th edition) 
·  Patients should exhibit the capacity to perform 8 METs on a graded exercise test or a 5 METs capacity 
 during continuous exercise, which is the rough equivalent of an 8 MET metabolic reserve.  . 
 
Medical Status   
 · The medical status of the patient should be stable. 
  · The patient should exhibit stable and/or controlled resting heart rate and blood pressure, i.e., less than 
100 bpm and 140/90 respectively, as well abnormal hemodynamic responses to exercise including 
appropriate increases in blood pressure, a normal or unchanged ECG at peak exercise with normal or 
unchanged conduction, arrhythmias stable or absent and a stable or medically acceptable ischemic 
response. 
 · The patient should exhibit stable or absent angina. 
 
Physical Fitness 
 · The patient should exhibit adequate physical ability (muscular strength, endurance, functional capacity 
  and body composition) for daily activities and/or occupation. 
 
 Education 
All individuals participating in the outpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation programs will be encouraged to increase 
their level of general cardiovascular and pulmonary wellness and disease prevention with the  following 
intended goals:  
 · Patients should obtain the necessary information to effectively manage his/her health during recovery 
 · Patient should develop adequate skills and positive adaptations in order to modify risk factors and have 
 the greatest possible chance to avoid the recurrence of major cardiovascular disease 
 · Patients should describe basic pathophysiology of their cardiovascular disease. 
 · Patients should have satisfactory understanding of the lifestyle characteristics associated with low risk 
of coronary heart disease. 
  · Patients should express satisfactory understanding of the reason(s) for any prescribed cardiovascular 
medications and possible side effects of each medication or interaction of medications. 
  · Patients should have satisfactory understanding of the range of safe activities permitted including 
sexual activity and vocational and recreational pursuits. 
 · Patients should demonstrate an ability to maintain the exercise prescription within the designated range 
 and to recognize signs and symptoms of exertional intolerance. 
 · The patient should demonstrate understanding of how to assess exertion, symptoms, and heart rate.   
 
Discharge Summary  
When the patient has completed the ECG monitored program, or has not attended for two consecutive weeks 
and has expressed disinterest (when contacted) in returning to continue the Cardiac Rehabilitation program, a 
Discharge Summary will be sent to the referring physician. A copy of the Discharge Summary will be kept 
on the patient's chart. The discharge summary from Phase II should include the number of exercise sessions 
attended, reason for discharge, cardiac education classes attended, Phase II evaluation, program telemetry 
report, and home exercise prescription. 
 
MAINTENANCE (PHASE III) CARDIAC REHABILITATION 
The Maintenance Cardiac Rehabilitation Program may or may not be preceded by the completion of the ECG 
Monitored (Phase II) Program. The Maintenance program can last between 3 months and indefinitely 
depending on the goals and priorities of the patient, and the plan of care as designated by the referring 
physician. 
 
The Maintenance program is designed to be a 3 -month transition period from monitored exercise to an 
independent exercise program, except for those individuals who must remain in a supervised exercise 
program. High-Risk individuals who must remain in a supervised program will be designated as such by the 
referring physician. 
 
Following the same criteria for functional capacity, medical status, physical fitness, and education previously 
outlined for the ECG monitored Cardiac Rehabilitation, the patient will be discharged from the Maintenance 
Program to independent exercise, unless designated as High-Risk by the referring physician. 
 
Discharge Summary from Maintenance Cardiac Rehabilitation 
After three months, a Discharge Summary report will be generated and sent to the referring physician. At this 
time, the physician will be asked to designate whether the patient is considered High -Risk and requires 
continues supervision by the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation staff. If the patient is designated High -Risk by 
the physician, the patient will continue in the Maintenance Cardiac Rehabilitation as long as the physician 
and patient so desire. If the patient is not designated as High -Risk by the physician, the individual will be 
discharged to continue exercise independently. A copy of the Discharge Summary Report and any physician 
correspondence will be kept on the patient's chart. 