 
 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Outpatient  Cardiac Rehabilitation  
   Program Structure  
Date of  Origination:  01/04/93                       
Last Date Revised: 02/01/2018 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Outpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Section:  General Policies 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CROP01 
 
Distribution:                    Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department  
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiovascular Services   
 
Purpose: 
 
To establish guidelines for a safe, effective, and successful Phase II Cardiac Rehabilitation Program. 
 
To establish guidelines to meet the goals of a Phase II Cardiac Rehabilitation Program: 
 
· To provide a flexible, individualized, exercise program of proper mode, intensity, duration, frequency, and 
progression to improve the patient's cardiovascular fitness without exceeding safe limits of exercise. 
 · To detect arrhythmias and other ECG changes during exercise that are contraindicated for physical activity. 
 · To educate patients on the proper mechanics of exercise. 
· To provide an educational program so that the patient and his/her family will gain a clearer understanding 
of his/her cardiovascular disease process and its treatment and prevention. 
· To prepare the patients physically, emotionally, and spiritually for a return to work and for resumption of 
normal familial and social roles. 
 · To provide the patients with guidelines for long-term, home-based exercise or supervised exercise. 
· To equip the patient and his/her family with the necessary tools to maintain, and ideally, improve their 
personal level of optimum health. 
 
Applies To:                      All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
Policy: 
 
A patient must be referred into the Cardiac Rehabilitation program by a physician and meet documented entry 
requirements.  (See Patient Referral and Patient Selection Policies)  During the course of rehabilitation, if a 
patient comes under the care of a physician other than the referring physician, or consults with the referring 
physician concerning any symptomatic changes in the patient's condition, the patient must obtain a medical 
release for exercise from the physician of care in order to resume exercise.  Using his/her medical judgement, the 
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation team in the outpatient exercise facility may decide that it is in the best interest of 
the patient not to exercise; at which point the physician of care may be contacted if necessary. 
 
The course of therapy may consist of up to 36 sessions, with re-evaluation of goals and progress summary every 
12 sessions or as needed. Criteria for determination of duration may include: Achievement of Program Discharge 
Goal (8 METs on GXT/ 5 METs continuous exercise), AACVPR Guidelines for Risk Stratification, GXT 
results, diagnosis, clinical history, medications, degree of left ventricular impairment, ischemic and/or anginal 
threshold, ECG, orthopedic limitations, current activities, vocational and avocational requirements. After every 
12 sessions, a report is sent to the referring physician documenting each patient’s progress. 
 Staff present for an exercise therapy session may include Registered Nurse, Exercise Physiologist, Physical 
Therapist, Clinical Exercise Physiology Technician, or volunteer staff.  Phase II Cardiac Rehabilitation should 
have a minimum staff-to-patient ratio of 1 staff member for every 5 ECG monitored patients (1:5) and 1 staff for 
every 15 Maintenance patients (1:15).  All personnel must possess current certification in Basic Life Support 
from the American Heart Association or the equivalent.  At least one person with current ACLS certification and 
the medico legal authority to provide such care shall be present whenever directly supervised, ECG-monitored 
rehabilitative exercise is provided for high-and intermediate-risk patients. 
 
Staff required for an education session may include one of the following: 
 
 Physician Mental Health Specialist 
 Registered Nurse    Pharmacist 
 Physical Therapist    Social Service Worker 
 Exercise Physiologist   Occupational Therapist 
 Nutritionist/ Dietician   Respiratory Therapist 
 Exercise Physiology Technician 
Exercise Goals for Cardiac Rehabilitation participants are as follows: 
 1. Participant will describe cardiac warning signs and symptoms and express appropriate interventions. 
 2. Participant will have increased exercise tolerance that allows for easier performance of Activities of 
Daily Living, gradually increasing duration and intensity, with measurable improvements in functional 
capacity. 
 3. Participant will explain the importance of stretching, warm-up, and cool-down. 
 4. Participant will palpate and accurately count pulse. (15 sec. x 4) 
 5. Participant will state desired intensity range. (RPE, Target Heart Rate) 
 6. Participant will incorporate fitness program into lifestyle (3-5 times per week), regularly exercising when  
  not attending the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation program. 
 7. Before discharge, the participant will achieve a functional capacity of 8 METs on a Graded Exercise Test  
  or exhibit the capacity to exercise continuously at an intensity of at least 5 METs. 
 
 
Procedure: 
 
An orientation session is completed with each participant prior to participation in his/her first exercise session 
(see Orientation Policy). During the orientation session and prior to the first exercise session, the patient is 
assessed by the professional staff and activity/ educational goals are established with the patient. 
 
Exercise Prescription 
The Exercise Prescription is individualized for each patient in accordance with physician recommendations, 
patient history, physical limitations, and patient goals. 
 
Mode 
Arm and leg strength and aerobic endurance exercises to maintain and improve muscle tone, improve 
cardiovascular endurance, and maintain and improve joint range of motion. 
 
Intensity  
Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE) by the patient during exercise should remain in the 11-14 range (fairly 
light to moderately hard).  
  
With a Graded Exercise Test: 
Set individually by calculating as low as 50 and high as 85% patients of the maximum heart rate achieved on 
the entrance GXT, or up to 70% of the maximum MET level achieved on the entrance GXT.  Without a GXT: 
Using the MET results of the Duke Activity Status Index and the Six Minute Walk Test set intensity up to 
70% of the reported MET ability. 
The initial exercise heart rate should be determined by the resting heart rate (R HR) plus 20 -30 beats per 
minute or as ordered by the patient’s cardiologist.  Exercise heart rate may eventually be allowed to increase 
above 30 beats per minute, using RPE, patient clinical signs and symptoms, and physician input for 
guidance. 
 
Duration   
The duration of each exercise session is determined by the initial and ongoing assessment and progress up to 
60 minutes of endurance activity, stretching and cool down activities.  The duration of the Phase II Cardiac 
Rehabilitation Program will be determined by patient and/or physician preference and the achievement of 
established discharge goals. For most patients, the program duration limit will allow up to 36 sessions. The 
duration may extend beyond 36 sessions at the request of the referring physician. 
 
 Frequency  
The recommended frequency of the exercise sessions is 3 times per week. Education topics are offered in 
conjunction with exercise. 
 
 Progression 
The participant is evaluated on a daily basis and progressed in MET level and/or exercise time based on the 
participant's objective and subjective responses to activities.  A small increment in workload or time will be 
added when a patient shows normal hemodynamic and physiologic responses to exercise and his/her exercise 
heart rate does not attain the prescribed target heart rate range or RPE range.  The patient must also have a 
relatively low RPE (<10) when exercising below his/her THR. 
 
The Exercise Session 
Each exercise session must follow the pattern of a warm -up period, endurance aerobic activity, followed by a 
cool-down period. Pre and Post -exercise ECG strips will be obtained for all ECG -monitored patients. ECG 
recordings will be obtained during the exercise session as is appropriate to document significant ECG changes. 
Pre and post-exercise blood pressure and heart rate values will be obtained and recorded for all patients. Blood 
pressure and heart rate may be monitored during exercise for a patient during exercise prn based on individual 
need.  
 
Unless otherwise specified by the patient's physician, in order to begin an exercise session a patient must present:  
 1. ECG tracings acceptably similar to baseline ECG,  
 2. Systolic blood pressure below 200 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure below 100 mmHg  
 3. Heart rate below 100 beats per minute 
 4. No other signs or symptoms of physiological distress 
 
The expected sequence of events for a Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation exercise session is as follows: 
 
 Using the Exercise Session Worksheet, the patient will: 
  1. Record weight 
  2. Apply a cardiac monitor, if appropriate (staff will obtain pre-exercise ECG strip) 
  3. Record pre-exercise blood pressure and heart rate on Exercise Record sheet 
  4. Stretch and warm-up 
 5. Exercise according to exercise prescription, recording heart rate and RPE for each mode. (Staff will 
  obtain blood pressure and ECG strip, if appropriate) 
  6. Cool-down and stretch   7. Record post-exercise heart rate and blood pressure (staff will obtain post-exercise ECG strip, if  
      appropriate) 
 
Staffing During Exercise Sessions 
Unless an emergency staffing situation presents itself, the anticipated staffing goal for an exercise session is that 
one staff member will be available for every 5 telemetry monitored patients (Patient to Staff = 5:1). For non -
monitored patients, the anticipated staffing ratio is one staff member for every 15 non-monitored patient. At all 
times that ECG-monitored patients are exercising, at least one staff member will be present who has Advanced 
Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) training and the medico-legal authority to use the emergency crash cart. Staff is 
defined as any individual who is an employee of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center or any 
individual who is an official volunteer assigned to the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Unit. All staff and 
volunteers will complete Basic Life Support CPR training. All clinical staff are e ncouraged to complete and 
maintain ACLS training. 
 
Termination of an Exercise Session 
An exercise session may be immediately terminated if any of the following criteria for termination of exercise 
are met: 
 
 · Blood pressure plateau or increase during exercise >220 mmHg systolic or >110 diastolic 
 · Onset of angina or other symptoms of cardiovascular insufficiency 
 · Any significant ECG disturbance (e.g., 2° or 3° AV block, atrial fibrillation, SVT, complex ventricular       
   ectopy, etc.) 
 · > 1 mm ST-segment depression, horizontal or downsloping 
 · Significant increase in ventricular arrhythmias 
 · Other signs/ symptoms of intolerance to exercise  
 
Outpatient Cardiac Education Program 
The major goal of the Healthy Lifestyle Series Outpatient Cardiac Education Program is that the patient and 
his/her family will have a satisfactory understanding of all material suggested and covered in the Outpatient 
Cardiac Rehabilitation Education Program. Objectives would include for the patient/ family to develop a more 
in-depth focus on responsibility for individual lifestyle choices, to increase self confidence in exercise and the 
performance of Activities of Daily Living, and to derive a greater understanding of the prevention of heart 
disease and its ongoing treatment. 
 
Regularly scheduled outpatient cardiac education classes include: 
 · Coronary Artery disease · Stress Management 
 · Cardiovascular Risk Factors · Relaxation Techniques 
 · Exercise & Your Heart · Cardiac Medications 
 · Heart-Healthy Nutrition 
  
Teaching plans, goals, and outlines for each education class may be obtained from the Outpatient Education 
manual located in the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Manager's office. 
 
 
Discharge Planning 
A conference will be conducted with each patient every 12 sessions until the patient moves into the Maintenance 
program or is discharged from Cardiac Rehabilitation. The patient will answer the Patient Conference 
Questionnaire, which will be reviewed by a staff member. Included for discussion in patient conferences are: 
 ·  Individual participant goals, both exercise and educational 
 ·  Individual participant progress toward achievement of established individual or program goals  · Individual plans for progressing participant to his/her optimal level of physical, psychological, social, and        
vocational health. 
 
Patient Conference Questionnaires, Exercise Records, Progress notes, and Progress Summaries are reported to 
the referring physician every 12 sessions and documented in the patient's chart in the appropriate sections.  
 
Appropriate discharge planning may include: 
 
 1. Patient evaluation of the program 
 2.  Final report of the patient's functional capacity and education 
 3. Review and documentation of goals and objectives met 
 4.  Follow-up completion of the Medical Outcomes Trust Short Form (SF-36), Duke Activity Status Index, 
Six Minute Walk Test, and other established Performance Improvement or Outcomes measures 
 5. Entry into Phase III Cardiac Rehabilitation 
 6. Home Exercise Program 
 7. Graded Exercise Test (Physician discretion) 
 8. Determination of follow-up needs and post-program therapy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 