 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Outpatient Cardiac Education Program  
Date of  Origination:  01/04/93                       
Last Date Revised: 02/01/2018 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Outpatient Cardiac Rehabilitation 
Section:  General Policies 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CROP08 
 
 
Distribution:                    Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department  
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services   
 
Purpose: 
 
To establish guidelines for the education of patients and their families in the outpatient program, and, those 
interested individuals within the community. 
 
Applies To:                      All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
 
Policy: 
 
Each patient along with their families/support system is encouraged to a sk questions and participate in 
discussion on the daily education topic. 
 
Cardiac Education classes offered include but not limited to: 
 1. Coronary Artery Disease 
 2. Cardiovascular Risk Factors 
 3. Exercise and Your Heart 
 4. Heart-Healthy Nutrition 
 5. Stress Management 
 6. Relaxation Techniques 
 7. Cardiac Medications 
            8.           Heart Disease and Sex 
            9.          Internet Cardiovascular Patient Education Resources 
            10.        Weight Management 
            11.        Care of the Caregiver 
            12.         Heart Disease and Women 
 
Appropriate educational topics which may be covered during any group or individual sessions may include 
Coronary Artery Disease, Nutrition, Stress Management, Relaxation, Medications, Risk Factor Modification, 
Exercise, Smoking and Smoking Cessation, Anatomy and Physiology, Goal Setting, Myocardial Infarction 
and Angina Pectoris, Sexual Dysfunction and return to normal sexual function, CPR Instruction, and 
Pulmonary Education Topics (see Pulmonary Education program) 
 
It is the goal of the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation education program that the patients and the families will 
have satisfactory understanding of all materials suggested and covered in the education classes, a more in depth focus on responsibility for own lifestyle choices, as well as increased self confidence in exercise, 
performance of daily living activities, and management of their disease and its ongoing treatment. 
 
 
Procedure: 
 
Assessment of patient/ family education needs begins during the patient orientation and continues throughout 
the course of Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation. During the orientation process, patient goals and risk factor 
modification are introduced to patient and family using the Treatment Plan Summary.    
 
The patient/family educational needs are evaluated on an ongoing basis by all staff members, with formal 
evaluation at 12, 24, and 36 sessions, using the patient Conference Questionnaire. As a patient indicates a 
particular educational need or has difficulty answering one of the questions concerning risk factors or goal 
accomplishment, the following responses may occur to fulfill the patient or family’s needs: 
 
  1. The patient/family will be counseled according to those demonstrated needs by one of the     
     Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation staff.  
 2. It will be suggested to the patient/family to attend the educational class pertaining to that particular 
     need (to attend initially or as review, if previously attended). 
 3. The patient/family may be given written educational material pertaining to the risk factor or the  
     education class if that education class cannot be attended for some reason. 
 4. The patient/family may be encouraged to borrow video educational material which deals with their 
     needs or concerns. 
 5. The patient/family may be referred to other appropriate services at their request or with their      
     approval for demonstrated needs. 
 
 
 