 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Staff Meetings and Education Workshops 
Date of  Origination:  01/04/93                       
Last Date Revised: 11/05/2013 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Personnel 
Section: Personnel 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CRST04 
 
 
Distribution:                    Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department  
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services   
 
Purpose:                          To establish guidelines and expectations concerning meetings, inservice training, and  
                                          outside education for Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation staff. 
 
Applies To:                      All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
Policy: 
 
All members of the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation staff are expected to attend scheduled Cardiopulmonary 
Rehabilitation staff meetings and scheduled Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation inservice training, unless excused 
beforehand. 
 
Attendance at inservice education offered hospital -wide, or by other hospital units, is encouraged. If during 
scheduled working hours, attendance at such inservices must be with permission of the department manager. 
 
Outside education and workshops which either occur during scheduled work hours or will be paid for by Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center are available to staff according to established hospital human 
resources policy and with approval by the hospital administration.  
 
Procedure: 
 
Staff will sign the OLOL Program Attendance Record for all unit meetings and hospital inservice training as 
verification of attendance. The Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation manager will maintain Attendance Records for 
unit meetings. Hospital inservice meeting Attendance Records will be maintained by Human Resources. 
 
Application for outside educational workshops must include a completed OLOL Travel Request form. The 
Travel Request is submitted for administrative approval in order to obtain permission to attend all outside 
educational workshops, regardless of location.  
 
 
 