 
 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Staffing Policy 
Date of  Origination:  01/04/93                       
Last Date Revised: 11/05/2013 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Personnel  
Section: Personnel 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: CRST01 
 
 
Distribution:                    Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department  
 
Formulated By:               Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services   
 
Purpose:                           To establish guidelines in the staffing of the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Program. 
 
Applies To:                      All Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
Policy: 
 
The Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Program is staffed by a team of multi-disciplinary health care professionals 
under the supervision of the Cardiac Rehabilitation Director and the Director of Cardiology. 
 
Only health care professionals who are qualified by relevant education, experience, and current competency 
shall provide patient care in the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation team. Assistants, students, and volunteers who 
are trained by the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation staff may facilitate staff, as appropriate, according to their 
training. Any or all of the following disciplines may be considered in the formation of the Cardiopulmonary 
Rehabilitation team. 
 
 Professional:     Volunteer:  
 Physician     OLOL Volunteers   
 Registered Nurse    Students 
 Exercise Physiologist                                         Patient Volunteers 
            Exercise Physiology Technicians         
 Respiratory Therapist 
 Dietician/ Nutritionist 
 Physical Therapist  
 Occupational Therapist 
 Pharmacist 
 Mental Health Specialist 
 Social Service Personnel  
 
All personnel in the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Program shall participate in relevant educational programs 
on safety, infection control, and other areas.   All personnel will be CPR certified on an annual basis. ACLS 
certification is preferred for the RN and Clinical Exercise Physiologist, and is encouraged for all staff. 
 
All licensed Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation personnel will maintain a current state licensure. 
 
Optimistic personality and tact are essential qualities for the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation staff since contact 
with the public is constant. 
 
Inservice meetings will be conducted with the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation staff to identify problems and 
possible interventions.  Educational topics will be presented by varying staff members.  
All personnel in the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation program are expected to: 
 
1. Be available to develop education materials and lead class discussion on a variety of subjects. 
2.  Assist in the maintenance and continuous quality improvement of the program. 
3.  Attend staff meetings to discuss appointments, referrals, training/ testing, psychosocial intervention and 
  follow-up. 
4. Assist with the patient referral process. 
5. Assist with testing and exercise prescription. 
6. Assist with education classes as scheduled. 
7. Adhere to duties and responsibilities as outlined in the appropriate job descriptions. 
 
Educational programs for the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation staff will be based on the results of evaluation 
studies and recommendations of quality monitoring and Performance Improvement Reports.  These studies and 
recommendations will also serve as part of the review mechanism of the program and evaluation of the 
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation provided. 
 
 