         
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
 CT-CLIN-105  
 
Page 1 of 5 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
SOP Manual: Blood Cancer and Cellular 
Therapy Program 
Section: Clinical 
Title: Informed Consent for Cellular Therapy and Transplant  
Date of Origination:  01/06/2025 SOP Reference #: CT-CLIN-105 
Revision Date:  Effective Date: 01/06/2025 
 
SCOPE:  
This standard operating policy/procedure (SOP) applies to the any personnel involved in the 
Informed Consent process for the Blood Cancer and Cellular Therapy Program (BCCT) at Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL). 
PURPOSE:   
To provide guidelines and set forth procedures to be followed in the informed consent process 
for the purposes of transplant and cellular therapy for the BCCT Program at OLOL. 
DEFINITIONS: 
1) Informed Consent: The voluntary permission of a patient, through signature, marking, or 
affirmative action through electronic means pursuant to La. R.S. 40:1163.1, to any medical 
or surgical procedure or course of procedures which: (1) sets forth in general terms the 
nature and purpose of the procedure or procedures, together with known risks, if any, of 
death, brain damage, quadriplegia, paraplegia, the loss or loss of function of any organ or 
limb, of disfiguring scars associated with such procedure or procedures; (2) acknowledges 
that such disclosure of information has been made and that all questions asked about the 
procedure or procedures have been answered in a satisfactory manner; and (3) is evidenced 
by a signature, marking, or affirmative action through electronic means, by the patient for 
whom the procedure is to be performed, or if the patient for any reason lacks legal capacity 
to consent, by a person who has legal authority to consent on behalf of such patient in such 
circumstances. Alternatively, the lists established by the Louisiana Medical Disclosure 
Panel in Louisiana Administrative Code Title 48, Part I, Chapter 23 
(https://www.doa.la.gov/media/15odwaqn/48v01.pdf) may be used to evidence Informed 
Consent. (reference OLOL Policy OC 012 Verification of Hospital/Informed Consent for 
Operations and Other Procedures). 
2) Adult: A person eighteen (18) years or older. 
3) Minor: A person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
4) Personal Healthcare Representative: a person who has authority in accordance with 
Louisiana law to act on behalf of an individual who is an adult or an emancipated minor in 
making decisions related to health care because of incapacity. 
GENERAL INFORMATION: 
N/A 
          
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
 CT-CLIN-105  
 
Page 2 of 5 
 
STANDARD OPERATING POLICY/PROCEDURE: 
A. Please refer to OLOL Policy OC 012-Verification of Hospital/Informed Consent for 
Operations and Other Procedures for institutional guidelines. 
B. Family members may not serve as interpreters or translators for donor/recipient consent. 
C. Recipients and donors who fall under the American Disability Act will be provided with 
appropriate resources to make an informed decision. 
D. If the patient is unable to read and/or write, the person responsible for obtaining the consent 
should read the consent form to the patient and the patient should verbalize back that he/she 
understands what is read.  The patient is to place an “X” on the line for patient signature on 
the consent form.  There should be two witnesses to the “X” made by the patient. 
E. Unrelated donors that are collected as part of the National Marrow Donation Program 
(NMDP) shall be consented according to the policy and practices for NMDP. 
F. Allogeneic and Autologous donor information and consent to donate. 
1. Donor informed consent for the cellular therapy product donation shall be obtained and 
documented by a licensed health care professional knowledgeable in the collection 
procedure. 
2. Informed consent from the related allogeneic donor shall be obtained by a licensed health 
care professional who is not the primary health care professional overseeing care of the 
recipient. 
3. The mobilization and collection procedure shall be explained in terms the donor can 
understand and shall include the following information at a minimum: 
a. The risks and benefits of the procedure. 
b. Tests and procedures performed on the donor to protect the health and safety of the 
donor and the recipient. 
c. Alternative collection methods 
d. Protection of medical information and confidentiality. 
4. Documentation of consent shall be available to the Collection Facility staff prior to the 
collection procedure. 
G. All transplant and cellular therapy recipient and/or donor consents must contain the following 
information at a minimum: 
a. Description of any procedures in terms that donor, recipient, or legal guardian can 
understand. 
b. Consent related to treatment, cellular therapy product infusion, storage, discard, or 
disposal, including actions taken when an intended recipient no longer requires the 
cellular therapy product. 
c. The risks and benefits of the procedure. 
d. Recipients and donors have the right to review the results of testing related to the 
transplant procedure. 
e. Confidentiality is maintained in accordance with institutional guidelines and 
applicable laws. 
f. Refusal and the right to withdraw. 
g. Request for more information 
h. Specific to donors for allogeneic transplants:          
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
 CT-CLIN-105  
 
Page 3 of 5 
 
i. Right to withdraw at any time 
ii. Alternative collection methods (apheresis/marrow harvest) 
4. The printed name, signature, that is dated and timed by the recipient, donor, and/or legal 
guardian. 
5. The printed name, signature that is dated and timed by the healthcare provider obtaining 
the informed consent. 
6. The program name and address. 
7. Informed consent donor shall be obtained and documented by a licensed health care 
professional knowledgeable in the elements of the transplant/cellular therapy processes.   
8. Ample time should be allotted during the informed consent process for the recipient, 
donor, or legal guardian to ask questions.  All questions shall be answered to the 
satisfaction of the recipient, donor, or legal guardian. 
H. For Allogeneic Donors ONLY: 
1. The donor or legal guardian shall have the right to refuse to donate and shall be informed 
of the potential consequences to the intended recipient. 
2. The allogeneic donor shall provide informed consent and provide authorization to release 
their health information to the attending physician and intended recipient as appropriate. 
3. A licensed health care professional knowledgeable in the proposed cellular therapy that is 
not involved in the care of the recipient will obtain the informed consent. 
4. When an ineligible but suitable allogeneic donor must be used, the attending transplant 
physician shall document the urgent medical need and rationale for the donor selection in 
the medical record and obtain the informed consent of the recipient.  The attending 
physician for the related allogeneic donor will also obtain consent. 
I. Any recipients and/or donors that are asked to participate in a data collections study shall 
follow the Institutional Review Board (IRB) and NMDP or The Center for International 
Blood and Marrow Transplant Research (CIBMTR) guidelines for obtaining informed 
consent. 
J. For recipients of cellular therapy products from an unrelated donor source: 
1. The recipient may be asked to participate and provide a repository sample to NMDP.  
Follow IRB and NMDP guidelines for obtaining consent and the process for acquiring and 
shipping the sample. 
K. All consents must comply with the institutional standards. (refer to OLOL Policy OC 012 
Verification of Hospital/Informed Consent for Operations and Other Procedures). 
L. The consent will be in the medical record of the recipient or donor, as appropriate and made 
available to the appropriate healthcare staff prior to the initial processes/procedures 
associated with the transplant or cellular therapy. 
M. If   < six (6) months has elapsed since the original consent was signed and a significant 
change in the patient's conditions, and/or there will be significant revisions to the treatment 
plan, the attending physician shall determine if a new consent needs to be obtained or if a 
review of the of the original consent is sufficient and document the process and rationale in 
the medical record.  
 
 