OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
CT-CL IN-104 
Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
SOP Manual: Blood Cancer and Cellular 
Therapy Program 
Section: Clinical 
Title:  Evaluation of Hematopoietic Progenitor Cell Recipient for Autologous 
Donation and Transplant or Cellular Therapy 
Date of Origination: 12/4/2024 SOP Reference #: CT- CLIN-104 
Revision Date: Effective Date: 12/23/2024 
S
COPE: 
This standard operating policy/procedure (SOP) applies to the Blood Cancer and Cellular 
Therapy Program (BCCT) located at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical (OLOL). 
P
URPOSE:  
 To provide proper screening criteria for autologous hemopoietic progenitor cells (HPC) or 
cellular therapy donors. 
DEFINITIONS: N/A 
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES: 
A. The pre-transplant evaluation of the donor/recipient will be completed prior to the initiation of the
mobilization/collection process of cells.
B. Patients in need of autologous transplant or cellular therapy shall be properly evaluated to determine
suitability for autologous donation.
C. The attending physician shall confirm the availability of a cellular therapy product prior to initiating
t
he recipient’s preparative regimen.
D. After evaluation by the cell therapy provider, the patient may be deemed a potential candidate for
transplantation or cellular therapy and undergo further pre-transplant testing. Autologous donors shall
be tested as required by applicable laws. The risk of donation shall be evaluated and documented to
include but limited to: possible need for central venous access, mobilization therapy for apheresis
collection and anesthesia for marrow harvest. The cell therapy physician will complete autologous
cell therapy or cellular therapy order.
1. All donor/ recipients will have a comprehensive evaluation to include but not limited to:
a. A complete medical history, infectious disease history, transfusion history, review of
relevant medical records, review of systems, performance status assessment (Karnofsky
Performance Status) and a physical examination will be performed.
b. Review of original diagnostic pathology reports and pathology review as indicated.
c. Determination of disease status and chemotherapy sensitivity of underlying disease, as
a
ppropriate.
d. Clinical evaluation including:
i. Chest X-ray (PA and Lateral Views). Additional x-rays clinically indicated.
ii. Electrocardiogram and testing (echocardiogram, MUGA) to determine cardiac ejection
fraction prior to beginning of preparative regimen, unless otherwise indicated.
iii. Dental evaluation as clinically indicated.
iv. Baseline pulmonary function studies prior to beginning of preparative regimen, unless
otherwise indicated.
e. Documentation of height, weight, and body surface area.OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
CT-CL IN-104 
Page 2 of 5 
f. Disease specific restaging studies/testing prior to beginning of preparative regimen or
otherwise as indicated by physician (Refer to “CT-CLIN-101 Acceptance Criteria for
Candidates of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant”).
g. Additional assessment of suitability for a donor/ recipient with increased risk or potential for
increased risk will be accomplished by obtaining independent clinical consultations with
me
dical specialist as indicated.
F. Laboratory Evaluation:
1.Laboratory testing shall be performed by a laboratory accredited or licensed in accordance with
ap
plicable laws.
2. Laboratory studies shall be performed prior to the initiation of mobilization/collection procedures.
3. Additional tests may be performed to assess the possibility of transmission of other infectious a nd
non
-infectious diseases.
a. The program may screen patient with fever, cough, or other symptoms by clinical or
laboratory testing for influenza or relative viral illnesses e.g.  COVID-19
4. High risk behaviors identified at donor screening may require additional laboratory testing.
5. Other communicable diseases tests shall be added to the donor evaluation as those tests become
av
ailable and are recommended to increase product safety.
6. A pregnancy assessment (serum pregnancy test) shall be performed on female candidates wit h
c
hildbearing potential within 7 days prior to the initiation of the mobilization regimen.
[
Childbearing potential is meant to include all females from puberty through menopause, unless
there is some definite medical indication that pregnancy is impossible e.g. Hysterectomy]
7. The donor shall be evaluated for the risk of hemoglobinopathy prior to the administration of
mobilization regimen.
8. Other tests as indicated and ordered by HCT physician.
G. The transplant coordinator will collect all test results and evaluations for review by the cell therapy
phys
ician before the donor/recipient is cleared to proceed.
H. The physician will review and approve the results of the donor/recipient evaluation. All test results
shall be made available to the candidate upon request and all relevant abnormal test results shall be
d
iscussed with the candidate regardless of the decision to transplant. Documentation of the candidate
notification and follow-up treatment recommendations is maintained in the medical record.
I. The potential risks to the donor from collection procedure shall be assessed by the cell therapy
physician prior to concluding the donor's suitability. Minimum requirements are:
1. The infectious disease marker (IDM) results shall be discussed with the patient and must be
pe
rformed within 60 days prior to collection. At minimum, the following IDM’s will be
tested:
• H
IV 1 and 2 Antibody Test (group O_)
• Hepatitis B Surface Antigen (HBsAg)
• Hepatitis B Core Antibody (HBcAB)
• Hepatitis C Virus Antibody (HCV A, anti HCV) with reflex RIBA
• West Nile Virus (WNV) RNA using minipool nucleic acid amplification testing
(MP_NAT)
2. Pregnancy test/assessment is negative, if applicable
3. The donor has negative response to any medical history questions that indicate risk to the donor.
4. HPC, Apheresis mobilization therapy to be given prior to collection.OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
CT-CL IN-104 
Page 3 of 5 
5. HPC, Marrow collection risks of anesthesia reviewed.
J. Issues of donor health that pertain to the safety of the collection procedure shall be communicated in
w
riting to the collection facility staff.
K. The clinical program shall inform collection facility and processing facility of donor test results and if
any testing was not performed.
L. Collection from a donor who does meet criteria for Our Lady of the Lake’s (OLOL) Cellular Therapy
(
CT) collection safety criteria shall require documentation of the rationale for his/her selection by the
r
ecipient’s physician.
M. Donors will be provided routine follow up for management of mobilization and collection and any
asso
ciated adverse events.
PROCEDURE: 
A. Initial Consult Visit:
1. Patient consults with physician
a. The physician shall complete a comprehensive evaluation to include, but not limited to:
i. Review of complete medical history
ii. Review of relevant medical records
iii. Performance status assessment (Karnofsky Performance Status)
iv. Physical examination to include height weight and body surface area
v. Review of original diagnostic pathology
2. Patient meets with a transplant coordinator(s) who share, at minimum, the following:
a. Education regarding next steps
b. Contact information for any questions or assistance after the conclusion of the visit
B. Interim Visit:
1. Patient/caregiver/family meet with Coordinators (CT and Financial) who share at a minimum
the following:
a. Copayments and explanation of benefits
b. Pre-test and work-up test information
c. Transplant education re: process, evaluations, and forms
d. Provide/explain patient education binder.
e. Explain line placement if necessary.
f. Set tentative calendar for testing (EKG, ECHO, PFTs, etc). Nutritional evaluation,
psychological evaluation, social evaluation, Collection Process, etc. as ordered by the
C
T physician/Advanced Practice Professional (APP)
g. Information regarding Transplant Education
C. Pr
e-transplant Visit(s):
1. Physician shares transplant or cellular therapy plan with patient /caregiver
2. Coordinator and CT physician/APP meet with patient:
a. Review of any changes to calendar
b. Explains consent(s) and obtains signature(s)OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
CT-CL IN-104 
Page 4 of 5 
c. Provide copy of consent(s) to patient
d. Explains and orders line placement if necessary.
e. Complete teaching record/documentation
f. Coordinate authorizations and approvals with financial counselor
3. Social Worker meets patient/caregiver/family and conducts evaluation(s) and provides at
minimum:
a. Lodging options
a. Applications for patient assistance programs
b. Referrals as needed for any other needs /advocacy
4. Psychologist meets with patient/caregiver/family and conducts psychological evaluation(s)
5. Restaging of disease is completed as ordered.
6. Coordinator confirms scheduled dates for transplant:
a. Updates tracking
b. Ensure appropriate communication/information (collection order) is shared wit h
ap
plicable departments staff/coordinates with collection facility/processing lab.
c. Ensures all required testing and evaluations are completed and reviewed prior to
mobilization/collections/transplant and are in the medical record.
d. Order line placement as necessary and educate patient accordingly.
e. Ensures documentation for updated plan of care are in the medical record and when
ne
eded faxed to outside referring physicians.
D. Transplant Attending Physician will complete
a. Suitability/Eligibility
b. Prescription for Collection
c. Final Declaration for the Autologous Donor
d. Attestation of the HPC Collection when completed
AS
SOCIATED POLICIES: 
1. OLOL SOP, CT-CLIN-101 "Acceptance Criteria for Candidates of Hematopoietic Cell
Transplantation".)
2. OLOL SOP, CT-CLIN-106 "Donor Suitability and Eligibility",
AT
TACHMENTS: 
N/A 
S
TATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
1. AABB "Standards for Cellular Therapy Product Services" Bethesda, MD, Current Edition.
2. A merican College of Surgeons Commission on Cancer. "Cancer Program Standards 2012"
https://www.facs.org/quality%20programs/cancer/coc/standards
3. C
enter for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research "CIBMTR Forms Instruction
M
anual" http://www.cibmtr.org/manuals/fim
4. Foundation for the Accreditation of Cellular Therapy. "FACT- JACIE International Standards for
Hematopoietic Cellular Therapy Product Collection, Processing, and Administration" Current