 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-121 
Page 1 of 13 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
SOP Manual: Blood Cancer and Cellular 
Therapy Program 
Section: Clinical 
Title:  Prophylaxis and Management of Toxicities of Hematopoietic Cell 
Transplantation (HSCT) and Other Therapies 
Date of Origination: 12/4/2024 Policy Reference #: CT- CLIN-121  
Revision Date:  Effective Date: 01/06/2025 
 
SCOPE:  
This policy/procedure applies to the Blood Cancer and Cellular Therapy Program (BCCT) 
located at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical (OLOL). 
PURPOSE:   
To describe the practice for prevention and management of complications following 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Appropriate prophylaxis/treatment is mandatory 
in order to maximize the patient’s chance of survival, quality of life and level of function.  
 
Administration of preparative regimens and cellular therapy products is known to be associated 
with diverse and potentially serious patient complications. All transplant patients shall be 
managed according to medical judgment and institutional practice guidelines.  
 
DEFINITIONS:  
1. High risk: leukemia, recent allogeneic transplant, prior history of mold infection, neutropenia lasting 
>14 days, receiving ≥3 days of steroids, development of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), 
significant GVHD.  
2. A specific MD order shall be obtained for any blood cultures drawn from central line if peripheral 
sticks are not successful.  
3. Signs and symptoms of SOS may include changes in mental status, restlessness, significant weight 
gain, increasing abdominal girth, appearance of jaundice, changes in color of urine, right upper 
quadrant pain.  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE: 
A. The Clinical Program shall assure appropriate follow-up of recipients after administration of 
preparative regimens and cellular therapy products, including, but not limited to, the 
following:   
1. Management of nausea, vomiting, pain, and other patient discomforts (i.e., Mucositis)   
2. Monitoring of blood counts for anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia and 
transfusion of blood products   
3. Monitoring for infections and management of antimicrobials   
4. Monitoring for graft failure and management of treatment    
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-121 
Page 2 of 13 
 
5. Monitoring for hepatic sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (SOS), previously known as 
veno-occlusive disease (VOD)  
6. Monitoring for evidence of acute and chronic graft versus host disease (GVHD) using an 
established staging and grading system. 
B. Standardized (electronic or pre-printed) order sets addressing prevention and management of 
anticipated symptoms, to include nausea, vomiting, and pain associated with administration 
of preparative regimens, cellular therapy infusion and post-transplant recovery will be 
utilized for all HSCT recipients.  
C. Standardized order sets will include frequency of vital sign assessment and routine laboratory 
sampling of peripheral blood counts and serum chemistries, criteria for blood product 
transfusion, prophylactic anti-infective and antiemetic's, and management of febrile 
neutropenia. The clinical care team to address individual patient considerations (e.g., known 
drug allergies, clinical trial participation, etc.) may modify standardized order sets.  
D. As required, the Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) Blood Cancer 
and Cellular Therapy (BCCT) Clinical Program shall follow institutional standards of care, 
policies, and procedures for rapid escalation of care, increased intensity of monitoring, and 
relevant workup to address complications.  
E. In the event of rapid escalation of care, increased intensity of monitoring, and/or relevant 
workup to address complications, the clinical staff in charge at the bedside (or designee) shall 
notify, as appropriate, the clinical staff, intensive care unit, emergency department, and/or 
pharmacy in a timely manner.   
PROCEDURE: 
A. The clinical care team shall routinely monitor HSCT recipients during the peri- and post-
transplant period to including but not limited to:   
1. Vital sign assessment   
2. Laboratory evaluation of peripheral blood counts and serum chemistries and   
3. Regular physical examinations for signs and symptoms of infection, graft failure, 
graft versus host disease (GVHD) or other complications.  
4. Documented response to interventions in the appropriate location in the medical 
record 
B. Management of HSCT Patients for Antimicrobial Prophylaxis: 
   
 Prophylaxis Antimicrobial  Start Day  Stop Day  
Bacterial  Levofloxacin 500 mg orally 
(PO)/intravenously (IV) daily 
(preferred)  
Alternatives based on local resistance 
patterns 
ANC <500  ANC ≥1000   
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-121 
Page 3 of 13 
 
Viral  Acyclovir 400 mg- 800 mg PO twice 
daily (B.I.D.)   
or Acyclovir 250 mg/m2IV B.I.D.  
or Valacyclovir 500 mg PO B.I.D.  
Day 1 following 
HSCT   
Administration  
At least 1 
year if CD4 
count ≥200  
Fungal  Low risk: Fluconazole 400 mg PO/IV 
daily   
High risk: Posaconazole tabs 300 mg 
PO daily   
or Voriconazole 200 mg PO BID or   
Voriconazole 4 mg/kg IV B.I.D.  
Micafungin 50-100 mg IV daily 
if cannot tolerate   
triazole antifungals  
Day 1 following 
HSCT   
Administration or 
when high risk 
criteria met  
ANC 
≥1000  
 
C. Management of Febrile Neutropenia 
1. Orders for first documented fever when the absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of ≤500 
cells/mm3:   
a. A temperature of ≥38.0°C (100.4°F) then obtain the following diagnostic tests:   
i. bacterial blood cultures x two (2) sets (peripheral, two separate sites)   
ii. lactic acid   
iii. urinalysis with culture (clean catch)   
iv. chest x-ray, two (2) views (AP and lateral)   
v. respiratory orders to be obtained if patient having respiratory symptoms, send 
respiratory viral PCR panel (if not done in prior 7 days)   
b. Start empiric antibiotics as indicated within 30-60 minutes (assuming normal 
renal function, otherwise adjust as required)   
2. Persistent fever after 72 hours on antibiotics:   
a. Attending provider to consult Infectious Disease to guide additional workup and 
antimicrobial treatment.  
D. Management of Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (SOS), previously known as veno-
occlusive disease (VOD):   
1. Obtain abdominal ultrasound including duplex studies to rule out other hepatic 
abnormalities.  
2. Obtain and monitor daily liver function tests.  
3. Fluid restrictions:   
a. administration of any intravenous medications in minimal volume    
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-121 
Page 4 of 13 
 
b. avoiding sodium   
4. Administer diuretics as needed.  
5. Maintain hematocrit ≥ 25%.  
6. Provide analgesia as needed.  
7. Modify GVHD prophylaxis regimen doses to keep in therapeutic range. 
8. Obtain a Gastroenterology consult. 
E. Management of Renal Dysfunction:   
1. Adjust or discontinue nephrotoxic agents.  
2. Obtain Nephrology consult.  
F. Management of Oral Mucositis:   
1. Prophylaxis:   
a. Recipients who are undergoing a preparative regimen for stem cell transplant 
which includes Total Body Irradiation should receive Palifermin according to 
standards of practice.  
2. Treatment:   
a. Assess for HSV/Candida, if positive, then treat accordingly   
b. Provide mouth care with Magic mouthwash.  
c. Provide analgesia as needed.  
d. Toothettes in lieu of tooth brushing 
G. Management of Gastrointestinal Toxicity:   
1. Evaluate for infection with stool culture.  
a. If the patient is having frequent watery bowel movements order clostridium 
difficile PCR testing.  
b. If C. diff PCR negative, manage diarrhea with Imodium after each loose bowel 
movement (maximum eight (8) tablets every 24 hours period).  
2. Consider viral etiologies such as CMV   
3. Consider noninfectious etiologies such as GVHD   
H. Management of Clostridium Difficile:   
a. Prophylaxis:   
a. All patients scheduled for allogeneic transplantation shall receive prophylactic 
oral vancomycin 125 mg PO BID starting on day of admission and continued 
through day of discharge.  
2. For any transplant recipient that tests positive for Clostridium Difficile PCR, treatment 
shall be based on the severity and/or the recurrence of the infection and current treatment 
guidelines.  
I. Management of Hemorrhagic Cystitis:   
1. Mesna - may be used at the discretion of the transplanting physician.  
2. Evaluate for bacterial and/or viral infection: send urine culture; also send urine for BK 
virus, CMV, and Adenovirus PCR.  
3. Evaluation for noninfectious etiologies include Cyclophosphamide and previous pelvic 
radiotherapy.  
4. Monitor a daily platelet count and support with transfusions according to institutional 
parameters.  
5. Maintain IV fluid hydration.   
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-121 
Page 5 of 13 
 
6. Pyridium and/or Oxybutynin may be ordered for symptomatic relief.  
7. Consult Urology if unresponsive to supportive measures and/or clots with threatened 
obstruction, for placement of 3-way foley catheter for continuous bladder irrigation 
(CBI).  
J. Management of Viral Infections:   
1. Prophylaxis:   
a. All patients scheduled for allogeneic transplantation shall receive recommended 
therapy starting on Day -5 and continue until 1 year post transplant:   
i. Acyclovir 400-800 mg PO twice daily (B.I.D.) or Acyclovir 250mg/m2 IV 
B.I.D. (if unable to tolerate by mouth medication) OR   
ii. Valacyclovir 500 mg PO B.I.D  
iii.  Letermovir 480 mg PO/IV starting at D+7 until D+100 for CMV [R+] only for 
allogeneic transplant patients.  
b. All patients scheduled for autologous transplantation shall receive recommended 
therapy starting on day -3 and continue until 1 year post transplant:   
i. Acyclovir 400-800 mg PO twice daily (B.I.D.) or Acyclovir 250mg/m2 IV 
B.I.D. (if unable to tolerate by mouth medication) OR   
ii. Valacyclovir 500 mg PO B.I.D   
2. Treatment Varicella Zoster Virus (VSV):   
a. Transplant recipients who are exposed to the VSV prior to or after the start of 
conditioning chemotherapy should be assessed for treatment with the varicella 
zoster immunoglobulin.  
i. If the recipient develops VZV after beginning conditioning chemotherapy 
begin acyclovir 500 mg/m2 IV every 8 hours and continue until 2 days after all 
lesions have crusted.  
ii. If single dermatome disease the physician may opt for valacyclovir 500 mg 
PO BID or acyclovir 800 mg PO X 5 daily doses (close clinical observation 
for disseminated lesion(s) is recommended). Dose adjustment should be used 
with renal impaired recipients.  
iii.  If acyclovir resistance occurs among patients, the physician should give 
Foscarnet for preemptive treatment of disease.  
iv. Consult Infectious Disease to guide additional workup and antiviral treatment.  
3. Treatment of Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV)   
a. Acyclovir 5-10 mg/kg IV every 8 hours (based off ideal body weight)   
b. Consult Infectious Disease to guide additional workup and treatment. 
K. Management of Cytomegalovirus (CMV):   
1. Prophylaxis:   
a. Seropositive [R+] allogeneic recipients and those high-risk for CMV such as 
CMV negative recipient/positive donor, those receiving corticosteroids >2 weeks.  
i. Consult Infectious Disease   
ii.  Letermovir 480 mg PO/IV once daily starting at D+7 until D+100.  
b. Patients who are not candidates for prophylaxis should undergo preemptive 
therapy (prompt treatment of detectable CMV viremia above a specified 
threshold)    
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-121 
Page 6 of 13 
 
i. CMV quantitative PCR plasma will be checked weekly.  
ii. If CMV viral load is detectable but below level of quantification, repeat 
again at least 5-7 days after   
iii. The threshold to initiate pre-emptive therapy will be CMV quantitative PCR 
plasma result >500 IU/mL or a rising trend on successive measurements from 
patient's baseline.  
iv. Consult Transplant Infectious Disease and start Ganciclovir 5mg/kg IV q12h 
or renally adjusted dose per physician orders for at least 2 weeks and until 
viral suppression.  
c. CMV negative allograft recipients shall receive CMV negative blood.  
     products.  
2. Treatment:   
a. Consult Infectious Disease to guide additional workup and antiviral.  
treatment for CMV infection or reactivation.  
b. Acyclovir should be discontinued with the initiation of any other medications for 
the treatment of CMV.   
L. Management of Invasive Fungal Infection:   
1. Prophylaxis:   
a. Low risk: Fluconazole 400 mg PO/IV daily or Micafungin 50 mg IV daily if 
unable to tolerate Fluconazole.   
b. High risk: Posaconazole tabs 300 mg PO daily or Voriconazole 200 mg PO BID 
or Voriconazole 4 mg/kg IV Q12H after completion of loading dose.   
c. Micafungin 100 mg IV daily if unable to tolerate triazole antifungals or during 
conditioning therapy prior to allogeneic stem cell transplant.  
2. For patients with fever and prolonged neutropenia unresponsive to antibiotics for >3-5 
days or with high clinical suspicion:   
a. Non-contrasted CT of the chest and/or sinuses should be obtained to   
evaluate for invasive fungal disease.  
b. Fungal markers (e.g., beta-D-glucan, galactomannan) shall be ordered as needed 
to support the diagnosis of fungal infection based on clinical suspicion.  
d. Suspicious skin lesions should be evaluated for biopsy.  
e. Empiric fungal therapy: AmBisome 5 mg/kg IV daily or Voriconazole 6 mg/kg 
IV every 12 hours as loading doses on day 1, followed by 4 mg/kg IV every 12 
hours thereafter.   
f. Consult Infectious Disease to guide additional workup and antifungal treatment.  
M. The Management of Pneumocystis Pneumonia:   
1. Prophylaxis:   
a. aerosolized inhaled Pentamidine 300 mg upon admission for transplant and then 
once a month until hematopoietic recovery.  
b. Stem cell transplant recipients will receive Trimethoprim Sulfamethoxazole DS 
PO three times weekly for a period of six months following hematopoietic 
recovery. (M-W-F)  
c. Patients allergic or intolerant to sulfa medications will continue monthly 
aerosolized inhaled Pentamidine or Atovaquone 1500 mg PO daily.   
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-121 
Page 7 of 13 
 
 
ASSOCIATED POLICIES: 
1.  N/A 
 
ATTACHMENTS: 
1.  Neutropenic Patient Guidelines 
2.  Thrombocytopenic Guidelines 
3.  Masking Guidelines 
4.  Immunosuppressant Diet for Transplant 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
1. AABB "A Model Quality System for the Transfusion Service" 1997.  
2. Abe Y, Choi I, Hara K, et al. "Case Report – Hemophagocytic syndrome: a rare 
complication of allogeneic non myeloablative hematopoietic stem cell transplantation" 
Bone Marrow Transplantation. 2002 Aug; 29:799-801   
3. Baden LR, et al. Prevention and Treatment of Cancer-Related Infections, Version 2.2016, 
NCCN   
4. Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2016; 14(7): 882-
913.  
5. Cooke, K. R., Richardson, P. G., and Krishnan, A. Y. (2015). Strategies for the 
Management of Hepatic Veno-Occlusive Disease in Patients Undergoing Bone Marrow 
Transplant. Clinical Advances in Hematology & Oncology, 13(12), 1-14.  
6. Dalle, J. H. and Giralt, S. A., (2016). Hepatic veno-occlusive disease after hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation: risk factors and stratification, prophylaxis, and treatment. Biol. 
Blood Marrow Transplant, 22, pp. 400-409.  
7. FACT-JACIE International Standards for Hematopoietic Cellular Therapy Product 
Collection, Processing, and Administration. Current edition.  
8. Ferreira RA, Vastert SJ, Abinun M, et al. "Hemophagocytosis during fludarabine-based 
SCT for systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis" Bone Marrow Transplantation 
2006;38:249-251   
9. Freifeld AG, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline for the Use of Antimicrobial Agents in 
Neutropenic Patients with Cancer: 2010 Update by the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2011; 52(4): e56-e93.  
10. Gabay C, Lamacchia C, Palmer G. "IL-1 pathways in inflammation and human diseases" 
Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2010;6(4):232-241.  
11. Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation: A Manual for Nursing Practice. (Current 
Edition)   
12. Infectious Disease Society of America (ISDA) http://www.idsociety.org/ 
Guidelines_Patient_Care/   
13. Jordan MB, Allen CE, Weitzman S, et al. "How I treat hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis” Blood 2011 (Oct);118(15):4041-4052.  
14. La Rosee P. "Treatment of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis in adults" American 
Society of Hematology 2015;190-196.   
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-121 
Page 9 of 13 
 
ATTACHMENT 1. Neutropenic Patient Guidelines 
A. Implement “masking guidelines” (refer to ATTACHMENT 3). Strong consideration for 
masking guidelines when construction efforts are underway at the facility.  
B. Unless medically contraindicated, ( e.g., allergy, neutropenic patients,  and those with central 
lines (including PICC lines)) midlines, or dialysis catheters and patients with accessed ports 
require CHG treatments/bathing as part of their daily care. Patients will bathe/shower using 
chlorhexidine gluconate (CHG) and change clothing daily1. 
C. Patients, visitors, and caregivers will demonstrate good hand hygiene (refer to CDC “Hand 
Hygiene in Healthcare Settings: Clean Hands Count for Patients”2). 
D. Oral care protocol to be instituted upon admission for all transplant patients. Oral care is 
encouraged QID and after meals. 
E. All neutropenic patients will follow a diet as prescribed by a transplant provider (see 
attachment #4) 
F. All visitors will be screened for recent and current infections daily; anyone with suspected or 
actual infection must not visit the unit (refer to institutional policies and/or procedures). 
G. Each institution will set standards on the age and appropriateness of children to visit the unit 
which houses Myelosuppressed patients (refer to institutional policies and/or procedures). 
1. All visitors must be  able to comply with the isolation policy, and adhere to strict 
guidelines, or they should not be allowed to visit the care area. 
H. All staff will practice good hand hygiene (refer to CDC “Hand Hygiene in Healthcare Settings: 
Clean Hands Count for Healthcare Providers”3) 
1. All staff must wash hands with soap and water 4 or use waterless hand -wash if 
appropriate:  
a. Before eating. 
b. Before and after having direct contact with a patient’s intact skin (taking a pulse 
or blood pressure, performing physical examinations, lifting the patient in bed) 
c. After contact with blood, body fluids or excretions, mucous membranes, non-
intact skin, or wound dressings 
d. After contact with inanimate objects (including medical equipment) near the 
patient 
 
1  HCA Clinical Services Group “FAQ: HAI Reduction Strategy Nursing Hygiene Care Program: Chlorhexidine 
Gluconate (CHG) Bathing in the Non-ICU Setting”  
https://connect.medcity.net/c/document_library/get_file?uuid=2a8aa5f7-939f-01c4-ad5b-
9778b1b49b11&groupId=36137332 
2 https://www.cdc.gov/handhygiene/patients/index.html 
3 https://www.cdc.gov/handhygiene/providers/index.html 
4 Wash with soap and water:  
● When hands are visibly dirty 
● When hands are visibly dirty 
● After known or suspected exposure to Clostridium difficile  
● After known or suspected exposure to patients with infectious diarrhea during norovirus outbreaks 
● If exposure to Bacillus anthracis is suspected or proven 
● Before eating 
● After using a restroom  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-121 
Page 10 of 13 
 
e. If hands will be moving from a contaminated-body site to a clean-body site during 
patient care 
f. After glove removal 
g. After using a restroom 
I. Patient linens will be changed daily and as needed. 
J. Line care shall be performed per institutional policy and procedure (refer to institutional 
policies and/or procedures). 
K. When a recipient is discharged to the primary care or community health care professionals 
before engraftment, the Clinical Program shall verify that the following elements are available: 
1. A consult between the HSCT  Attending Physician and the receiving health care 
professional(s) regarding.  
a. Management of nausea, vomiting, pain, and other discomforts. 
b. Monitoring of blood counts and transfusion of blood products. 
c. Monitoring of infections and use of antimicrobials. 
d. Monitoring of organ dysfunction or failure and institution of treatment. 
e. Monitoring of graft failure and institution of treatment. 
f. Regular assessment for evidence of acute graft -vs-host disease (GVHD) using an 
established staging and grading system. 
g. Regular assessment for evidence of chronic GVHD using an established staging and 
grading system. 
L. Facilities shall provide an appropriate location, adequate space, and protection from airborne 
microbial contamination. 
M. Facilities shall provide appropriate medications, blood products, and additional care as 
required by the recipient. 
N. Nursing will provide education to patients and their family members on neutropenic 
precautions, fever, and interventions. Education will be documented in the patient’s medical 
record. 
O. The provider will activate the neutropenic order set when indicated.  
P. Nursing will notify the physician of the first neutropenic fever event and thereafter per 
institutional protocol. 
1. Start empiric antibiotics5. For febrile episodes lasting 3-7 days, the physician may start 
an antifungal medication. 
2. Nursing will continue assessment of the patient for fever and neutropenia. Side effects 
will be reported, and interventions documented in the patient’s medical record. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 The timely initiation of appropriate antimicrobial therapy is essential in the successful management of 
immunocompromised patients. 
  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-121 
Page 11 of 13 
 
ATTACHMENT 2. Thrombocytopenic Guidelines 
A. The following precautions should be implemented after the patient's platelets fall below 
50,000: 
1. Review standing orders for platelet transfusion parameters and transfuse accordingly. 
 
2. Avoid invasive procedures such as enemas, rectal meds, IM injections, or finger sticks 
unless ordered by an Oncology/Transplant attending physician.  
 
3. Consult the Transplant Physician/Provider before administration of any anticoagulant 
medications. 
 
4. Avoid medications that slow blood clotting such as aspirin or ibuprofen. 
 
5. Women who are menstruating should use sanitary pads instead of tampons.  
a. Nursing shall monitor and report how many pads are used per hour; saturation of 
more than one pad per hour should be reported immediately to the physician.  
 
6. Prepare the patient for a possible platelet transfusion. 
 
7. Implement fall guidelines and consider safety rounds for high-risk patients. 
 
8. Monitor daily platelet count. 
 
9. Hold pressure to venipuncture and arterial sites for at least 5 minutes and until bleeding 
stops. 
 
10. For critical bleeding, notify the physician immediately. Prepare patient to receive blood 
products and fluids. Monitor vital signs frequently and hold pressure to bleeding areas 
as appropriate. 
 
11. Provide the patient and/or family with the following instructions. 
a.  Avoid blowing the nose, picking the nose, or using decongestant nose sprays. 
b. Avoid straining while having a bowel movement. Avoid vigorous wiping after a 
bowel movement. 
c.  Do not use enemas or rectal suppositories. Utilize stool softeners to keep stool soft. 
d. Use a soft toothbrush or toothettes. Do not use dental floss or toothpicks. 
e.  Do not use razors with blades to shave. Use electric clippers and electric razors, as 
necessary. 
f.  Avoid sharp objects such as scissors and nail clippers. 
g. Wear non-slip footwear when out of bed to prevent falls. 
 
12. Education will be documented in the patient’s medical record. 
 
  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-121 
Page 12 of 13 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 3. Masking Guidelines 
 
1. All patients will wear a standard surgical mask when out of the HEPA-filtered care areas and 
when being transported to/from unit for any reason.  
 
2. For patients with an ANC less than or equal to 500 neutrophils per milliliter and/or if they are 
on immunosuppressant therapy (including Cellcept, Tacrolimus, Cyclosporine, steroids, etc.), 
even discharged and readmitted, will wear a facemask outside of the HEPA-filtered unit, or 
until the attending physician releases the patient from needing to wear a mask. 
 
3. Masks must cover the patient’s nose and mouth to offer effective protection. 
 
4. All visitors are required to wear a facemask that covers their nose and mouth when in the 
healthcare setting in keeping with institutional standards. The number of visitors to a patient 
may be limited in accordance with hospital policies/protocols or based on the patient’s 
condition.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
 
CT-CLIN-121 
Page 13 of 13 
 
ATTACHMENT #4 Immunosuppressant Diet 
 
