 
1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Emergency Management 
Subject:  Tornado Plan (Code Gray) Section:  A 
Date of Origination:  June 2000 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: 4/30/2019 Serial Code:  ECEP004  
Date Last Reviewed: 05/02/2024 
 
Purpose: 
The purpose of the Tornado Plan is to provide specific instruction for the safety of the patients, visitors, 
and staff in the event of a Tornado. 
 
Policy:  
The Tornado Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency Operations Plan (ECEP001) to guide 
the hospital’s preparation and response in the event of a tornado.  
 
Weather Monitoring: 
The Regulatory Safety Officer or designee shall monitor weather reports and inform the Administrator on 
Call of any tornado warnings within the East Baton Rouge and/or Ascension Parish Area. 
Mitigation: Continuous Annual Planning 
1. Formation of Disaster Teams—upon hire and annually during evaluations, team members will be 
asked to declare this disaster team that they would like to participate on (see ECEP014 Disaster 
Staffing Policy) 
2. The hospital Emergency Management Committee will review and revise the Hazard Vulnerability 
Analysis annually 
 
Authorization to Activate: 
1. The Tornado Plan may be activated if either the following criteria is present: 
a. A Tornado has been sighted in the immediate area. 
b. A Tornado is indicated in the immediate area by radar. 
2. The Administrator on Call and/or the Chief Operating Officer in coordination with the Regulatory 
Safety Officer will determine and activate the Hospital Incident Command System and the 
emergency event plan for a Tornado. 
3. The Incident Commander will determine and activate the appropriate HICS positions to respond 
to the incident. 
 
Notification: 
 
1. Acting on the recommendation of the Regulatory Safety Officer, the AOC/ Incident Commander 
will notify the PBX page operator to clearly announce three times a “Code Gray: Tornado” to 
notify all staff of a tornado. (Plain Talk - “Code Gray -Severe Weather Warning. Shelter in place, 
close blinds, stay clear of windows. Team please activate your emergency response plans.”)  
2 
2. Administration will begin the Administrative call out process to all hospital leaders such as 
Senior Administrators, Divisional Directors, Directors, Department Heads, Managers, and 
Supervisors to inform them of the event. 
3. The RAVE Text Lake Alert system will be utilized to notify Team Members. 
 
Response: **NOTE: Elevators may not be used when the Tornado Plan has been activated. 
1. All emergency events will be managed by following the Emergency Operations Plan (ECEP-
001). 
 
2. See also Department Specific Response: Tornado and Responsibility Matrix (below). 
 
Department Specific Response Tornado 
A. Patient Care Areas 
1. Emergency Care Unit 
• Instruct all patients, visitors, and staff to move into interior hallways or stairwells away 
from windows and glass as quickly as possible. Crouch or sit on the floor if possible. 
• Report unit census and bed availability to Medical Care Branch Director as soon as 
possible and as often as requested throughout the event.  
• ECU Charge Nurse will report regularly to the Medical Care Branch Director the 
number of victims received, type of injuries, and any resource needs identified. 
2. Perioperative Services 
• Preoperative services will be delayed upon notification of the Incident 
Commander/AOC or designee. 
• Procedures in progress will continue until finished with updates on the situation 
provided frequently. 
• Instruct all patients, visitors, and staff to move into interior hallways or stairwells away 
from windows and glass as quickly as possible. Crouch or sit on the floor if possible. 
3. All Other Patient Care Units 
• Instruct all patients, visitors, and staff to move into interior hallways or stairwells away 
from windows and glass as quickly as possible. Crouch or sit on the floor if possible. 
• Report unit census and bed availability to Medical Care Branch Director as soon as 
possible and as often as requested throughout the event 
B. Clinical Support Areas (Pharmacy, Laboratory, Blood Bank, Imaging and Respiratory Care) 
• All areas will complete an inventory of supplies and scheduled services and report status to the 
Medical Care Branch Director as soon as possible.  
• The Operations Section Chief and Medical Staff Specialist will determine if any changes will 
be made to scheduled services or procedures.   
3 
C. Non-Clinical Support Areas 
1. Materials Management/ Linen / Nutritional Services  
• Upon notification of the event, all areas will complete an inventory of supplies and 
report to the Infrastructure Branch Director as soon as possible and as often as 
requested.  
• Linen Services will assist with providing blankets for protection to patients, visitors, and 
staff. 
2. Plant Services 
• Plant Services will check and complete a review of all utility systems to ensure they are 
functioning properly and report status to the Infrastructure Branch Director. 
• Plant Services will assess the need for additional Utility support and report any needs to 
the Infrastructure Branch Director as soon as possible.  
3. Security  
• Assist the Information Desk personnel with securing and clearing the Lobby and Gift 
Shop of all patients, visitors, staff and guests, direct them to the nearest shelter areas 
(inner corridors on the first floor). 
• Assist the Cafeteria personnel with clearing and securing the area of all patients, visitors, 
staff and guests, direct them to the nearest shelter areas (inner corridors on the first 
floor). 
• Security will assess the need for additional resources and report any needs and concerns 
to the Security Branch Director when identified.  
 
Responsibility Matrix 
 
Department/ 
Personnel 
Job Function/ Responsibility 
Administrator on 
Call (AOC)/ House 
Manager 
 Assume the role of Incident Commander. 
 Determine the need and type of emergency event policies, plans and procedures to 
implement to respond to a tornado. 
 Activate appropriate HICS positions. 
 Notify PBX to announce a “Code Gray: Tornado” 
 Obtain additional resources when needed. 
PBX / Page 
Operator 
 Clearly announce three times, on the overhead paging system “Code Gray: 
Tornado, please implement all safety measures immediately” when instructed to do 
so by the Incident Commander/AOC. 
 Await notification to call an “All Clear-Code Gray” from the Incident 
Commander/AOC. 
Patient Care Areas: 
Charge Nurse 
 Assure that all back-up communication devices are functional and charged: Cell 
phones, PAMEX, flashlights, other pertinent equipment. 
 Report and maintain unit census and bed availability information to the (Medical 
Care Branch Director)  
4 
o Number of patients and pertinent patient information 
o Number of possible discharges 
o Number of available beds 
 Direct and guide nursing staff in all procedures and response actions. 
Patient Care Areas: 
All Staff 
 Conduct an inventory of all medical supplies and equipment, report status to 
Medical Care Branch Director. 
 Move ambulatory patients to the corridor outside of the patients’ room. 
 Position non-ambulatory patients away from windows, move them as close to the 
room door as possible. 
 Direct patients, visitors, staff and guests to move as far away from windows as 
possible and assume a crouched (ball) position. 
 Provide blankets for protection for all patients, visitors, and guests, when available. 
 Evacuate the area if needed. 
 Wait further instructions from the Charge Nurse. 
Perioperative 
Services 
 Conduct an inventory of all medical supplies and equipment, report status to the 
Medical Care Branch Director. 
 Assure that all back-up communication devices are functional and charged: cell 
phones, PAMEX, flashlights, other pertinent equipment. 
 Report and maintain unit census and bed availability information to the (Medical 
Care Branch Director) 
o Number of patients and pertinent patient information 
o Number of occupied or operating rooms in use 
o Move ambulatory and non-ambulatory patients to the inner corridors of the 
facility. 
 Direct patients, visitors, staff and guests to move as far away from windows as 
possible (the inner corridors of the facility) and assume a crouched (ball) position. 
 Provide blankets for protection for all patients, visitors, and guests when available. 
 Evacuate the area if needed. 
Security or 
designee 
 Clear the Lobby, Gift Shop and other high traffic areas of all visitors, staff and 
guests. 
 Clear the hospital cafeteria of all visitors, staff, and guests. 
 Direct all visitor and guests to the nearest shelter areas: inner hallways of the first 
floor, away from all windows. 
 Direct all employees to report to their units/departments. 
 Implement controlled access at all entrances. 
Plant Services  Ensure that all entrances to the hospital are closed including:  
o Doors, fire doors, elevator hatches, windows, etc. 
 Ensure that the generator(s) is operational and fueled. 
All other 
departments 
 Instruct all patients, visitors, staff and guests to move into the interior hallways or 
stairwells of the facility. 
 Direct all patients, visitors, staff and guests to assume a crouched or ball position 
for protection from flying debris. 
 Close all doors, fire doors and windows in your surrounding area. 
 Remain in the safe area until an “All Clear-Code Gray” has been called. 
 
Recovery 
1. See Emergency Operations Plan (ECEP-001) 