Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Emergency Management 
Subject:  Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Plan Section:  A 
Date of Origination:  November 1999 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: December 2004 Serial Code:  ECEP008 Appendix A 
Date Last Reviewed: 05/02/2024 
Isolation precautions 
Agents of bioterrorism are generally not transmitted from person to person; re-aerosolization of these 
agents is unlikely4. All patients, including symptomatic patients with suspected or confirmed 
bioterrorism-related illnesses, are to be managed utilizing Standard Precautions. Standard Precautions 
are designed to reduce transmission from both recognized and unrecognized sources of infection, and are 
recommended for all patients receiving care, regardless of their diagnosis or presumed infection status5. 
For certain diseases or syndromes (e.g., smallpox and pneumonic plague), additional precautions 
may be needed to reduce the likelihood for transmission.  
 
STANDARD PRECAUTIONS 
Standard Precautions, as defined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), are designed 
to reduce the risk of transmission of most disease causing microorganisms in any type of health care 
setting regardless of the patient’s presumed or diagnosed infectious status. Except for smallpox, viral 
hemorrhagic fevers, and pneumonic plague, most infectious diseases caused by bioterrorism agents are 
rarely, if ever, transmitted from person-to-person. Standard Precautions should be integrated into all 
healthcare worker/patient care interactions that include contact with: 
• Blood 
• Non-intact skin 
• Body fluids regardless of the presence or absence of visible blood (urine, feces, vomitus, wound and 
lesion drainage, pulmonary secretions including nasal and salivary secretions and tears) 
• Skin soiled with visible blood or other body fluids 
• Mucous membranes 
The following diseases require Standard Precautions to reduce the risk of transmission to health care 
workers. 
Bioterrorism Diseases 
• Bacillus anthracis – Anthrax (See contact Precautions) 
• Brucellae species – Brucellosis 
• Clostridium Botulinum - Botulism 
• Coxiella burnetii - Q fever 
• Francisella tularensis – Tularemia (See Contact Precautions) Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 2 
 
OSHA Bloodborne Pathogens Standard 
Healthcare workers should follow facility specific policies and procedures related to reducing the risk of 
occupational exposure to blood and other potentially infectious materials as required by the Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration’s (OSHA) Bloodborne Pathogens Standard. 
Visitors 
Limit visitors to immediate family members and significant others. Instruct visitors to wash their hands 
before and after patient contact and before leaving the patient’s room. 
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) 
Gloves 
Wear disposable gloves when contact with blood and body fluids is anticipated. Gloves should also be 
worn when touching environmental surfaces and patient care articles likely to be contaminated or soiled 
with blood or body fluids. Gloves should be put on just prior to performing a patient care task that 
involves contact with blood or body fluids and removed immediately, without touching non-contaminated 
surfaces, when the task is complete. When performing multiple procedures on the same patient, gloves 
should be changed after contact with blood and body fluids that contain high concentrations of 
microorganisms (e.g., feces, wound drainage or oropharyngeal secretions) and before contact with a clean 
body site such as non-intact skin and vascular access sites. 
Facial Protection 
Wear disposable, fluid-resistant masks and eye shields (goggles with side-shields) or a face shield when 
performing patient care tasks likely to generate splashing or spraying of blood and body fluids onto the 
mucous membranes of the face. 
Gowns 
Wear disposable fluid-repelling gowns to protect skin and clothing when performing procedures likely to 
generate splashing or spraying of blood and body fluids. Plastic aprons may be worn for procedures likely 
to soil clothing but are unlikely to generate splashing or spraying of blood or body fluids (e.g., cleaning 
incontinent patients). The material composition of the gown should be appropriate to the amount of fluid 
penetration likely to be encountered. Remove soiled gowns after patient contact. 
Handwashing 
Wash hands promptly after contact with blood and other body fluids or with articles and surfaces 
contaminated or soiled with blood and body fluids regardless of whether gloves are worn. HCW should 
wash their hands when otherwise indicated to prevent transfer of microorganisms from one patient to 
another. Alcohol foams or gels can be used for routine handwashing unless hands are visibly soiled, or the 
patient has Anthrax.  Bacillus anthracis (Anthrax) produces spores which are not inactivated by the 
alcohol, thus requiring mechanical cleaning with soap and water. 
 Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 3 
CONTACT PRECAUTIONS 
Cutaneous anthrax and tularemia, although rare, can be transmitted to healthcare workers by contact with 
the infected patient’s wound or lesion drainage. In addition to Contact Precautions, Standard Precautions 
should be followed. 
Patient Placement 
Place the patient in a private room, if available. Patients with the same diagnosis may be cohorted 
(grouped) in semi-private rooms. When a private room or cohorting is not achievable, separate infected 
patients at least three (3) feet away from non-infected patients. 
Visitors 
Limit visitors to immediate family members or significant others. Instruct visitors to wash their hands 
their hands before and after patient contact and before leaving the patient’s room. 
Patient’s Clothing 
Bag patient’s clothing and send home with a family member. Instruct family members to wear gloves 
when handling clothes soiled with wound or lesion drainage. Clothes should be washed in warm or hot 
water using a commercial laundry product. If no family member is available, follow the facility procedure 
for washing and drying patient’s clothes. 
 
AGENT SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS 
A. Anthrax 
1. Description of Agent / Syndrome 
a. Etiology 
Anthrax is an acute infectious disease caused by Bacillus anthracis, a spore forming, gram-
positive bacillus. Associated disease occurs most frequently in sheep, goats, and cattle, which 
acquire spores through ingestion of contaminated soil. Humans can become infected through skin 
contact, ingestion, or inhalation of B. anthracis spores from infected animals or animal products 
(as in "woolsorter’s disease" from exposure to goat hair). Person-to-person transmission of 
inhalational disease does not occur. Direct exposure to vesicle secretions of cutaneous anthrax 
lesions may result in secondary cutaneous infection.1  
b. Clinical features 
Human anthrax infection can occur in three forms: pulmonary, cutaneous, or gastrointestinal, 
depending on the route of exposure. Of these forms, pulmonary anthrax is associated with 
bioterrorism exposure to aerosolized spores.9 Clinical features for each form of anthrax includes: 
Pulmonary  
• Non-specific prodrome of flu-like symptoms follows inhalation of infectious spores. 
• Possible brief interim improvement. 
• Two to four days after initial symptoms, abrupt onset of respiratory failure and 
hemodynamic collapse, possibly accompanied by thoracic edema and a widened 
mediastinum on chest radiograph suggestive of mediastinal lymphadenopathy and 
hemorrhagic mediastinitis. 
• Gram-positive bacilli on blood culture, usually after the first two or three days of illness. 
• Treatable in early prodromal stage. Mortality remains extremely high despite antibiotic Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 4 
treatment if it is initiated after onset of respiratory symptoms. 
Cutaneous 
• Local skin involvement after direct contact with spores or bacilli. 
• Commonly seen on the head, forearms or hands. 
• Localized itching, followed by a papular lesion that turns vesicular, and within 2 -6 days 
develops into a depressed black eschar. 
• Usually non-fatal if treated with antibiotics. 
Gastro-intestinal 
• Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and fever following ingestion of contaminated food, 
usually meat.  
• Bloody diarrhea, hematemesis.  
• Gram-positive bacilli on blood culture, usually after the first two or three days of illness.  
• Usually fatal after progression to toxemia and sepsis.10 
c. Modes of transmission 
The spore form of B. anthracis is durable. As a bioterrorism agent, it could be delivered as an 
aerosol. The modes of transmission for anthrax include: 
• Inhalation of spores.  
• Cutaneous contact with spores or spore-contaminated materials.  
• Ingestion of contaminated food.1 
d. Incubation period 
The incubation period following exposure to B. anthracis ranges from 1day to 8 weeks (average 
5days), depending on the exposure route and dose: 
• 2-60 days following pulmonary exposure. 
• 1-7 days following cutaneous exposure.  
• 1-7 days following ingestion. 
e. Period of communicability 
Transmission of anthrax infections from person to person is unlikely. Airborne transmission does 
not occur, but direct contact with skin lesions may result in cutaneous infection. 6 
2. Preventive Measures 
a. Vaccine availability 
• Inactivated, cell-free anthrax vaccine (Bioport Corporation 517/327-1500, formerly Michigan 
Biologic Products Institute*) – limited availability. 
*Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not constitute 
endorsement by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
b. Immunization recommendations 
• Routinely administered to military personnel. Routine vaccination of civilian populations not 
recommended.1,10-12 
3. Infection Control Practices for Patient Management  Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 5 
Symptomatic patients with suspected or confirmed infections with B. anthracis should be managed 
according to current guidelines specific to their disease state. Recommendations for chemotherapy are 
beyond the scope of this document. Additional information and recommendations for therapy may be 
obtained from the local and state health department and the CDC Emergency Preparedness and 
Response office, 1-888-246-2675, and the CDC Clinician Hotline, 1-877-554-4625.  
a. Isolation precautions 
Standard Precautions are used for the care of patients with infections associated with B. anthracis. 
Standard Precautions include the routine use of gloves for contact with nonintact skin, including 
rashes and skin lesions. 
b. Patient placement 
Private room placement for patients with anthrax is not necessary. Airborne transmission of 
anthrax does not occur. Skin lesions may be infectious, but requires direct skin contact only.  
c. Patient transport 
Standard Precautions should be used for transport and movement of patients with B. anthracis 
infections. 
d. Cleaning, disinfection, and sterilization of equipment and environment 
Principles of Standard Precautions should be generally applied for the management of patient-
care equipment and for environmental control.  
e. Discharge management 
No special discharge instructions are indicated. Home care providers should be taught to use 
Standard Precautions for all patient care (e.g., dressing changes). 
f. Post-mortem care 
Standard Precautions should be used for post-mortem care. Standard Precautions include wearing 
appropriate personal protective equipment, including masks and eye protection, when generation 
of aerosols or splatter of body fluids is anticipated.5  
4. Post Exposure Management 
a. Decontamination of patients / environment 
The risk for re-aerosolization of B. anthracis spores appears to be extremely low in settings where 
spores were released intentionally or were present at low or high levels. In situations where the 
threat of gross exposure to B. anthracis spores exists, cleansing of skin and potentially 
contaminated fomites (e.g. clothing or environmental surfaces) may be considered to reduce the 
risk for cutaneous and gastrointestinal forms of disease. The plan for decontaminating patients 
exposed to anthrax may include the following: 
• Instructing patients to remove contaminated clothing and store in labeled, plastic bags.  
• Handling clothing minimally to avoid agitation.  
• Instructing patients to shower thoroughly with soap and water (and aiding if necessary).  
• Instructing personnel regarding Standard Precautions and wearing appropriate barriers (e.g. 
gloves, gown, and respiratory protection) when handling contaminated clothing or other 
contaminated fomites.  
• Decontaminating environmental surfaces using an EPA-registered, -approved 
sporicidal/germicidal agent or 0.5% hypochlorite solution (one-part household bleach added Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 6 
to nine parts water).5,6 
b. Prophylaxis and post-exposure immunization 
Recommendations for prophylaxis are subject to change. Up-to-date recommendations should be 
obtained in consultation with local and state health departments and CDC. Prophylaxis should be 
initiated upon confirmation of an anthrax exposure (Table 1 and Table 2). 
c. Triage and management of large-scale exposures / potential exposures 
Pharmacy, and local and state health department will be responsible for identification of: 
• Sources of prophylactic antibiotics and planning for acquisition on short notice.  
• Locations, personnel needs and protocols for administering prophylactic post -exposure care 
to large numbers of potentially exposed individuals. 
• Means for providing telephone follow -up information and other public communications 
services. 
Intensive Care Unit Managers, Respiratory Care, Anesthesia, and Administration will need to 
consider: 
• How limited numbers of ventilators will be distributed in the event of many patients arriving 
with abrupt pulmonary decompensation.  
• How additional ventilators can be obtained. 
• In the event of severely limited ventilator availability, whether and when ventilator support 
will be discontinued for a terminally ill individual.3,10,11 
5. Laboratory Support and Confirmation 
Diagnosis of anthrax is confirmed by aerobic culture performed in a BSL -2 laboratory.1 
a. Diagnostic samples  
Diagnostic samples to obtain include: 
• Blood cultures. 
• Acute serum for frozen storage. 
• Stool culture if gastrointestinal disease is suspected. 
b. Laboratory selection 
Handling of clinical specimens should be coordinated with local and state health departments, and 
undertaken in BSL -2 or -3 laboratories. The FBI will coordinate collection of evidence and 
delivery of forensic specimens to FBI or Department of Defense laboratories. 
c. Transport requirements 
Specimen packaging and transport must be coordinated with local and state health departments, 
and the FBI. A chain of custody document should accompany the specimen from the moment of 
collection. For specific instructions, contact the local and state health department and the CDC 
Emergency Preparedness and Response office, 1-888-246-2675. Identification of appropriate 
packaging materials and transport media will be coordinated by the Laboratory. 
6. Patient, Visitor, and Public Information 
CDC Fact sheets for distribution have been prepared and are available from Infection Control. 
The information includes the explanation that people recently exposed to B. anthracis are not 
contagious, and antibiotics are available for prophylactic therapy along with the anthrax vaccine. Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 7 
Dosing information and potential side effects should be explained clearly. Decontamination 
procedures, i.e., showering thoroughly with soap and water; and environmental cleaning, i.e., 
with 0.5% hypochlorite solution ( one-part household bleach added to nine parts water), are 
described. Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 8 
ANTHRAX – QUICK REFERENCE 
Any suspected case of anthrax (Bacillus anthracis) MUST BE TREATED AS A PUBLIC HEALTH 
EMERGENCY and reported to the infection control practitioner (225) 765-8864, and the Office of 
Public Health, (800) 256-2748.  
Bioterrorism Epidemiology: 
• Inhalation anthrax: most likely disease presentation if bacilli intentionally aerosolized 
• Person to person transmission does NOT occur 
Incubation Period: 
• Average 1 – 6 days 
• Up to 6 weeks following a bio-aerosol release 
Clinical Disease: 
• Gastrointestinal: abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea, hematemesis 
• Cutaneous: pruritic skin lesion with black eschar and tissue edema, 
• Inhalation: Bi-phasic illness 
• Initial phase: flu-like symptoms, low grade fever, non-productive cough, malaise, fatigue, 
myalgias, mild chest discomfort followed by a short period (several hours to days) of 
improvement 
• Acute phase: abrupt onset of respiratory distress with dyspnea, stridor, cyanosis, high fever, 
shock and death within 24 – 36 hours. 
Diagnosis: 
• Presumptive diagnosis based on characteristic skin lesion (cutaneous), intestinal bleeding 
(gastrointestinal) and respiratory failure with widening mediastinum (inhalation). 
Treatment: (See overview) 
• Early antibiotic treatment is critical to survival 
• Ciprofloxacin, Penicillin G (if susceptible), Doxycycline 
Prophylaxis: (See overview) 
• Early antibiotic prophylaxis is critical to preventing disease 
• Ciprofloxacin, Doxycycline 
Isolation: 
• Inhalation: Standard Precautions 
• Cutaneous and gastrointestinal: Standard and Contact Precautions 
Table 1: Anthrax – Antibiotic Therapy for Contained Casualty Settings 
Contained casualty setting: assumes a limited number of persons seeking treatment. Start IV therapy as 
soon as diagnosis suspected. 
Patient Category Antibiotic  Comment 
Adults: Preferred Therapy: Give IV antibiotics until Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 9 
In vitro studies suggest that 
ofloxacin 400 mg IV q 12 hours or 
levofloxacin 500 mg IV q 24 
hours can be substituted for 
ciprofloxacin however these 
antibiotics will, most likely not be 
included in the National 
Pharmaceutical Stockpile. 
*Ciprofloxacin 1 400 mg IV q 
12 hours 
*Doxycycline 200 mg IV 
loading, then 100 mg IV q 12 
hours, or 
Erythromycin 15 – 20 
mg/kg/day in divided doses 
Therapy if stain is susceptible: 
*Penicillin 2 G 20 MU/day IV 
in divided doses (if 
susceptible) 
clinically stable then switch to an 
oral antibiotic to complete 60 
days of treatment. Switch IV 
penicillin to Amoxicillin 500 mg 
PO q 8 hours when clinically 
stable to complete 60 days 
treatment. 
Children: 
The use of tetracyclines and 
fluoroquinolones in children has 
well known adverse effects. These 
risks must be weighed carefully 
against the risk of developing life-
threatening disease. If a release of 
B anthracis is confirmed, children 
should be treated initially with 
ciprofloxacin or doxycycline, but 
therapy should be changed to 
penicillin as soon as penicillin 
susceptibility is confirmed. 
Preferred Therapy: 
*Ciprofloxacin 1, 3 15 mg/kg q 
12 hours, or 
*Doxycycline 4 
• If >8 years and > 45 kg: 
give 200mg loading dose, 
then 100 mg q12 hours. 
• If > 8 years and = 45 kg: 
give 4.4mg/kg loading 
dose, then 2.2 – 4.4 
mg/kg/day in 2 divided 
doses. 
• If = 8 years: same as > 8 
years and = 45 kg, 
Therapy if stain is susceptible: 
*Penicillin G 2 400,000 
units/kg/day in divided doses 
(if susceptible) 
Give IV antibiotics until 
clinically stable then switch to an 
oral antibiotic to complete 60 
days of treatment. 
Switch IV penicillin to PO 
Amoxicillin: 
• If = 20 kg: give 500 mg PO q 
8 hour; or 
• If < 20 kg: give 40 mg/kg 
divided into 3 doses to be 
taken q 8 hours 
To complete 60 days of 
treatment. 
Pregnancy: 5 
High mortality rate from the 
infection outweighs the risk posed 
by antibiotics. 
Same as for non-pregnant 
adults 
Oral doxycycline not 
recommended for more than 14 
days 
  
Immunocompromised Same as adults and children   
* Antibiotics supplied as part of the National Pharmaceutical Stockpile (NPS) 
1. Therapy with ciprofloxacin may be initiated either as intravenous or oral dosage. The 
pharmacokinetics are such that oral ciprofloxacin is rapidly absorbed in the GI tract with no 
substantial loss by first-pass metabolism. Maximum serum concentrations are attained 1 – 2 hours 
after oral dosing. Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 10 
2. If tested for susceptibility, therapy should be changed to IV penicillin. 
3. Ciprofloxacin dose should not exceed 1 gram/day in children. 
4. In 1991 the American Academy of Pediatrics amended their recommendation to allow treatment of 
young children with tetracyclines for serious infections such as Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever for 
which doxycycline may be indicated. Doxycycline is preferred for its twice-a-day dosing and low 
incidence of gastrointestinal side effects. 
5. Although tetracyclines are not recommended during pregnancy, its use may be indicated for life-
threatening infections. Adverse affects on developing teeth and bone are dose related, therefore, 
doxycycline might be used for short course therapy (7 – 14 days) prior to the 6th month of gestation. 
After the 6th month, professional consultation should be obtained. 
Table 2: Anthrax – Antibiotic Therapy for Mass Casualty Settings or Post-Exposure 
Prophylaxis 
Mass Casualty Setting or Post -Exposure Prophylaxis 
Patient Category Antibiotic Comment 
Adults, including pregnant 
women and 
immunocompromised 
Preferred treatment: 
*Ciprofloxacin 500 mg PO q 
12 hours, or 
*Doxycycline 1 100 mg PO q 
12 hours 
Therapy if strain is 
susceptible: 
Amoxicillin 500 mg PO q 8 
hours 
Duration of therapy is 60 days 
Children 
The use of tetracyclines and 
fluoroquinolones in children has 
well known adverse effects. These 
risks must be weighed carefully 
against the risk of developing life-
threatening disease. If a release of 
B anthracis is confirmed, children 
should be prophylaxed initially 
with ciprofloxacin or doxycycline 
but therapy should be changed to 
amoxicillin as soon as penicillin 
susceptibility is confirmed. 
Preferred treatment: 
*Ciprofloxacin 15 – 20 mg/kg 
PO q12 hours (not to exceed 1 
gm/day), 
or 
*Doxycycline 2 
• >8 years and > 45 kg: 
give 200mg loading dose, 
the 100 mg q12 hours. 
• < 8 years and = 45 kg: 
give 4.4mg/kg loading 
dose then 2.2 – 4.4 
mg/kg/day in 2 divided 
doses. 
• = 8 years: same as > 8 
years and = 45 kg, 
Duration of therapy is 60 days Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 11 
Therapy if strain is 
susceptible: 
Amoxicillin 
• If = 20 kg: give 500 mg PO 
q 8 hour; or 
• If < 20 kg: give 40 mg/kg 
divided into 3 doses to be 
taken q 8 hours 
* Antibiotics supplied as part of the National Pharmaceutical Stockpile (NPS) 
1. Although tetracyclines are not recommended during pregnancy, its use may be indicated for life-
threatening infections. Adverse affects on developing teeth and bone are dose related, therefore, 
doxycycline might be used for short course therapy (7 – 14 days) prior to the 6th month of gestation. 
After the 6th month, professional consultation should be obtained. 
2. In 1991, the American Academy of Pediatrics amended their recommendation to allow treatment of 
young children with tetracyclines for serious infections for which doxycycline may be indicated such 
as Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever. Doxycycline is preferred for its twice-a-day dosing and low 
incidence of gastrointestinal side effects. 
Reference: DHS -(California Department of Health Services) 10 -05-01 California Hospital 
Bioterrorism Response Planning Guide. 
Prophylaxis should continue until B. anthracis exposure has been excluded. If exposure is confirmed, 
prophylaxis should continue for 8 weeks. In addition to prophylaxis, post -exposure immunization 
with an inactivated, cell -free anthrax vaccine is also indicated following anthrax exposure. If 
available, post -exposure vaccination consists of three doses of vaccine at 0, 2 and 4 weeks after 
exposure. With vaccination, post-exposure antimicrobial prophylaxis can be reduced to 4 weeks. 1 Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 12 
B. Botulism 
1. Description of Agent / Syndrome 
a. Etiology 
Clostridium botulinum is an anaerobic gram -positive bacillus that produces a potent 
neurotoxin, botulinum toxin. In humans, botulinum toxin inhibits the release of acetylcholine, 
resulting in characteristic flaccid paralysis. C. botulinum produces spores that are present in 
soil and marine sediment throughout the world. Foodborne botulism is the most common 
form of disease in adults. An inhalational form of botulism is also possible13. Botulinum toxin 
exposure may occur in both forms as agents of bioterrorism. 
b. Clinical features 
Foodborne botulism is accompanied by gastrointestinal symptoms. Inhalational botulism and 
foodborne botulism are likely to share other symptoms including: 
• Responsive patient with absence of fever. 
• Symmetric cranial neuropathies (drooping eyelids, weakened jaw clench, difficulty 
swallowing or speaking). 
• Blurred vision and diplopia due to extra-ocular muscle palsies. 
• Symmetric descending weakness in a proximal to distal pattern (paralysis of arms 
first, followed by respiratory muscles, then legs). 
• Respiratory dysfunction from respiratory muscle paralysis or upper airway obstruction 
due to weakened glottis. 
• No sensory deficits. 
c. Mode of transmission 
Botulinum toxin is generally transmitted by ingestion of toxin -contaminated food 6. 
Aerosolization of botulinum toxin has been described and may be a mechanism for 
bioterrorism exposure 11. 
d. Incubation period  
• Neurologic symptoms of foodborne botulism begin 12 – 36 hours after ingestion. 
• Neurologic symptoms of inhalational botulism begin 24- 72 hours after aerosol exposure. 
e. Period of communicability 
Botulism is not transmitted from person to person.10  
2. Preventive Measures 
a. Vaccine availability 
A pentavalent toxoid vaccine has been developed by the Department of Defense. This 
vaccine is available as an investigational new drug (contact USAMRIID, 301/619 -2833). 
Completion of a recommended schedule (0, 2, 12 weeks) has been shown to induce protective 
antitoxin levels detectable at 1-year post vaccination. 
b. Immunization recommendations 
Routine immunization of the public, including healthcare workers, is not recommended.11 
3. Infection Control Practices for Patient Management  Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 13 
Symptomatic patients with suspected or confirmed botulism should be managed according to current 
guidelines.14 Recommendations for therapy are beyond the scope of this document. For up -to-date 
information and recommendations for therapy, contact the CDC Clinician Hotline, (877) 554-4625 or 
Louisiana Office of Public Health, (800) 256-2748.  
a. Isolation precautions 
Standard Precautions are used for the care of patients with botulism. 
b. Patient placement 
Patient-to-patient transmission of botulism does not occur. Patient room selection and care 
should be consistent with policy. 
c. Patient transport 
Standard Precautions should be used for transport and movement of patients with botulism. 
d. Cleaning, disinfection, and sterilization of equipment and environment 
Principles of Standard Precautions should be generally applied to the management of patient -
care equipment and environmental control. 
e. Discharge management 
No special discharge instructions are indicated. 
f. Post-mortem care 
Standard Precautions should be used for post-mortem care. 5 
4. Post Exposure Management 
Suspicion of even single cases of botulism should immediately raise concerns of an outbreak 
potentially associated with shared contaminated food. In collaboration with CDC and local /state 
health departments, attempts should be made to locate the contaminated food source and identify 
other persons who may have been exposed. 13 Any individuals suspected to have been exposed to 
botulinum toxin should be carefully monitored for evidence of respiratory compromise.14 
a. Decontamination of patients / environment 
Contamination with botulinum toxin does not place persons at risk for dermal exposure or 
risk associated with re-aerosolization. Therefore, decontamination of patients is not required.  
b. Prophylaxis and post-exposure immunization 
Trivalent botulinum antitoxin is available by contacting state health departments or by 
contacting CDC (404/639 -2206 during office hours, 404/639 -2888 after hours). This horse 
serum product has a <9% percent rate of hypersensitivity reactions. Skin testing should be 
performed according to the package insert prior to administration.14 
c. Triage and management of large-scale exposures / potential exposures 
Patients affected by botulinum toxin are at risk for respiratory dysfunction that may 
necessitate mechanical ventilation. Ventilatory support is required, on average, for 2 to 3 
months before neuromuscular recovery allows unassisted breathing. Large-scale exposures to 
botulinum toxin may overwhelm an institution’s available resources for mechanical 
ventilation. Sources of auxiliary support and means to transport patients to auxiliary sites, if 
necessary, should be planned in advance with coordination among neighboring .6,10 
5. Laboratory Support and Confirmation 
a. Obtaining diagnostic samples Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 14 
Routine laboratory tests are of limited value in the diagnosis of botulism. Detection of toxin 
is possible from serum, stool samples, or gastric secretions. For advice regarding the 
appropriate diagnostic specimens to obtain, contact state health authorities or CDC 
(Foodborne and Diarrheal Diseases Branch, 404/639-2888). 
b. Laboratory selection 
Handling of clinical specimens should be coordinated with local and state health departments. 
The FBI will coordinate collection of evidence and delivery of forensic specimens to FBI or 
Department of Defense laboratories. 
c. Transport requirements 
Specimen packaging and transport must be coordinated with local and state health 
departments, and the FBI. A chain of custody document should accompany the specimen 
from the moment of collection. For specific instructions, contact the local and state health 
department and the CDC Emergency Preparedness and Response office, 1-888-246-2675.  
Identification of appropriate packaging materials and transport media will be coordinated by 
the Laboratory.  
6. Patient, Visitor, and Public Information 
CDC Fact sheets for distribution have been prepared and are available from Infection Control. 
The information includes the explanation that people exposed to botulinum toxin  are not 
contagious. A clear description of symptoms including blurred vision, drooping eyelids, and 
shortness of breath is included with instructions to report for evaluation and care if such 
symptoms develop. 
  
  Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 15 
BOTULISM – QUICK REFERENCE 
Any suspected case of botulism (Clostridium botulinum) MUST BE TREATED AS A PUBLIC 
HEALTH EMERGENCY and reported to the Infection Control Practitioner (225) 765-8864 and 
the Office of Public Health, (800) 256-2748.  
Bioterrorism Epidemiology: 
• Botulinum toxins are considered the most lethal substances known to man. 
• Intentional exposure could occur through contaminated food or water or by bio-aerosol. 
• Person to person transmission does NOT occur. 
Incubation Period: 
• 12 – 36 hours following exposure, but may be as long as several days, depending on the size of 
the inoculum and route of exposure. 
Clinical Disease: 
• Foodborne: Acute bilateral cranial nerve impairment, blurred or double vision, ptosis, dysphagia, 
dry mouth, slurred speech, afebrile, alert and oriented 
• Cranial nerve palsies, dilated pupils (50%), urinary retention 
• Symptoms may progress to a symmetrical flaccid paralysis in which sensation is completely 
preserved and result in respiratory failure 
• Inhalation: Symptoms would be like foodborne illness 
Diagnosis: 
• Presumptive - based on symptoms 
• Tensilon test may be slightly positive 
• Brain imaging (CT or MRI), lumbar puncture and edrophonium chloride tests normal 
• Electromyography may show decreased amplitude of action potentials in involved muscle group 
Treatment: (See overview) 
• Botulism antitoxin – must be obtained through the local health department 
• Most effective if administered early in disease 
• Mechanical ventilation 
Isolation: 
Standard Precautions Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 16 
C. Plague 
1. Description of Agent / Syndrome 
a. Etiology 
Plague is an acute bacterial disease caused by the gram -negative bacillus Yersinia pestis, 
which is usually transmitted by infected fleas, resulting in lymphatic and blood infections 
(bubonic and septicemia plague). A bioterrorism -related outbreak may be expected to be 
airborne, causing a pulmonary variant, pneumonic plague.3,10 
b. Clinical features  
Clinical features of pneumonic plague include: 
• Fever, cough, chest pain. 
• Hemoptysis. 
• Muco-purulent or watery sputum with gram-negative rods on gram stain. 
• Radiographic evidence of bronchopneumonia.10 
c. Modes of transmission 
• Plague is normally transmitted from an infected rodent to man by infected fleas. 
• Bioterrorism-related outbreaks are likely to be transmitted through dispersion of an 
aerosol. 
• Person-to-person transmission of pneumonic plague is possible via large aerosol 
droplets.6 
d. Incubation period  
The incubation period for plague is normally 2 – 8 days if due to fleaborne transmission. The 
incubation period may be shorter for pulmonary exposure (1-3 days).10 
e. Period of communicability 
Patients with pneumonic plague may have coughs productive of infectious particle droplets. 
Droplet precautions, including the use of a mask for patient care, should be implemented until 
the patient has completed 72 hours of antimicrobial therapy.3,6 
2. Preventive Measures 
a. Vaccine availability 
Formalin-killed vaccine exists for bubonic plague but has not been proven to be effective for 
pneumonic plague. It is not currently available in the United States. 
b. Immunization recommendations 
Routine vaccination requires multiple doses given over several weeks and is not 
recommended for the general population.3 Post-exposure immunization has no utility. 
3. Infection Control Practices for Patient Management  
Symptomatic patients with suspected or confirmed plague should be managed according to current 
guidelines. Recommendations for specific therapy are beyond the scope of this document. For up -to-
date information and recommendations for therapy, contact the CDC Clinician Hotline (877) 554 -
4625, or Louisiana Office of Public Health, (800) 256-2748.  
a. Isolation precautions Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 17 
For pneumonic plague, Droplet Precautions should be used in addition to Standard 
Precautions.  
• Droplet Precautions are used for patients known or suspected to be infected with 
microorganisms transmitted by large particle droplets, generally larger than 5  in size, 
that can be generated by the infected patient during coughing, sneezing, talking, or during 
respiratory-care procedures.  
• Droplet Precautions require healthcare providers and others to wear a surgical -type mask 
when within 3 feet of the infected  patient. Masks are required to be worn to enter the 
room of a patient on Droplet Precautions. 
• Droplet Precautions should be maintained until patient has completed 72 hours of 
antimicrobial therapy. 
b. Patient placement 
Patients suspected or confirmed to have pneumonic plague require Droplet Precautions. 
Patient placement recommendations for Droplet Precautions include: 
• Placing infected patient in a private room.  
• Cohort in symptomatic patients with similar symptoms and the same presumptive 
diagnosis (i.e. pneumonic plague) when private rooms are not available. 
• Maintaining spatial separation of at least 3 feet between infected patients and others when 
cohorting is not achievable.  
• Avoiding placement of patient requiring Droplet Precautions in the same room with an 
immunocompromised patient. 
• Special air handling is not necessary, and doors may remain open. 
c. Patient transport 
• Limit the movement and transport of patients on Droplet Precautions to essential medical 
purposes only.  
• Minimize dispersal of droplets by placing a surgical -type mask on the patient when 
transport is necessary.5,6 
d. Cleaning, disinfection, and sterilization of equipment and environment 
Principles of Standard Precautions should be generally applied to the management of patient -
care equipment and for environmental control (see Section I for more detail).5 
e. Discharge management 
Generally, patients with pneumonic plague would not be discharged until no longer infectious 
(completion of 72 hours of antimicrobial therapy) and would require no special discharge 
instructions. In the event of a large bioterrorism exposure with patients receiving care in their 
homes, home care providers should be taught to use Standard and Droplet Precautions for all 
patient care. 
f. Post-mortem care 
Standard Precautions and Droplet Precautions should be used for post-mortem care. 5 
4. Post Exposure Management 
a. Decontamination of patients / environment Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 18 
The risk for re-aerosolization of Y. pestis from the contaminated clothing of exposed persons 
is low. In situations where there may have been gross exposure to Y. pestis, decontamination 
of skin and potentially contaminated fomites (e.g. clothing or environmental surfaces) may be 
considered to reduce the risk for cutaneous or bubonic forms of the disease. 3 The plan for 
decontaminating patients may include: 
• Instructing patients to remove contaminated clothing and storing in labeled, plastic bags. 
• Handling clothing minimally to avoid agitation.  
• Instructing to patients to shower thoroughly with soap and water (and aiding if 
necessary). 
• Instructing personnel regarding Standard Precautions and wearing appropriate barriers 
(e.g. gloves, gown, face shield) when handling contaminated clothing or other 
contaminated fomites. 
• Performing environmental surface decontamination using an EPA -registered, -approved 
sporicidal/germicidal agent or 0.5% hypochlorite solution ( one-part household bleach 
added to nine parts water).5,6 
b. Prophylaxis 
• Recommendations for prophylaxis are subject to change. Up -to-date recommendations 
should be obtained in consultation with local and state health departments and CDC.  
• Post-exposure prophylaxis should be initiated following confirmed or suspected 
bioterrorism Y. pestis exposure, and for post -exposure management of healthcare 
workers and others who had unprotected face -to-face contact with symptomatic patients 
(Table 3 and Table 4).  
• Recommendations 1 for the treatment of patients with pneumonic plague in a contained 
and mass casualty setting and for post-exposure prophylaxis.2 
• Prophylaxis should continue for 7 days after last known or suspected Y. pestis exposure, 
or until exposure has been excluded.10 
• Employee Health/ Infection Control will assist in identifying and managing health care 
workers exposed to infectious patients. In general, maintenance of accurate occupational 
health records will facilitate identification, contact, assessment, and delivery of post -
exposure care to potentially exposed healthcare workers3,11,12 
c. Triage and management of large-scale exposures / potential exposures 
• The masks in the Isolation Carts are appropriate for Droplet Precautions. These masks 
can be obtained from Materials Management for large numbers of patients and staff. 
Instruction and reiteration of requirements for Droplet Precautions (as opposed to 
Airborne Precautions) will be necessary to promote compliance and minimize fear and 
panic related to an aerosol exposure. 
• Administration, Patient Care Services, and Pharmacy will identify: 
• Sources of bulk prophylactic antibiotics and planning for acquisition on short notice. 
• Locations, personnel needs and protocols for administering prophylactic post -
exposure care to large numbers of potentially exposed individuals.  
• Means for providing telephone follow -up information and other public 
communications services. Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 19 
5. Laboratory Support and Confirmation 
Laboratory confirmation of plague is by standard microbiologic culture, but slow growth and 
misidentification in automated systems are likely to delay diagnosis. For decisions regarding 
obtaining and processing diagnostic specimens, contact state laboratory authorities or CDC. 
a. Diagnostic samples  
Diagnostic samples to obtain include: 
• Serum for capsular antigen testing. 
• Blood cultures. 
• Sputum or tracheal aspirates for Gram’s, Wayson’s, and fluorescent antibody 
staining. 
• Sputum or tracheal aspirates for culture. 
b. Laboratory selection 
Handling of clinical specimens should be coordinated with local and state health departments, 
and undertaken in Bio -Safety Level (BSL) -2 or -3 laboratories. 3 The FBI will coordinate 
collection of evidence and delivery of forensic specimens to FBI or Department of Defense 
laboratories. 
c. Transport requirements 
Specimen packaging and transport must be coordinated with local and state health 
departments, and the FBI. A chain of custody document should accompany the specimen 
from the moment of collection. For specific instructions, contact the local and state health 
department and the CDC Emergency Preparedness and Response office, 1 -888-246-2675.  
Identification of appropriate packaging materials and transport media will be coordinated by 
the Laboratory. 
6. Patient, Visitor, and Public Information 
CDC Fact sheets for distribution should be prepared and are available from Infection Control. The 
information includes a clear description of Droplet Precautions, symptoms of plague, and instructions 
to report for evaluation and care if such symptoms are recognized. The difference between 
prophylactic antimicrobial therapy and treatment of an actual infection is clarified. Decontamination 
by showering thoroughly with soap and water may be recommended. Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 20 
PLAGUE – QUICK REFERENCE 
Any suspected case of plague (Yersinia pestis) MUST BE TREATED AS A PUBLIC HEALTH 
EMERGENCY and reported to the infection control practitioner (225) 765-8864, and the Louisiana 
Office of Public Health (800) 256-2748. 
Bioterrorism Epidemiology: 
• Pneumonic plague: most likely disease presentation if bacilli intentionally aerosolized. 
• Bubonic plague: most likely disease presentation if infected fleas released. 
Transmission: 
• Person to person exposure to respiratory droplets (within 3 feet) 
• Contact with infected animals 
• Contact with infected, draining buboes 
Incubation Period: 
• Pneumonic: 1 – 3 days. 
• Bubonic: 2 – 10 days. 
Clinical Disease: 
• Pneumonic: acute onset high fever, chills, headache, myalgias, malaise, cough (hemoptysis) 
progressing rapidly to dyspnea, stridor, cyanosis, and death; gastrointestinal symptoms may be 
present. 
• Bubonic: high fever, malaise, painful lymph nodes common in groin 
• Septicemic: 80% of persons with bubonic become septic; 5 – 15% develop pneumonia. 
Diagnosis: 
• Presumptive diagnosis: gram-negative coccobacilli with "safety-pin" bipolar staining on Gram, 
Wright, Giemsa, or Wayson stain of blood, sputum, CSF, or lymph node aspirates (if present). 
Treatment: (see overview) 
• Early antibiotic treatment is critical to survival. 
• Gentamicin, Doxycycline, or Ciprofloxacin 
Prophylaxis: (see overview) 
• Early antibiotic prophylaxis is critical to preventing disease. 
• Doxycycline or Ciprofloxacin, 
Isolation: 
• Pneumonic: Standard and Droplet Precautions 
• Bubonic: Standard and Contact Precautions. Droplet Precautions if bubonic progresses to 
pneumonia. 
Table 3: Plague – Antibiotic Therapy for Contained Casualty Settings 
Contained casualty setting: assumes a limited number of persons seeking treatment. 
Start IV therapy as soon as diagnosis is suspected Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 21 
Patient Category Recommended Therapy 
Adults Preferred Therapy 
*Gentamicin 5 mg/kg IM or IV 1 time daily or 
*Gentamicin 2 mg/kg loading dose followed by 1.7 mg/kg IM or 
IV 3 times daily 3 
Alternative Choices 
*Doxycycline 100 mg IV 2 times daily 
*Ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV 2 times daily 4 
Chloramphenicol 25 mg/kg IV 4 times daily 5 
Children 6 Preferred Therapy 
*Gentamicin 2.5 mg/kg IM or IV 3 times daily 3 
Alternative Choices 
*Doxycycline 
= 45 kg give adult dose 
< 45 kg give 2.2 mg/kg IV 2 times daily (Maximum 200 mg 
daily) 
*Ciprofloxacin 15 mg/kg 2 times daily 4 
Chloramphenicol 15 mg/kg IV 4 times daily 5 
Pregnant Women 7 Preferred Therapy 
*Gentamicin 5mg/kg IM or IV 1 time daily or 
*Gentamicin 2 mg/kg loading dose followed by 1.7 mg/kg IM or 
IV 3 times daily 3 
Alternative Choices 
*Doxycycline 100 mg IV 2 times daily 
*Ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV 2 times daily 4 
Table 4: Plague – Antibiotic Therapy for Mass Casualty Settings and Post-exposure Prophylaxis 
Mass Casualty Setting and Post-exposure Prophylaxis 8 
Adults Preferred Choices 
*Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times daily 9 
*Ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally 2 times daily 4 
Alternate Choice 
Chloramphenicol 25 mg/kg orally 4 times daily 5 
Children 6 Preferred Choices Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 22 
*Doxycycline 9 
If = 45 kg give adult oral dose 
If < 45 kg give 2.2 mg/kg orally 2 times daily 
*Ciprofloxacin 20 mg/kg orally 2 times daily 4 
Pregnant Women 7 Preferred Choices 
*Ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally 2 times daily 4 
*Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times daily 9 
Alternate choice 
Chloramphenicol 25 mg/kg 4 times daily 5 
* Antibiotic supplied as part of the National Pharmaceutical Stockpile (NPS) 
1. These recommendations are adapted from the consensus recommendations of the Working Group on 
Civilian Biodefense and are not necessarily approved by the Food and Drug Administration. In non-
bioterrorism response situations, routine treatment guidelines should be followed. Refer to the 
original publication (Inglesby TV, Dennis DT, Henderson DA, et al. Plague as a Biological Weapon: 
Medical and Public Health Management, JAMA. 2000;283: 2281-2289) for explanations and further 
discussion. 
2. One antimicrobial agent should be selected. Therapy with gentamicin or ciprofloxacin should be 
continued for 10 days. Treatment with doxycycline or chloramphenicol should be continued for 14 –
21 days. Persons beginning treatment with parenteral doxycycline, ciprofloxacin, or chloramphenicol 
can be switched to oral antibiotics when clinically indicated. 
3. Aminoglycosides must be adjusted according to renal function. Evidence suggests that gentamicin     
5 mg/kg IM or IV one time daily would be efficacious in children, although this is not yet widely 
accepted in clinical practice. Neonates up to 1 week of age and premature infants should receive 
gentamicin 2.5 mg/kg 2 times daily. 
4. Other fluoroquinolones can be substituted at doses appropriate for age. Ciprofloxacin dosage should 
not exceed 1 g daily in children. 
5. Concentration should be maintained between 5 and 20 ug/mL. Concentrations greater than 25 ug/mL 
can cause reversible bone marrow suppression. Children younger than 2 years should not receive 
chloramphenicol. 
6. In children, ciprofloxacin does should not exceed 1 g daily, chloramphenicol should not exceed 4 g 
daily. Children younger than 2 years should not received chloramphenicol. In neonates, gentamicin-
loading dose of 4 mg/kg should be given initially. 
7. Alternatives to breastfeeding may be required while the mother is taking certain antibiotics. Consult 
specific antibiotic package insert for information on breastfeeding. 
8. Duration of treatment for plague in mass casualty situations is 10 days. Duration of post-exposure 
prophylaxis to prevent plague infection is 7 days. 
9. Tetracycline may be substituted for doxycycline. 
Reference: DHS -(California Department of Health Services) 10 -05-01 California Hospital 
Bioterrorism Response Planning Guide. Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 23 
DROPLET PRECAUTIONS * 
Pneumonic plague can be transmitted to healthcare workers when the infected patient coughs, sneezes, or 
speaks. Transmission requires close contact (within 3 feet) between the infected patient and the healthcare 
worker. In addition to Standard Precautions, Droplet Precautions should be followed for patients with 
suspect or diagnosed pneumonic plague. 
Patient Placement 
Place the patient in a private room, if available. Patients with the same diagnosis or similar syndrome may 
be cohorted (grouped) in semi-private rooms. When a private room or cohorting is not achievable, 
spatially separate the infected patient three (3) or more feet away from a non-infected patient. Negative 
pressure isolation rooms or HEPA filtration units are not required. The door to the patient’s room can 
remain open. 
Respiratory Protection 
Wear a surgical mask over the nose and mouth when entering the patient’s room or within 3 feet of the 
infected patient. 
Transporting Patients 
Transport infected patients only when necessary. Place a surgical mask over the patient’s nose and mouth, 
if tolerated. If an elevator is used, all occupants should be masked. 
Visitors 
Limit visitors to immediate family members or significant others. Instruct visitors to wash their hands 
before and after patient contact and to wear a surgical mask when within three feet of the infected patient. 
 
AGENT SPECIFIC INFORMATION 
A. Smallpox 
1. Description of Agent / Syndrome 
a. Etiology 
Smallpox is an acute viral illness caused by the variola virus. 11 Smallpox is a bioterrorism 
threat due to its potential to cause severe morbidity in a nonimmune population and because it 
can be transmitted via the airborne route. 10 A single case is considered a public health 
emergency. 
b. Clinical features 
Acute clinical symptoms of smallpox resemble other acute viral illnesses, such as influenza. 
Skin lesions appear, quickly progressing from macules to papules to vesicles. Other clinical 
symptoms to aid in identification of smallpox include: 
• 2-4 day, non-specific prodrome of fever, myalgias. 
• rash most prominent on face and extremities (including palms and soles) in contrast to 
the truncal distribution of varicella (chickenpox). 
• rash scabs over in 1-2 weeks.  
• In contrast to the rash of varicella  (chickenpox), which arises in "crops,"  variola rash 
has a synchronous onset.10 
c. Mode of transmission Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 24 
Smallpox is transmitted via both large and small respiratory droplets. Patient -to-patient 
transmission is likely from airborne and droplet exposure, and by contact with skin lesions or 
secretions. Patients are considered more infectious if coughing or if they have a hemorrhagic 
form of smallpox. 
d. Incubation period  
The incubation period for smallpox is 7-17 days; the average is 12 days. 
e. Period of communicability 
Unlike varicella, which is contagious before the rash is apparent, patients with smallpox 
become infectious at the onset of the rash and remain infectious until their scabs separate 
(approximately 3 weeks).6,10  
2. 2. Preventive Measures 
a. Vaccine availability 
A live-virus intradermal vaccination is available for the prevention of smallpox.12 
b. Immunization recommendations 
Since the last naturally acquired case of smallpox in the world occurred more than 20 years 
ago, routine public vaccination has not been recommended. 3 Vaccination against smallpox 
does not reliably confer lifelong immunity. Even previously vaccinated persons should 
be considered susceptible to smallpox.  
3. Infection Control Practices for Patient Management  
Symptomatic patients with suspected or confirmed smallpox should be managed according to current 
guidelines. Recommendations for specific therapy are beyond the scope of this document. For up -to-
date information and recommendations for therapy, contact the CDC Clinician Hotline (877) 554-
4625 or Louisiana Office of Public Health (800) 256-2748.  
a. Isolation precautions 
For patients with suspected or confirmed smallpox, both Airborne and Contact Precautions 
should be used in addition to Standard Precautions.  
• Airborne Precautions are used for patients known or suspected to be infected with 
microorganisms transmitted by airborne droplet nuclei (small particle residue, 5  or 
smaller in size) of evaporated droplets containing microorganisms that can  remain 
suspended in air and can be widely dispersed by air currents. 
• Airborne Precautions require healthcare providers and others to wear respiratory 
protection when entering the patient room. (Appropriate respiratory protection must meet 
the minimal NIOSH standard for particulate respirators, N95).5,15 
• Contact Precautions are used for patients known or suspected to be infected or colonized 
with epidemiologically important organisms that can be transmitted by direct contact 
with the patient or indirect contact with potentially contaminated surfaces in the patient’s 
care area. 
• Contact Precautions require healthcare providers and others to: 
• Wear clean gloves upon entry into patient room.  
• Wear gown for all patient contact and for all contact with the patient’s 
environment. Gown must be removed before leaving the patient’s room. Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 25 
• Wash hands using an antimicrobial agent. 
b. Patient placement 
Patients suspected or confirmed with smallpox require placement in rooms that meet the 
ventilation and engineering requirements for Airborne Precautions, use the negative air 
Isolation Rooms, which include: 
• Monitored negative air pressure in relation to the corridor and surrounding areas. 
• 6 – 12 air exchanges per hour. 
• Appropriate discharge of air to the outdoors or monitored high efficiency filtration of air 
prior to circulation to other areas. 
• The door that must remain closed. 
• Patient placement in a private room is preferred. However, in the event of a large 
outbreak, patients who have active infections with the same disease (i.e., smallpox) may 
be cohorted in rooms that meet appropriate ventilation and airflow requirements for 
Airborne Precautions.5,6 
c. Patient transport 
• Limit the movement and transport of patients with suspected or confirmed smallpox to 
essential medical purposes only.  
• When transport is necessary, minimize the dispersal of respiratory droplets by placing a 
mask on the patient, if possible5 
d. Cleaning, disinfection, and sterilization of equipment and environment 
A component of Contact Precautions is careful management of potentially contaminated 
equipment and environmental surfaces.  
• When possible, non-critical patient care equipment should be dedicated to a single patient 
(or cohort of patients with the same illness). 
• If use of common items is unavoidable, all potentially contaminated, reusable equipment 
should not be used for the care of another patient until it has been appropriately cleaned 
and reprocessed. Policies should be in place and monitored for compliance. 5 
e. Discharge management 
In general, patients with smallpox will not be discharged until determined they are no longer 
infectious. Therefore, no special discharge instructions are required.  
f. Post-mortem care 
Airborne and Contact Precautions should be used for post-mortem care.5 
4. Post Exposure Management 
a. Decontamination of patients / environment 
• Patient decontamination after exposure to smallpox is not indicated. 
• Items potentially contaminated by infectious lesions should be handled using Contact 
Precautions.6 
b. Prophylaxis and post-exposure immunization 
Recommendations for prophylaxis are subject to change. Up-to-date recommendations should Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 26 
be obtained in consultation with local and state health departments and CDC.  
Post-exposure immunization with smallpox vaccine (vaccinia virus) is available and 
effective. Vaccination alone is recommended if given within 3 days of exposure. Passive 
immunization is also available in the form of vaccinia immune -globulin (VIG) (0.6ml/kg 
IM). If greater than 3 days has elapsed since exposure, both vaccination and VIG are 
recommended. 12 VIG is maintained at USAMRIID, 301/619-2833.10 11   
Vaccination is generally contraindicated in pregnant women, and persons with 
immunosuppression, HIV–infection, and eczema, who are at risk for disseminated vaccinia 
disease. However, the risk of smallpox vaccination should be weighed against the likelihood 
for developing smallpox following a known exposure. VIG should be given concomitantly 
with vaccination in these patients. 11 
Following prophylactic care, exposed individuals should be instructed to monitor themselves 
for development of flu -like symptoms or rash during the incubation period (i.e., for 7 to 17 
days after exposure) and immediately report to designated care sites selected to minimize the 
risk of exposure to others. 
Employee Health/ Infection Control will assist in identifying and managing health care 
workers exposed to infectious patients. In general, maintenance of accurate occupational 
health records will facilitate identification, contact, assessment, and delivery of post-exposure 
care to potentially exposed healthcare workers. 
c. Triage and management of large-scale exposures / potential exposures 
Infection Control and Administration in cooperation with Plant Services staff will coordinate 
and identify sites to provide necessary parameters for Airborne Precautions.  
Laboratory Support and Confirmation 
a. Diagnostic samples to obtain 
For decisions regarding obtaining and processing diagnostic specimens, contact state 
laboratory authorities or CDC. 
b. Laboratory selection 
Handling of clinical specimens must be coordinated with state health departments, CDC, and 
USAMRIID. Testing can be performed only in BSL - 4 laboratories.11 The FBI will 
coordinate collection of evidence and delivery of forensic specimens to FBI or Department of 
Defense laboratories. 
c. Transport requirements 
Specimen packaging and transport must be coordinated with local and state health 
departments, and the FBI. A chain of custody document should accompany the specimen 
from the moment of collection. For specific instructions, contact the local and state health 
department and the CDC Emergency Preparedness and Response office, 1-888-246-2675.  
Identification of appropriate packaging materials and transport media will be coordinated by 
Laboratory. 
5. Patient, Visitor, and Public Information 
CDC Fact sheets for distribution should be prepared, and are available from Infection Control. 
The information includes a clear description of symptoms and where to report for evaluation and 
care if such symptoms are recognized. Details about the type and duration of isolation are 
included. Vaccination information that details who should receive the vaccine and possible side Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 27 
effects are also included. Extreme measures such as burning or boiling potentially exposed 
materials are discouraged. 
  Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 28 
SMALLPOX – QUICK REFERENCE 
Any suspected or confirmed case of smallpox MUST BE TREATED AS A PUBLIC HEALTH 
EMERGENCY and reported to the Infection Control Practitioner (225) 765-8864 and the 
Louisiana Office of Public Health (800) 256-2748. 
Bioterrorism Epidemiology: 
• Transmission: highly contagious; person-to-person contact with respiratory secretions; coughing 
patients most contagious; contact with lesions and fomites (clothes and bed linens). 
• Persons vaccinated prior to 1972 DO NOT have immunity. Persons vaccinated multiple times 
(military prior to 1990 and foreign travelers prior to 1972) may have some residual immunity. 
Incubation Period: 
• Average 12 – 14 days; range 7-17 days. 
Clinical Disease: 
• Acute onset of malaise, rigors, vomiting, headache, backache, possible delirium; high fever (up to 
40.5 C) at or just prior to onset of rash, maculopapular rash predominate on face and mucous 
membranes of mouth, pharynx migrating to forearms, legs, palms and soles then to trunk. 
Diagnosis: 
• Presumptive diagnosis based on signs and symptoms. 
Differential Diagnosis: 
• Chicken pox, allergic contact dermatitis, erythema multiforme with bullae, secondary syphilis, 
atypical measles (Chickenpox eruptions are more numerous on trunk than on face and 
extremities. Lesions occur in crops in different stages of development and are superficial with 
rare scar formation). 
Treatment: 
• Provide supportive care, pain and fever control, sedation for delirium; maintain hydration; 
antibiotics for secondary infection. 
Prophylaxis: 
• See Smallpox Vaccination Recommendations 
Isolation: 
• Special Isolation: See Smallpox Isolation Recommendations. 
  
SMALLPOX – RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ISOLATION 
Introduction 
Recommendations for smallpox isolation were developed to assist infection control practitioners (ICP) in 
California in developing a rational approach to reducing the risk of transmission of a highly contagious 
virus. Because of the small particle size, smallpox virus can be easily be dispersed by air currents or on 
dust particles over long distances and may be inhaled by many susceptible hosts within a short period of 
time. In addition to airborne transmission, smallpox can be transmitted by contact with draining skin 
lesions and by contact with surfaces and articles such and clothing and bed linens soiled or contaminated 
with the virus. In contrast, microorganisms that require Droplet Precautions such as pneumonic plague are 
quite large and do not travel more than three (3) feet from the infected patient and, therefore, are unlikely Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 29 
to be dispersed throughout the hospital. 
There is some controversy about how long a facility should maintain isolation after a smallpox 
bioterrorist event. Some authorities recommend that isolation should be maintained until all healthcare 
workers in the facility have been vaccinated. However, if a bioterrorism event were to take place and if 
multiple outbreaks were to occur throughout the United States there may not be sufficient vaccine to meet 
the demand. Additionally, if the vaccine is not administered within 3 – 4 days after the first date of 
exposure, it may not prevent the infection from occurring. Therefore, the current recommendation is to 
maintain isolation until the local health officer declares that smallpox is no longer a threat to HCW or the 
public. 
OSHA Bloodborne Pathogens Standard 
Healthcare workers should follow facility specific procedures related to reducing the risk of occupational 
exposure to blood and other potentially infectious materials as required by the California Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration’s (CAL-OSHA) Bloodborne Pathogens Standard. 
Training 
Healthcare workers who will be expected to provide direct and indirect patient care should be specifically 
trained in methods to reduce the risk of exposure to patients infected with smallpox. 
Isolation Recommendations 
Room Placement 
Although patients with smallpox should be isolated in negative pressure rooms with adjoining anterooms 
these facilities may be limited or, in some hospitals, non-existent. Several options for isolating patients 
with smallpox are presented. Plan A or B is the best approach when only a limited number of cases are 
anticipated. If the outbreak escalates, plan C or D may have to be implemented to accommodate 
increasing numbers of patients. 
Plan A: - Negative Pressure Isolation Room 
Place the patient in a private room that has (1) monitored negative air pressure in relation to the exterior 
surrounding areas, (2) 6 -12 air changes per hour (ACH), and (3) appropriate venting of contaminated air 
to the outside. If 6 – 12 ACH cannot be achieved, place a HEPA filtration unit in the room. The windows 
and doors should remain closed and the patient should remain in their room. 
Plan B: – No Negative Pressure Room 
If no negative pressure room is available, place the patient in a private room. The room should be 
equipped with a HEPA filtration unit. The windows and doors should remain closed and the patient 
should remain in their room. 
Plan C: – Designated Nursing Unit 
As the number of smallpox patients requiring hospitalization and isolation increases, consider designating 
a wing of a nursing unit or, preferentially, an entire nursing unit. If appropriate ventilation cannot be 
achieved, it may be necessary to create a barrier between the designated nursing unit (wing) and other 
areas of the hospital. Infection control practitioners should develop a plan consistent with the structure of 
the hospital and the ability to effectively isolate infected patients from non-infected patients. These 
barriers may include, but are not limited to, sealing off the existing ventilation system to prevent 
contaminated air from recirculating to other areas of the hospital, closing all windows and doors, 
including fire doors, and limiting access to the unit to trained personnel. 
Plan D: – Designated Health Facility 
The county or state emergency medical services agency may designate a specific facility such as a closed  Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 30 
 
 
Visitors 
Visitors should be limited to immediate family or significant others. Unvaccinated visitors should be 
encouraged to remain at home until vaccinated. If this is not an option, visitors should be instructed to 
wear PPE. 
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) 
The physical properties of PPE should be appropriate to the degree of exposure and the task(s) to be 
performed by HCW. Facility infection control committees should evaluate existing PPE to determine if 
the physical properties maximize HCW protection.  
Respirators 
Disposable N-95 respirators that filter particles to 0.02 microns should be worn when entering the room 
and removed after leaving the room. If patients cannot be placed in negative pressure or HEPA filtered 
rooms, HCW should always wear N-95 respirators when entering a designated smallpox unit. The 
respirator should be changed when moist or more frequently as necessary. 
Facial Shields or Eye Protectors 
Face shields or eye protectors with side shields should be worn when entering the room. 
Gowns 
Disposable, long sleeve, ribbed, or elastic-cuffed gowns or coveralls should be worn when entering the 
room and when contact with contaminated articles or surfaces is anticipated. The gown should be 
removed before leaving the patient’s room. After removal, clothing should not have contact with the 
patient or potentially contaminated surfaces or equipment. 
Gloves 
Disposable gloves should be worn when entering the room and when contact with skin, mucous 
membranes, skin lesions, blood, and other body fluids is anticipated. Gloves should cover the rib or 
elastic cuffs of the gown. All jewelry including rings should be removed. Gloves should be removed prior 
to leaving the room and hands should be washed immediately. 
Handwashing 
Hands should be washed with an antimicrobial hand hygiene product. Sink faucets should be foot or 
sensor-operated or should be turned off with a paper towel. Alcohol foams and gels should not be 
substituted for handwashing when sinks are immediately accessible. 
Transporting Patients 
Patients infected with smallpox should not leave their room. If patients must be transported, place a 
surgical mask over patient’s nose and mouth, if tolerated. Place a sheet or blanket over the patient 
completely covering the body from the neck to and including the feet. Cover the head and face (except the 
nose and mouth) with a towel. If an elevator is used to transport patients, all occupants should wear PPE 
including N-95 respirators. Only essential HCW should remain in the procedure room with the patient. 
Laboratory Specimens 
Specimens should be placed in a plastic, zip-lock bag that are tightly sealed and properly labeled. 
Patient Care Equipment 
Patient care equipment (e.g., thermometers, blood pressure cuffs, stethoscopes and commodes) should be Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 31 
kept in the patient’s room. Use disposable equipment whenever possible. Reusable equipment should be 
placed in an appropriately labeled container, sealed and transported to central service for reprocessing. 
Environmental Services 
Daily Cleaning 
Disinfect environmental surfaces in the patient’s room and bathroom with a properly diluted, 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) approved disinfectant such as a quaternary ammonium 
compound or a phenolic. Allow all surfaces to air dry. The disinfecting solution and a supply of other 
cleaning materials should be kept in the patient’s room. Privacy curtains should be changed when visibly 
soiled. Floors should be cleaned using a single-bucket procedure of wet mopping. The contents of the 
bucket should be emptied into the toilet. After each use, the mop head should be removed and disposed in 
the linen hamper. Disposable mop heads and cleaning cloths should be used, if available. The bucket and 
the mop handle should remain in the patient’s bathroom.  
Terminal Cleaning 
Terminal cleaning should be performed using similar procedures described for daily cleaning. If the room 
is under negative pressure or is HEPA filtered and there are at least 6 - 12 ACH, allow the room to air for 
at least 2 - 12 hours (depending on the number of ACH) before admitting a non-infected patient to the 
room. 
Soiled Linen 
Soiled linen should be placed in leak proof bags. Viral aerosols may be created during the initial bagging 
process therefore it is essential that bags be carefully sealed to reduce expulsion of air into the 
environment. When removed from the room, the bag should be placed in a second leak proof bag and 
clearly identified as "isolation" or "contaminated". The bag should be carefully secured and removed from 
the nursing unit in covered carts to a designated holding area. Chutes should not be used. 
Facility Operated Laundry 
Soiled linen should be autoclaved prior to transport to the laundry facility. If the linen is not autoclaved, 
facility laundry workers should wear PPE including N-95 respirators. 
Commercial Service 
Infection control practitioners should consult with the commercial laundry service to determine special 
requirements, if any, for labeling, transporting and processing soiled linen. As an alternative, linen should 
be autoclaved prior to transport to a commercial laundry service. 
 Patient’s Clothing 
Place patient’s clothing in a labeled, leak proof bag, and send to central service for autoclaving. 
Autoclaved clothing may then be sent home with the patient’s family or washed, if necessary, according 
to facility policy. 
Biohazardous Waste 
Waste receptacles should be lined with red biohazard bags. Viral aerosols may be created during the 
initial bagging process; therefore, it is essential that the bag be carefully sealed to reduce expulsion of air. 
When removed from the room, biohazardous waste should be placed in a second red bag and secured. 
Biohazardous waste should be removed in a covered cart to a designated biohazardous-waste holding 
area. Infection control practitioners should consult with the contracted waste hauler service for special 
instructions, if any, on transporting biohazardous waste. As an alternative, biohazardous waste can be 
autoclaved. 
Deceased Patient Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 32 
Place the deceased patient in a leak-proof body bag and transfer to the facility morgue. The body should 
not be embalmed. If an autopsy is requested, the Louisiana Department of Health Services should be 
notified. 
  
 
 
SMALLPOX – SPECIMEN COLLECTION 
Contact the Department of Health Services, Viral and Rickettsial Disease Laboratory Branch (510-307-
8611; fax 510- 307- 8599) prior to shipping any Biosafety Level IV specimens. 
Safety recommendations 
• Wear personal protective equipment 
• Use safety blood-collection equipment 
• Do not use glass vials or tubes 
• Dispose of needles, scalpel blades, and other sharp objects in sharps disposal container 
• Deposit waste in biohazard red bag 
• Seal all specimens with Parafilm 
• Transport all specimens in a double, sealed, plastic zip-lock bags 
Pustule/vesicle specimen collection 
• Open the top of a vesicle or pustule with a scalpel. 
• Express fluid from the vesicle or pustule onto a clean microscope slide and allow to air dry. Place 
the slide into a dry, plastic slide holder and seal. 
• Alternately, swab the base of the vesicle or pustule with a dry swab. Place the swab into a plastic, 
capped container. 
• Obtain at least three (3) slides or swabs. Label each slide or swab. 
• Do not place the slides from more than one patient in the same container. 
Scabs specimen collection 
• Remove scab with the blunt edge of a scalpel blade. 
• Deposit at least 12 scab specimens in a clean, dry, plastic tube containing no preservative and 
label. 
Blood specimens 
• Place 10 cc of blood into a labeled, red or marble-topped tube. 
• Allow blood to clot then separate serum from the clot. 
• Remove serum from collection tube and pour into a plastic, clean, screw-topped vial. 
• If a plastic serum separator tube is used, serum may be left in the tube. 
Label 
Label the specimen container with the patient’s name, medical record number, date and time specimen 
was collected, physician’s name and telephone number. Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 33 
  
SMALLPOX – VACCINATION INFORMATION 
The risk of smallpox occurring as a deliberate bio-aerosol release is considered low. Therefore, pre-
exposure vaccination is not recommended for any group other than laboratory or medical personnel 
working directly with the variola virus (research laboratory personnel). 
 
Vaccine effectiveness 
Smallpox vaccine can prevent or decrease the severity of clinical disease if administered before the 
outbreak or within 3 – 4 days after first exposure date. The effectiveness of the vaccine in preventing 
disease if given more than 7 days after the first exposure date is not known. 
Target populations 
Healthcare workers and persons who have unprotected face-to-face contact (within 6.5 feet) with a 
confirmed smallpox case will probably be the first to receive the vaccine.  
These groups include: 
• Persons exposed at the initial release site. 
• Persons who have face to face, household or close proximity (6.5 feet or 2 meters) contact with a 
confirmed or suspect case at any time from the onset of the infected person’s fever and until all 
the scabs have separated from the skin; 
• Laboratory personnel involved in the collection and processing of clinical specimens; and 
• Other persons at risk such as emergency medical services and law enforcement personnel. 
Expanded vaccination programs will depend on the extent of an outbreak and the availability of vaccine. 
Previous vaccination 
Persons vaccinated one time prior to 1972 have no residual immunity. Persons who have had multiple (2 
or more) vaccinations (military, foreign travelers) may have some residual immunity however this is 
unknown. 
Vaccine contraindications 
The risk of vaccination should be weighed against the likelihood of acquiring smallpox. Unless 
concurrently assessed by a physician, vaccination should not be administered to exposed persons or their 
household contacts if there is a history of any of the following conditions: 
• Current history of eczema, impetigo, atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis, varicella zoster, or 
other skin conditions 
• Pregnancy (all trimesters) 
• Persons with immunodeficient conditions such as current treatment for cancer (chemo/radiation 
therapy), receiving large doses of corticosteroids; or altered immune systems such 
agammaglobulinemia 
• HIV infection or AIDS 
• Allergies to polymixin B, streptomycin, tetracycline, neomycin 
Vaccine Administration 
The vaccine is administered using a special needle and multiple-skin punctures. The skin is punctured 15 Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 34 
times and a small amount of blood will be seen at the puncture site. 
Vaccine Response 
The vaccination is successful if the puncture site has a visible pimple with an area of redness surrounding 
the pimple within 2 – 5 days after vaccination. The pimple will become bigger over the next several days 
and eventually a dark colored scab will form. 
Major or Primary (first) Vaccine Response 
• Days 2 - 5: A red papule (pimple) is visible at the vaccination site; the papule progresses to a 
fluid-filled vesicle then to a pustule over the next few days. 
• Days 8 -10: The pustule reaches maximum size and contains turbid (cloudy) fluid (pus) 
surrounded by a red area. The red area may get bigger over the next 3 days. 
• Days 14 –21: The pustule dries, forms a scab, and eventually falls off. 
Previously Vaccinated Response 
• Revaccination is considered successful if a pustular lesion is present or an area of definite 
induration or congestion surrounding the scab is visible upon examination 6-8 days after 
revaccination. If the response peaks at 48 hours (hypersensitivity reaction), the person should be 
re-vaccinated. 
Equivocal Reaction 
• Equivocal reaction, including accelerated, modified, vacciniform, immediate, early or immune 
reactions are defined as all responses other than major reactions. If an equivocal reaction is 
observed, vaccination procedures should be checked and the vaccination repeated using vaccine 
from a different vial or from a different lot, if available. Difficulty in determining if the reaction 
were blunted could be caused by immunity, insufficient potent vaccine, or vaccination technique 
failure. If the repeat vaccination by using vaccine from a different vial or lot fails to elicit a major 
reaction, providers should consult with the local health officer before attempting another 
vaccination. 
Vaccination site care 
Complications associated with smallpox vaccination can be reduced when careful site care is practiced 
from the time vaccination is administered until the scab falls off the vaccination site. 
• Wash hands with soap and water before and after any contact with the vaccination site (e.g. 
dressing change, accidental scratching) or contact with any fluid or pus that might seep through 
the dressing. Do not touch the vaccination site (fluid or pus) with items such as cloth towels that 
may be used by another household member. 
• Always cover the vaccination site loosely with a gauze dressing. Secure the gauze loosely with 
tape. Occlusive dressings should not be used routinely because it may cause maceration at the 
vaccination site. 
• Soiled dressings should be sealed in a plastic bag before disposal. If the scab has fallen off the 
skin, the scab should also be sealed in a plastic bag. 
• Always keep the vaccination site dry. When bathing, place a gauze dressing over the vaccination 
site and then cover the site with a watertight dressing. To make a watertight dressing, cut a piece 
of plastic [Saran (R)] wrap large enough to extend 2 -3 inches beyond the vesicle. Place the wrap 
over the gauze and secure with tape. Remove the plastic wrap after bathing and apply a clean, 
dry, gauze dressing, if necessary. Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 35 
• Clothes that become soiled with fluid or pus from the drainage site should be removed and 
washed in hot water and bleach. 
• Report all vaccination complications to a health care worker (nurse or physician). 
• Monitor your temperature daily. If a fever occurs, take Tylenol (R) as directed on the package 
label. 
Vaccinated Health Care Workers 
Consult with Infection Control to determine if newly vaccinated health care workers may continue to 
have patient contact.  Because side effects from the vaccine vary among individuals, each health care 
worker will be evaluated on a case by case basis.  If allowed to work, the vaccination site must always be 
covered with a water-tight seal. Cover the vaccination site with a gauze dressing reinforced with a semi-
permeable dressing such as Opsite (R) or Tegaderm (R) during the work shift. Remove the semi-
permeable dressing at the end of the work shift. Practice meticulous handwashing before contact with all 
patients. Hands should be thoroughly washed after contact with fluid or pus that may accumulate under 
the semi-permeable dressing. 
Complications: 
• Fever 
Low-grade (100F–102F) fever and enlarged lymph nodes; occurs most commonly in children. 
• Autoinoculation 
Vaccinia virus is transferred from the site of vaccination by contaminated hands or articles such as 
clothes, sheets or towels. The most common sites involve the face, eyelid, nose, mouth genitalia and 
rectum. 
• Encephalitis 
Occurs 8-15 days after the vaccination; symptoms include fever, headache, vomiting, drowsiness, 
spastic paralysis, coma, and convulsions. 
• Progressive vaccinia 
Pustules fail to heal and spreads to surrounding tissue that becomes black and necrotic. 
• Eczema vaccinatum 
Lesions spread to areas of skin afflicted by eczema or other chronic or exfoliative skin conditions; 
symptoms may be mild to severe but may be fatal. 
• Generalized vaccinia 
Lesions spread to cover part or all the body 6-9 days after vaccination. 
  
Sample Smallpox Vaccination Consent Form 
I, _______________________________ (print name) have read the Smallpox Vaccination Information 
provided to me. I understand that there is a risk that complications may occur because of receiving the 
smallpox vaccination. 
I have had the opportunity to read and I understand the instructions for caring for the vaccination 
site. I understand that complications that may be associated with vaccination. I have had the 
opportunity to ask questions related to smallpox vaccination and have had my questions answered 
to my satisfaction. Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 36 
By my signature below, I accept the smallpox vaccination. 
Patient (Parent or Guardian) Signature:       Date: 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
Lot Number: ___________________________ Expiration Date: _______________________ 
Distribution center location: _____________________________________________________ 
Date: ____/____/____ 
Name title of person administering vaccination: ____________________________________ 
  
  
Instructions for Administering Smallpox Vaccine 
Vaccine Storage 
Smallpox (vaccinia) vaccine should be stored at 20 degrees C until reconstituted. 
Supplies 
• Vaccination Informed Consent 
• Vaccination Consent 
• Gloves 
• Alcohol wipes 
• Alcohol foam or gel (handwashing) 
• Vaccinia vaccine 
• Bifurcated needle (sterile) 
• Gauze pads 
• Tape (non-allergic) 
• Waste receptacle lined with a red bag and syringe disposal container 
Administrative Requirements 
• Distribute smallpox vaccination information and smallpox vaccination consent. 
• Collect signed consent and answer questions about vaccine administration. 
• Document date vaccination given, lot number, expiration date, and person administering vaccine. 
Administration of Vaccine 
• Reconstitute vaccine ampules as needed, do not reconstitute ahead of time. 
• Wear gloves on both hands; change gloves after vaccinating each person. 
• Vaccination site may be washed with soap and water and dried.  Do not use alcohol.  The 
vaccine is inactivated by alcohol. 
• Insert bifurcated needle into the reconstituted vaccine ampule and carefully withdraw the needle. 
A droplet of vaccine will be visible between the two prongs of the needle. 
• Hold the needle at a right angle (perpendicular) to the skin over the deltoid muscle (vaccinators Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 37 
wrist should rest against the patient’s arm). 
• Administer 15 rapid needle strokes in a 5-mm diameter area of the skin over the deltoid muscle 
vigorously enough to draw a trace of blood at the vaccination site. 
• Wipe excess vaccine from the vaccination site with dry gauze. 
• Cover the site with a dry gauze (non-occlusive) dressing. 
• Remove gloves and wash hands. 
• Discard gauze and gloves in the biohazardous waste receptacle. 
• Discard bifurcated needle and empty vaccine ampules in syringe disposal container. 
  Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 38 
TULAREMIA – QUICK REFERENCE 
Any suspected or confirmed case of tularemia (Francisella tularensis) MUST BE TREATED AS A 
PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY and reported to the Infection Control Practitioner, (225)765-
8864, and the Louisiana Office of Public Health, (800) 256-2748. 
Bioterrorism Epidemiology: 
• Exposure to 10 – 50 organisms can result in clinical disease. 
• Pneumonic tularemia is NOT transmitted from person to person. 
• Laboratory personnel are at high risk for infection. 
Incubation Period: 
• Average 3 to 5 days (range 1 to 21 days). 
Clinical Disease: (Six classic forms of tularemia that may overlap) 
• Pneumonic (most likely presentation): abrupt onset of fever, chills, headache, malaise, anorexia, 
cough (little or no sputum production), myalgias, pleuritic chest pain, substernal tightness, and 
rarely hemoptysis. Pneumonia may be primary or secondary to bacteremic dissemination from 
other tularemia syndromes. 
• Systemic: fever, chills, myalgias, sore throat, nausea, anorexia, vomiting, abdominal pain, and 
loose or watery diarrhea. 
• Oropharyngeal, ulceroglandular, oculoglandular or glandular – (See tularemia overview). 
Diagnosis: 
• Laboratory: elevated WBC, lactic acid dehydrogenase, serum transaminase, alkaline phosphatase, 
and possibly serum creatine kinase and urinary myoglobin levels. Pleural fluid generally 
exudative with >1000 leukocytes/mm 3. 
• Radiology: Chest x-ray may show infiltrates without symptoms; subsegmental/lobar infiltrates, 
hilar adenopathy, pleural effusion, granulomas, or miliary infiltrates (may mimic tuberculosis). 
Treatment: (See overview) 
• Gentamicin, Ciprofloxacin, or Doxycycline 
Prophylaxis: (See overview) 
• Doxycycline (may substitute tetracycline) or Ciprofloxacin 
Isolation: 
• Standard Precautions 
Recommendations 1 for the treatment of patients with tularemia in contained and mass casualty settings 
and for post-exposure prophylaxis 2 are as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 39 
 
Table 5: Tularemia – Antibiotic Therapy for Contained Casualty Settings 
Contained Casualty Setting: assumes a limited number of persons seeking treatment. 
Start IV antibiotic therapy as soon as diagnosis is suspected. 
Patient Category  Recommended Therapy 
Adults Preferred Therapy 
*Gentamicin 5 mg/kg IM or IV 1 time daily 3 or 
*Gentamicin 2 mg/kg loading dose followed by 1.7 mg/kg IM or 
IV 3 times daily 3 
Alternative Choices 
*Doxycycline 100 mg IV 2 times daily 
*Ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV 2 times daily 4 
Chloramphenicol 25 mg/kg IV 4 times daily 5 
Children 6 Preferred Therapy 
*Gentamicin 2.5 mg/kg IM or IV 3 times daily 3 
Alternative Choices 
*Doxycycline = 45 kg give adult dose 
< 45 kg give 2.2 mg/kg IV 2 times daily 
*Ciprofloxacin 15 mg/kg 2 times daily 4 
Chloramphenicol 15 mg/kg IV 4 times daily 5 
Pregnant Women 7 Preferred Therapy 
*Gentamicin 5mg/kg IM or IV 1 time daily 3 or 
*Gentamicin 2 mg/kg loading dose followed by 1.7 mg/kg IM or 
IV 3 times daily 3 
Alternative Choices 
*Doxycycline 100 mg IV 2 times daily 
*Ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV 2 times daily 5 
*Antibiotic supplied as part of the National Pharmaceutical Stockpile (NPS) 
  
Table 6: Tularemia – Antibiotic Therapy for Mass Casualty Settings and Post-exposure 
Prophylaxis 
Mass Casualty Setting and Post-exposure Prophylaxis 8 
Adults Preferred Choices Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 40 
*Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times daily 9 
*Ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally 2 times daily 4 
Children 6 Preferred Choices 
*Doxycycline 9 
If = 45 kg give adult oral dose 
If < 45 kg give 2.2 mg/kg orally 2 times daily 
Ciprofloxacin 15 mg/gm orally 2 times daily 4 
Pregnant Women 7 Preferred Choices 
*Ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally 2 times daily 4 
*Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times daily 9 
*Antibiotic supplied as part of the National Pharmaceutical Stockpile (NPS) 
1. These recommendations are adapted from the consensus recommendations of the Working Group on 
Civilian Biodefense and are not necessarily approved by the Food and Drug Administration. In non-
bioterrorism response situations, routine treatment guidelines should be followed. Refer to the 
original publication (Dennis DT, Inglesby TV, Henderson DA, et al. Tularemia as a biological 
weapon: Medical and public health management, JAMA, in press) for explanations and further 
discussion. 
2. One antimicrobial agent should be selected. Therapy with gentamicin or ciprofloxacin should be 
continued for 10 days. Treatment with doxycycline or chloramphenicol should be continued for 14 – 
21 days. Persons beginning treatment with parenteral doxycycline, ciprofloxacin or chloramphenicol 
can be switched to oral antibiotics when clinically indicated. 
3. Aminoglycosides must be adjusted according to renal function. Neonates up to 1 week of age and 
premature infants should receive gentamicin 2.5 mg/kg 2 times daily. 
4. Other fluoroquinolones can be substituted at doses appropriate for age. Ciprofloxacin dosage should 
not exceed 1 g daily in children. 
5. Concentration should be maintained between 5 and 20 ug/mL. Concentrations greater than 25 ug/mL 
can cause reversible bone marrow suppression. Children younger than 2 years should not receive 
chloramphenicol. 
6. In children, ciprofloxacin does should not exceed 1 g daily, chloramphenicol should not exceed 4 g 
daily. Children younger than 2 years should not received chloramphenicol. In neonates, gentamicin-
loading dose of 4 mg/kg should be given initially. 
7. Alternatives to breastfeeding may be required while the mother is taking certain antibiotics. Consult 
specific antibiotic package insert for information on breastfeeding. 
8. One antibiotic, appropriate for the patient’s age, should be chosen among the alternatives. Duration of 
prophylaxis in mass casualty situations is 14 days. Duration of treatment with doxycycline or 
chloramphenicol is 14 – 21 days. 
9. Tetracycline may be substituted for doxycycline. 
Reference: DHS -(California Department of Health Services) 10 -05-01 California Hospital Bioterrorism 
Response Planning Guide. Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 41 
  
  Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 42 
VIRAL HEMORRHAGIC FEVERS (VHF) - QUICK REFERENCE 
Any suspected case of Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers (VHF) MUST BE TREATED AS A PUBLIC 
HEALTH EMERGENCY and reported to the Infection Control Practitioner (225) 765-8864 and 
the Louisiana Office of Public Health, (800) 256-2748. 
Transmission: Except for Hantaviruses, all VHF viruses are highly contagious especially in the terminal 
stages of the disease; person to person contact with blood, all body fluids and tissue; coughing patients 
may aerosolize virus into the air may result in transmission. 
Incubation Period: 
Varies with each virus; range is 5 – 42 days. 
Clinical Disease: 
Varies slightly with each virus. The target organ is the vascular bed and the dominant clinical features are 
the result of microvascular damage and changes in vascular permeability. Common symptoms include 
fever, myalgias, prostration, conjunctival injection, hypotension, flushing, petechial hemorrhages, shock 
and generalized hemorrhage. 
Diagnosis: 
Presumptive based on clinical signs and symptoms. 
Treatment: 
Supportive care, pain and fever control, sedation, and hydration. 
Prophylaxis: 
None 
Isolation: 
See Recommendations for Isolation. 
 
VIRAL HEMORRHAGIC FEVERS (VHF) – RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ISOLATION 
Introduction 
The term viral hemorrhagic fever (VHF) refers to a group of diseases caused by several distinct families 
of viruses. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has issued isolation recommendations 
that apply to four viruses that cause VHF: Lassa, Marburg, Ebola, and Congo-Crimean hemorrhagic 
fever. Health Canada has issued recommendations that also apply Junin, Sabia and Machupo viruses, 
found in South America. 
Blood, body secretions and excretions, semen, and tissue specimens from infected patients contain the 
virus responsible for VHF. Evidence suggests that the risk of person-to-person transmission increase as 
the patient’s condition deteriorates. Persons at highest risk for secondary transmission are those who are 
in closest contact with the blood and body fluids of the infected person toward the end of the incubation 
period and into the acute phase of the illness. Such persons include those with prolonged or close physical 
contact with infected persons such as family members, those providing direct medical and nursing care, 
and laboratory workers handling the patient’s specimens. Healthcare workers (HCW) in Africa are at 
great risk of acquiring VHF due to inappropriate barriers to protect them from exposure to blood and 
body fluids. The risks associated with various body fluids have not been well defined as most health care 
workers in Africa who acquire the infection have had multiple unprotected contacts with multiple body 
fluids over a relatively short period. Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 43 
OSHA Bloodborne Pathogens Standard 
Healthcare workers should follow facility specific procedures related to reducing the risk of occupational 
exposure to blood and other potentially infectious materials as required by the California Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration’s (CAL-OSHA) Bloodborne Pathogens Standard. Extreme vigilance is 
required to prevent needle sticks or other sharp injuries. Parenteral exposure has been associated with a 
high risk of transmission, a short incubation period and severe disease. Whenever possible, needleless 
intravenous systems, safety syringes and phlebotomy equipment should be used. If an exposure occurs, 
wash percutaneous exposures with copious amounts of antimicrobial soap (not bleach) and water and 
flush the mucous membranes of the eyes, nose, and mouth with copious amounts of fresh water. Exposed 
persons should receive an immediate medical evaluation and follow-up. 
Training 
Health care workers expected to provide direct and indirect patient care should be specifically trained in 
methods to reduce the risk of exposure to VHF patients. 
Isolation Recommendations 
These recommendations were developed to assist infection control practitioners (ICP) in preparing for a 
bioterrorist event. It is assumed that most patients requiring hospitalization are at or near end-stage 
disease and have diarrhea, vomiting, prominent cough or hemorrhage. Given the unpredictability of VHF 
infection and the potential for rapid progression to end-stage disease without warning, it may be prudent 
to implement the following recommendations at the time of hospital admission. 
Room Placement 
Plan A: Negative Pressure Room 
Place the patient in a private room that has (1) monitored negative air pressure in relation to the exterior 
surrounding areas, (2) 6 -12 air changes per hour (ACH), and (3) appropriate venting of contaminated air 
to the outside. The windows and doors should remain closed and the patient should remain in the room. 
Plan B: No Negative Pressure Room 
If no negative pressure room is available, place the patient in a private room. The room should be 
equipped with a HEPA filtration unit. The windows and doors should remain closed and the patient 
should remain in the room. 
Plan C: Designated Area or Unit 
As the number of VHF patients requiring isolation increases, consider designating a wing of a nursing 
unit or, preferentially, an entire nursing unit. Infection control practitioners should develop a plan 
consistent with the structure of the hospital and the ability to effectively isolate infected patients from 
non-infected patients and the public. 
Plan D: – Designated Health Facility 
The county or state Emergency Medical Service may designate an alternate facility such as a closed 
hospital or gymnasium to accommodate increasing numbers of cases that require medical support. 
Infection control practitioners should be well informed of and actively participate in state, and local 
bioterrorism preparedness plans. 
Visitors 
Visitors should be limited to close family members and significant others. Family members should be 
instructed to wear PPE appropriate to the potential risk of blood and body fluid exposure. 
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 44 
The physical properties of PPE should be appropriate to the degree of exposure and the task(s) to be 
performed by the HCW. Facility infection control committees should evaluate existing PPE to determine 
if the physical properties maximize HCW safety. 
Respirators 
Disposable, fluid-resistant, N-95 respirators should be worn when entering the room and disposed of 
before leaving the room. 
Face Shields 
Disposable, face shields, in addition to N-95 respirators, should be worn when entering the room. 
Gowns 
Disposable, long sleeve, fluid-proof (impervious) gowns or coveralls with rib or elastic cuffs should be 
worn when entering the room. The gown should be removed before leaving the patient’s room. Fluid 
resistant gowns or coveralls can be worn if there is little or no soiling of the environment. 
Gloves 
Disposable gloves should be worn when entering the room. All jewelry including rings should be 
removed. Gloves should completely cover the cuff of the gown or coverall. Reinforced or double gloves 
should be worn for procedures that involve handling of sharp devices (e.g. phlebotomy). Gloves should 
be removed before leaving the room and hands should be washed immediately. 
Shoe and head covers 
Fluid-proof, ankle or calf high shoe covers or rubber boots should be worn when blood or body fluids 
visibly soil the floor. Shoe covers should be removed before leaving the room. Boots, if worn, should be 
cleaned. 
Head covers should be worn if spraying or splashing of blood or other body fluids onto the hair is 
anticipated. Head covers should be removed before leaving the room. 
 
Handwashing 
Hands should be washed with an antimicrobial hand hygiene product. Faucets should be foot or sensor-
operated or should be turned off with a paper towel. Paper towels should be accessible. Alcohol foams or 
gels should not be substituted for handwashing when running water and soap are immediately accessible. 
Transporting Patients 
Patients with VHF who have a prominent cough, vomiting, diarrhea, or hemorrhage should not leave their 
room. If it is necessary to transport the patient, notify the receiving department and schedule the 
diagnostic test when there are no other patients in the department. Place a surgical mask over patient’s 
nose and mouth, if tolerated. Confine and contain blood and body fluids that soil the environment during 
transport. If an elevator is used all occupants should wear PPE. Only essential HCW should remain in the 
procedure room with the patient. 
Laboratory Specimens 
Specimens should be placed in double, zip lock bags that are tightly sealed and labeled. 
Patient Care Equipment 
Patient care equipment (e.g., thermometers, blood pressure cuffs, stethoscopes and commodes) should be 
kept in the patient’s room. Use disposable equipment whenever possible. Reusable equipment should be 
placed in an appropriately labeled container, sealed and transported to central service for reprocessing. Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 45 
Environmental Services 
Daily Cleaning 
Disinfect environmental surfaces in the patient’s room and bathroom with a properly diluted, 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) approved disinfectant such as a quaternary ammonium 
compound or a phenolic. Allow all surfaces to air dry. The disinfecting solution and a supply of cleaning 
materials should be kept in the room. Privacy curtains should be changed when visibly soiled. Floors 
should be cleaned using a single-bucket procedure of wet mopping. The contents of the bucket should be 
emptied into the toilet. After each use, the mop head should be removed from the handle and disposed in 
the linen hamper. Disposable mop heads and cleaning cloths should be used, if available. The bucket and 
the mop handle should remain in the patient’s bathroom. 
Terminal Cleaning 
Terminal cleaning should be performed using similar procedures described for daily cleaning. If the room 
is under negative pressure or HEPA filtration allow the room to air for 2 hours or longer after terminal 
cleaning before admitting a non-infected patient. 
Management of Blood and Body Fluids 
Blood and Body Fluid Spills 
Blood and body fluid spills should be confined and contained with a biohazard fluid solidification 
treatment product when possible. Following the removal of the solid waste, decontaminate the area with 
an EPA-approved disinfectant. 
Containerized Liquid Blood and Body Fluids 
Containerized liquid blood, gastric secretions, and pulmonary secretions should be treated with a 
biohazard fluid solidification treatment product before disposal. The contents of bedpans, urinals and 
emesis basins should be carefully emptied into the toilet. Several ounces of household bleach should be 
poured into the toilet and left standing for about 5 minutes before flushing. 
Soiled Linen 
Soiled linen should be placed in leak proof bags. Viral aerosols may be created during the initial bagging 
process therefore it is essential that bags be carefully sealed to reduce expulsion of air into the 
environment. When removed from the room, the bag should be placed in a second leak proof bag and 
clearly identified as "isolation" or "contaminated". The bag should be carefully secured and removed from 
the nursing unit in covered carts to a designated holding area. Chutes should not be used. 
Facility Operated Laundry 
Soiled linen should be autoclaved prior to transport to the laundry facility. If the linen is not autoclaved, 
facility laundry workers should wear PPE including N-95 respirators. 
Commercial Service 
Infection control practitioners should consult with the commercial laundry service to determine special 
requirements, if any, for labeling, transporting and processing soiled linen. As an alternative, linen should 
be autoclaved prior to transport to a commercial laundry service. 
Patient’s Clothing 
Place patient’s clothing in a labeled, leak proof bag, and send to central service for autoclaving. 
Autoclaved clothing may then be sent home with the patient’s family or washed, if necessary, according 
to facility policy. 
Biohazardous Waste Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 46 
Waste receptacles should be lined with red biohazard bags. Viral aerosols may be created during the 
initial bagging process therefore it is essential that bags be carefully sealed to reduce expulsion of air into 
the environment. When removed from the room biohazardous waste should be placed in a second red bag 
and secured. Biohazardous waste should be removed in a covered cart to a designated biohazardous-waste 
holding area. Infection control practitioners should consult with the contracted waste hauler for special 
instructions, if any, on removing and transporting biohazardous waste. As an alternative, biohazardous 
waste can be autoclaved. 
Deceased Patient 
Place the deceased patient in leak-proof body bag and transfer to the facility morgue. The body should not 
be embalmed. If an autopsy is requested, the Louisiana Department of Health Services should be notified. 
 Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 47 
Hospital Bioterrorism Response Planning Guide 
SUMMARY OF POTENTIAL BIOTERRORIST DISEASE SYNDROMES 
Disease Symptoms Physical 
Exam 
Diagnostic Tests Key Differential 
Diagnosis 
Incubation 
Period 
Duration 
of Illness 
Inhalation 
Anthrax 
Fever, malaise, cough, 
mild chest discomfort, 
possible short recovery 
phase then onset of 
dyspnea, diaphoresis, 
stridor, cyanosis, shock. 
Death 24-36 hours after 
onset of severe 
symptoms, 
Hemorrhagic meningitis 
in up to 50% 
Non-specific 
physical 
findings. 
Serology (acute & 
convalescent samples); 
gram stain & culture of the 
blood; polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR); CXR - 
widened mediastinum. 
Rarely pneumonia. 
Hantavirus pulmonary 
syndrome 
(HPS), Dissecting aortic 
aneurysm (no fever) 
1-6 days (up 
to 45 days) 
3-5 days 
Pneumonic 
plague 
High fever, chills, 
headache, hemoptysis, 
and toxemia, rapid 
progression to dyspnea, 
stridor, and cyanosis. 
Death from respiratory 
failure, shock, and 
bleeding. 
Rales, 
hemoptysis, 
purpura 
Gram stain & culture of 
blood and target tissue, 
serum immunoassay for 
capsular antigen, Serology 
to confirm; PCR, 
immunohistochemical 
stains (IHC) 
HPS, TB, community 
acquired pneumonia 
(CAP), 
meningococcemia, 
rickettsioses 
2-3 days 1-6 days 
Tularemia Fever, headache, 
malaise, chest 
discomfort, anorexia, 
non-productive cough. 
Pneumonia in 30-80%. 
Oculoglandular from 
inoculation of 
conjunctiva with 
No adenopathy 
with Typhoidal 
illness. 
Serology; culture of blood, 
sputum, or skin lesions; 
PCR; IHC; CXR -
pneumonia, mediastinal 
lymphadenopathy, or 
pleural effusion. 
Atypical community 
acquired pneumonia, Q 
fever, Brucellosis  
1-10 days 
(average 3-5 
days 
>2 weeks Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 48 
periorbital edema. 
Smallpox Fever, back pain, 
vomiting, malaise, 
headache, rigors, 
delirium. Papules 2-3 
days later, progressing 
to pustular vesicles. 
Abundant on face and 
extremities initially.  
Papules, 
pustules, or 
scabs of 
similar stage, 
many on 
face/extremitie
s, palm/soles. 
Clinical diagnosis; 
Guarnieri bodies on 
Giemsa or modified silver 
stain, virons on electron 
microscopy, PCR, viral 
isolation, IHC 
Varicella, vaccinia, 
monkeypox, cowpox, 
disseminated herpes zoster. 
7-17 days 
(average 12 
days) 
4 weeks 
Botulism Ptosis, blurred vision, 
diplopia, generalized 
weakness, dizziness, 
dysarthria, dysphonia, 
dysphagia 24 - 36 hours 
after exposure followed 
by symmetrical 
descending flaccid 
paralysis and 
respiratory failure. 
No fever, 
patient alert, 
postural 
hypotension, 
pupils 
unreactive, 
normal 
sensation, 
variable 
muscle 
weakness. 
Diagnosis – clinical. 
Serology, toxin assays/ 
anaerobic cultures of 
blood/stool; 
electromyography studies. 
Guillian-Barré, myasthenia 
gravis, tick paralysis, 
Mg++ intoxication, 
organophosphate 
intoxication, 
organophosphate 
1-5 days Death 24-
72 hours 
or 
ventilator 
support for 
months 
Filoviruses 
(Marburg, 
Ebola) 
Fever, severe headache, 
malaise, myalgia, 
maculopapular rash day 
5; progression to 
pharyngitis, 
hematemesis, melena, 
uncontrolled bleeding; 
shock/death days 6-9. 
Petechia, 
ecchymoses, 
conjunctivitis, 
uncontrolled  
Serology (antigen capture 
ELISA, IgM Elisa or PCR 
during acute phase), viral 
isolation (requires 
containment facility), IHC; 
leukopenia, 
thrombocytopenia, 
proteinuria. 
Meningococcemia, 
malaria, typhus, 
leptospirosis, borreliosis, 
thrombotic 
thrombocytopenicpurpura 
(TTP), rickettsiosis, 
hemolytic uremic 
syndrome (HUS), 
arenaviruses. 
2-19 days 
(average 4-
10 days) 
Days to 
weeks 
Arenavirus
es (Lassa, 
Fever, malaise, myalgia, 
headache, nausea, 
Conjunctivitis, 
petechia, 
Serology, viral isolation, 
PCR, IHC; leukopenia, 
Leptospirosis, 
meningococcemia, 
5-21 days 
Lassa; 7-16 
7-15 days Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 49 
Junin, 
Sabia, 
Machupo, 
Guanarito) 
vomiting, pharyngitis, 
cough, retrosternal pain, 
bleeding, tremors of 
tongue and hands 
(Junin), shock, aseptic 
meningitis, coma, 
hearing loss in some. 
ecchymoses, 
flushing over 
head and upper 
torso. 
thrombocytopenia, 
proteinuria 
malaria, typhus, 
borreliosis, rickettsiosis, 
TTP, HUS, filoviruses. 
days Sabia, 
Junin, 
Machupo, 
Guanarito 
Brucellosis Irregular fever, chills, 
sweating, myalgias, 
cough and arthritis 
lasting for weeks. 
Profound weakness and 
fatigue, depression and 
mental status changes. 
Chest x-ray 
may be normal 
or showlung 
abscesses, 
single or 
military 
nodules, 
bronchopneum
onia, enlarged 
hilar nodes & 
pleural 
effusion. 
Serology, cultures of 
blood, liver or bone 
marrow. 
Influenza, Infectious 
mononucleosis, malaria, 
tuberculosis, Hodgkin’s 
disease, and 
lymphoblastoma 
5-60 days Undulant 
form < 
1yr. 
Chronic 
form > 
1year 
Q-Fever Fever, chills, headache 
early, pleuritic chest 
pain. Weight loss, 
myalgia and cough 
appearing late during 
course. 
  Abnormal liver function 
tests, normal WBC with 
thrombocytopenia. 
Serology – IFA or ELISA 
(2-3 wks after presentation. 
CXR consolidation 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, 
Legionella pneumophila, 
Chlamydia psittaci & 
Chlamydia pneumoniae. 
2-14 days 2 days to 2 
weeks 
Venezuelan 
Equine 
Encephaliti
s 
Generalized malaise, 
spiking fever, rigors, 
severe headache, 
photophobia & 
myalgias in the legs and 
lumbosacral area. 
Nausea, vomiting, 
Non-specific Serum for IgM ELISA 
indirect FA, 
hemagglutination 
inhibition, complement 
fixation and neutralization. 
White blood count often – 
  1-5 days 1 – 2 
weeks Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 50 
cough, sore throat and 
diarrhea may follow. 
leukopenia & lymphopenia 
Staphyloco
ccal 
Enterotoxi
n B 
Fever, myalgia, nausea, 
diarrhea and cough. 
  Clinical diagnosis. 
Serology and urine toxin 
levels are useful 
retrospectively. 
Influenza, adenovirus, 
mycoplasma 
3–12 hours Days to 
weeks 
Cholera Vomiting, headache, 
intestinal cramping with 
little or no fever and 
soon painless 
voluminous diarrhea. 
Rice water 
diarrhea & 
dehydration. 
Clinical diagnosis. 
Darkfield or phase-contrast 
microscopy of the stool –
darting motile vibrio 
Acute bacillary dysentery, 
food poisoning, heat 
exhaustion and some forms 
of malaria. 
4 hours – 
5days 
3 – 5 days 
Ricin Weakness, fever, 
progressive cough, 
pulmonary edema, 
cyanosis, chest 
tightness, dyspnea, 
nausea & arthralgias. 
Respiratory 
distress and 
death 
Specific serum ELISA. 
Acute and convalescent 
sera should be collected. 
Staphylococcal enterotoxin 
B, Q fever, tularemia, 
plague, some chemical 
warfare agents such as 
phosgene.  
4 – 8 hours Death 36–
72 hours 
Mycotoxins  
(T-2) 
Skin – burning pain, 
redness, tenderness, 
blistering. Nasal itching 
and pain, sneezing, 
epistaxis and 
rhinorrhea. 
Pulmonary/tracheobron
chial – dyspnea, 
wheezing, and cough. 
Eyes – pain, tearing, 
redness, foreign body 
sensation and blurred 
vision may occur 
Skin blisters, 
epistaxis, 
blood-tinged 
saliva and 
sputum. 
Blood, tissue and 
environmental samples – 
chromatography-mass 
spectrometry 
Mustard agent, 
staphylococcal Enterotoxin 
B 
Minutes to 
hours 
Death in 
minutes, 
hours or 
days Infectious Disease / Biological Terror Event Policy - Appendix A. - 51 
REFERENCE LIST 
1. Anonymous. Bioterrorism alleging use of anthrax and interim guidelines for management -- United 
States, 1998. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1999;48:69-74. 
2. Noah DL, Sovel AL, Ostroff SM, Kildew JA. Biological warfare training: infectious disease outbreak 
differentiation criteria. Mil Med 1998;163:198-201. 
3. DOD DFFUaE. NBC Domestic preparedness response workbook.1998. 
4. Simon JD. Biological terrorism. JAMA 1997;278:428-30. 
5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory 
Committee (HICPAC). Recommendations for isolation precautions in hospitals. Am J Infect Control 
1996;24:24-52. 
6. American public health association. Control of communicable diseases in man. Washington 
DC:American public health association; 1995. 
7. Tucker JB. National health and medical services response to incidents of chemical and biological 
terrorism. JAMA 1997;278:362-8. 
8. Holloway HC, Norwood AE, Fullerton CS, Engel CC Jr, Ursano RJ. The threat of biological 
weapons. Prophylaxis and mitigation of psychological and social consequences. JAMA 
1997;278:425-7. 
9. Pile JC, Malone JD, Eitzen EM, Friedlander AM. Anthrax as a potential biological warfare agent. 
Arch Intern Med 1998;158:429-34. 
10. Franz D, Jahrling PB, Friedlander AM, McClain DJ, Hoover DL, Bryne WR, et al. Clinical 
recognition and management of patients exposed to biological warfare agents. JAMA 1997;278:399-
411. 
11. U.S.Army medical research institute of infectious diseases. Medical management of biological 
casualties. Fort Detrick:USAMRIID; 1998. 
12. Anonymous. Drugs and vaccines against biological weapons. Med Lett Drugs Ther 1999;41:15-6. 
13. Shapiro RL, Hatheway C, Becher J, Swerdlow DL. Botulism surveillance and emergency response. 
JAMA 1997;278:433-5. 
14. Shapiro RL, Hatheway C, Swerdlow DL. Botulism in the United States: A clinical and 
epidemiological review. Arch Intern Med 1998;129:221-8. 
15. Federal Register. Respiratory protective devices; final rules and notice. 1995.  
 
OTHER SOURCES OF INFORMATION 
USAMRIID 301/619-2833 
BIOPORT (producers of anthrax vaccine) 517/327-1500 
US PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE 1-800-872-6367 
DOMESTIC PREPAREDNESS INFORMATION LINE 1-800-368-6498 
NATIONAL RESPONSE CENTER1-800-424-8802 
 