 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Emergency Management 
Subject:  Chemical Contamination Plan -Code 
ORANGE 
Section:  A 
Date of Origination:  November 2001 Supersedes:  
Date Last Revised:  4/30/2019 Serial Code:  ECEP010 
Date Last Reviewed: 05/06/2024 
 
Purpose: 
 
To describe the procedures used by Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Children's Hospital, OLOL Ascension, Lake 
Livingston and North ED to safely decontaminate contaminated patients exposed in an accidental or intentional chemical, 
radiation, or mass casualty terrorists event or release.  
 
Authorization to Activate: 
 
The Administrator on Call (AOC) will assume the role of Incident Commander and determine and activate 
appropriate Hospital Incident Command System (HICS) positions to respond to the incident. 
 
Notification: 
 
1. The Emergency Department Charge Nurse or designee, when given advance notice of receiving chemically 
contaminated persons, will call the PBX page operator and notify them to: 
 
a. Activate the Decontamination Team. 
 
b. Call and/or page the AOC to notify them of the event. 
 
2. The AOC/Incident Commander will notify the PBX page operator to clearly announce three times “Code Orange” 
to notify staff of the emergency event. 
 
3. The PBX page operator will contact the Regulatory Safety Officer to notify that the Decon team is being 
activated. 
 
4. All decontamination team members on campus will immediately report to the decontamination area to begin area 
set up (See diagram.). 
 
5. The On Call decontamination team leader will begin team call out procedures to notify team members to report to 
the decontamination area for decon suit up, as soon as possible. 
 
Response: 
• All emergency events will be managed by following the Emergency Operations Plan (ECEP-001). See also 
Department Specific Response Chemical Contamination and Responsibility Matrix (below). 
• See also Mass Casualty Incident (ECEP-016). 
 
 OLOL Ascension: 
If the Emergency Department has advance notice of receiving chemically contaminated patients then the House 
Manager should be notified so Plant Operations can be called to set up the decontamination station and perform 
patient decontamination. When there is little or no advance notice then the Emergency Department personnel 
should perform a hasty decontamination so that treatment will not be delayed while waiting for the station to be  2 
set-up. The personnel performing the decontamination are to use personal Protective Equipment. 
ADVANCED NOTICE OF CONTAMINATED PATIENTS ARRIVING 
 Set-Up of Decontamination Area 
1. The decontamination supplies and personal protective equipment (PPE) will be transported to the designated area 
(outside the ER area by helipad).  The placement of the area is dependence on the wind direction as evidence by 
the windsock outside the ED.  The area should be placed upwind so no hazardous fumes can blow in the direction 
of the decontamination team.  PPE will consist of: 
• Level B protective suits 
• Full face respirators with chemical cartridges 
• Chemical over boots 
• Rubber gloves 
• Nitrile gloves 
• Tape for seams 
2. The decontamination team consists of at least one ED trained RN, and at least 5 support personnel.  
3. All contaminated water will be contained within pools and then disposed of later in 55-gallon drums.  
4. The team members will don the PPE and maintain on until the hazard is deemed clear. 
5. Patients will enter and be undressed through either an “ambulatory area” or “stretcher” area.  The RN will 
perform a quick triage to assess for life threatening conditions.  If present, then the patient must be managed 
quickly.  All clothes will be bagged and labeled with the patient’s identifying information. 
6. The patient will be passed to a “wash” area where they will be washed with soap and water. 
7. They will then be passed through to a “rinse” area to rinse off the soap. 
8. They will then be passed to a control area where they will be dried and redressed with facility paper suits. 
9. Once decontaminated, the patient is considered safe and can be treated through the system as a normal patient. 
 
A. Decontamination 
1. If it is known that a person is chemically contaminated, he or she should not be allowed to enter the building 
until the contamination is removed or has been determined not to be a threat to health and safety. 
 
2. If a chemically contaminated person enters the hospital and the contamination presents an immediate health 
hazard: 
• Move the contaminated person to the outside of the building. 
• Contact Plant Services and request immediate shut down of the Emergency Care Unit (ECU) 
ventilation system.  
• Perform a hasty decontamination of the person (see below.) 
• If the area of contamination involves the entire department, evacuation may be required.  
• See also the Evacuation Plan (ECEP-003). 
 
B. Hasty Decontamination 
1. Don a respirator, coveralls and gloves from the decontamination cart.  
 
2. Remove the patient's clothing and place in a sealed plastic bag that is labeled with the patient's name or 
admission number. Do not discard the clothing. Secure patient belongings for disposal or evidence. 
 
3. Apply soap and large volumes of water to the patient concentrating on any area visibly contaminated and 
rinse for 5 to 10 minutes depending upon the amount of contamination. 
 
C. Treatment  
1. Following decontamination, staff should attempt to discover what type of chemical contamination is on the 
patient as quickly as possible by:  3 
• Asking the patient what the chemical is. 
• If the patient is unable to communicate, try to determine if the patient is a chemical plant employee by 
looking at their uniform or ID badge. Contact the chemical plant to find out what type of chemical is 
in question. 
• If the patient does not know, or is unconscious, contact the Emergency Medical Services (EMS) 
Hazmat team for information about their response to the spill site and have determined what type of 
chemical is involved. 
 
2. If the type of chemical involved cannot be determined, the caregiver should proceed with signs and 
symptoms-based treatment. If the type of chemical becomes known, then consult the poison control database 
or local manufacturer of the chemical for treatment guidelines.  
 
3. Suggested References: 
• SDS (Safety Data Sheets) - Located in ECU, other areas of the hospital and on Team Link. 
• Poison Control Database - Located in ECU 
• Chemical Plant Emergency Plans Library - Located in ECU 
• U.S. Army Medical Management of Chemical Casualties Handbook - Located in ECU 
 
Recovery: 
 
 1.   Facilities will contact vendor for removal of Wastewater or clean-out of retention bladder. 
 
 2    Patient belongings will be handed over to appropriate authorities for disposal or evidence retrieval 
 
 3.   Debrief with team to identify strengths and/or opportunities for improvement for future drills/events. 
 
 4.   Notify Risk Management and Employee Health of any team member exposures with event entered into  
       RLDatix. 
 
 5.   See Emergency Operations Plans for further information. 
 
Responsibility Matrix 
 
Department/ 
Personnel Job Function/ Responsibility 
Emergency 
Department 
Charge Nurse, or 
designee 
 When given advance notice of receiving chemically contaminated persons, call 
the PBX page operator and notify them to: 
o Activate the Decontamination Team  
o Call and/or page the AOC to notify them of the event 
Administrator on 
Call (AOC)/ 
Incident 
Commander 
 Assume the role as Incident Commander  
 Activate appropriate HICS positions to respond to the event. 
 Notify the PBX page operator to call a “Code Orange”  
 Notify the PBX page operator to page the On-Call Decontamination Team  
 Provide general guidance on all response activities 
 Obtain additional resources as necessary 
PBX/ Page 
Operator 
 Clearly announce three times “Code Orange” once instructed to do so by the 
AOC/ Incident Commander. 
 Page the On-Call Decontamination Team to activate the decon team. 
 Clearly announce three times “All Clear Code Orange” once instructed to do so 
by the AOC/Incident Commander. 
Regulatory Safety 
Officer 
 Instruct all “on call” team members to report to the decontamination area as 
soon as possible  
 Provide guidance and assistance with donning & doffing PPE for decon team 
members. 
 Safely decontaminate any persons who are contaminated  
 After the event, ensure all decon equipment is checked, cleaned, re-charged, and  4 
placed back in the proper storage area. 
Decontamination 
Team members 
 Upon notification of the “Code Orange” immediately report to the 
decontamination area to begin area set- up. 
 Assist “On Call” team members with donning & doffing PPE 
 Prepare to don PPE for team rotation 
 Safely decontaminate any persons who are contaminated  
 After the event, assist with clean up procedures of all decontamination 
equipment. 
Security  Send one (1) to three (3) personnel to decontamination area to implement 
access, traffic, and crowd control policies, plans, and procedures. 
 Assess and determine the need to don proper PPE (seek guidance from Safety 
Officer and/or Incident Commander if needed) 
 Manage and direct access, crowd and traffic control to assist with contaminated 
patient throughput.   
 Respond to any security events. 
 After the event, assist with area clean up procedures (cones, caution tape, 
barricades) 
 
 
 