 1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Environment of Care 
Emergency Management 
SUBJECT:  
Disaster Care and Treatment 1135 Waiver 
Request 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
12/01/2020  
Review Date: 05/06/2024 
REVISION DATE: 
 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
ECEP017 
 
SCOPE: 
This policy and associated procedure apply to Our Lady of The Lake Regional Medical Center 
PURPOSE: 
When the President of the United States declares a disaster / emergency under the Stafford Act, and the Health 
and Human Services Secretary declares a public health emergency under Section 319 of the Public Health 
Service Act, the Secretary is authorized to take certain actions in addition to his/her regular authorities. Under 
Section 1135 of the Social Security Act, CMS can issue several blanket waivers as a result of a disaster or 
emergency. These waivers will prevent gaps in access to care for beneficiaries impacted by the emergency. 
Providers can request an individual Section 1135 waiver. If a blanket waiver has been issued, providers should 
still notify the LA Department of Health Hospital Standards Section and CMS Regional Office if operating 
under these modifications to ensure proper payment. 
 
During an emergent event, an 1135 waiver can be requested by the healthcare provider from the CMS 
Conditions of Participation (CoP).  It is not limited to natural events such as weather.  It could be major 
damage to the building from a tornado, or flooding throughout the structure, or anything to that nature.  If a 
facility has encountered any such situation, it must immediately report this to LA Department of Health 
Hospital Standards Section.  HSS would review the hospital’s situation and its contingencies and capabilities 
to determine if, in fact, there is a need to request such a waiver.    
 
POLICY: 
 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 2 
 
Procedure: 
 
 
1.     The CEO or designed will contact the Louisiana Department of Health Hospital Standards Sections 
to determine if there is a need to request a waiver with the following information: 
a.  Provider name. 
b.  Full address including parish, city, and state. 
c.  CCN (Medicare provider number). 
d.  Contact person and his/her contact information for follow-up, should the Region need 
additional clarification. 
e.  Brief summary of why the waiver is needed. 
f.  Consideration – Type of relief being sought or regulatory requirements or regulatory reference 
that the requestor is seeking to be waived. 
g.  There is no specific form that is required to submit the information, but it is helpful to clearly 
state the scope of the issue and the impact. 
 
2.     If the HHS deems a waiver is necessary, the information should come directly from the hospital to 
the appropriate CMS Regional Office email (RODALDSC@cms.hhs.gov) with a copy to the 
appropriate State Agency for Health Care Administration to make sure the waiver request does not 
conflict with any State requirements, and all concerns are addressed timely. Louisiana HHS prefers the 
waiver request come from LDH Standards Section to CMS. 
 
3.    Facility’s Role Under an 1135 Waiver: 
A.  Alternate Care Site – In the event of a need, other FMOLHS facilities has been pre-designated to 
serve as a first level alternate care site for Our Lady of The Lake Regional Medical Center, based 
on surge capacity and subspecialty services available.  In the event that other FMOLHS facilities 
cannot be used, Our Lady of The Lake Regional Medical Center will work in coordination with the 
Hospital Designated Regional Coordinator through the Regional and State response plans to 
identify a safe, appropriate location.    
B.  Communication – Our Lady of The Lake Regional Medical Center has incorporated the National 
Incident Management System (NIMS) into its Emergency Operations Plan to ensure maximum 
compatibility with local, regional, state and federal government response plans and procedures.  
NIMS incorporates the Incident Command System (ICS) which provides an efficient tool for the 
management of emergency operations and enables a common and consistent language.  
•  Within this structure, Our Lady of The Lake Regional Medical Center has a Public 
Information Officer (PIO) whose responsibility includes communication, both internal and 
external with the community. 
•  Communication with staff and patients may be done via multiple means as described in the 
Section C (Response Procedures and Resources) of the Emergency Operations Plan.  
 
 
C. Coordination Efforts with Local Emergency Management Officials – Our Lady of The Lake 
Regional Medical Center actively participates in on-going all-hazards planning and continues to  3 
integrate with the following agencies during disaster response and recovery, as described in the 
Emergency Operations / Management Plan: 
• East Baton Rouge Parish Mayor’s Office of Homeland Security and Emergency 
Preparedness 
•  LA Region 2 Healthcare Emergency Preparedness Coalition 
•  LA Region 2 Office of Public Health 
•  LA Emergency Response Network 
•  LA Hospital Association 
•  LA Emergency Support Function 8 – Health and Medical – Designated Regional 
Coordinators 
•  LA Governor’s Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness 
 Licensure of Physicians and Others – Our Lady of The Lake Regional Medical Center has established a 
process for Granting Disaster Privileges to volunteer licensed independent practitioners who are not members 
of the Medical Staff. This process is included in ECEP015 Volunteer Practitioners Disaster Credentialing and 
MS-PHY-017 Disaster Privileges. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
•  
ATTACHMENTS:  
• N/A 
 
 
Policy Oversight by:  
 
Manager, Environmental Safety  
 