 
Emergency Management Plan  
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Emergency Management 
Subject:  Emergency Management Program Plan Section:   
Date of Origination:  January 1, 1997 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised:  07/12/2021 Serial Code:  ECEP000 
Date Last Reviewed: 05/02/2024 
 
OBJECTIVE and SCOPE 
The organization engages in planning activities prior to developing its Emergency Operations Plan. The hospital’s leaders including 
those of the medical staff actively participate in emergency management planning; the hospital conducts a hazard vulnerability 
analysis (HVA) to identify events that could affect demand for its services or its ability to provide those services, the likelihood of 
those events occurring and the consequences of those events; Together with its community partners prioritizes those hazards, threats 
and events identified in the HVA; Communicates its needs and vulnerabilities to community emergency response agencies and 
identifies the capabilities of its community in meeting their need . The hospital uses its HVA as a basis for defining mitigation and 
preparedness activities.  
 
The objective of the Emergency Management program is to identify processes for managing the effect of emergency events to hospital 
operations. HVAs are completed annually to identify and prioritize potential natural, technological and/or human emergency events 
that may affect demand for or the hospital’s ability to respond to demand for services. The HVA process includes an evaluatio n of 
mitigation and preparedness activities, as well as response and recovery strategies. Results of the HVA s are shared with other 
hospitals within the Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System (FMOLHS) and with other hospitals and agencies within 
East Baton Rouge Parish and Public Health Region 2. The hospital maintains emergency response plans for priority vulnerabilities 
identified through the HVA process. OLOL RMC is an active participant in community planning activities within the City of Baton 
Rouge, East Baton Rouge Parish, Public Health Region 2 and the State of Louisiana.  
 
The hospital’s incident command structure is integrated into and consistent with its community’s command structure.  
 
The hospital uses an incident command structure that is compliant with the National Incident Management System (NIMS) structu re 
and is consistent with the command structure in place at other healthcare facilities in East Baton Rouge Parish, Public Healt h Region 
2, and the State of Louisiana. Use of the incident command and the NIMS structure enables a common, consistent language between 
facilities which supports an effective community-wide response. 
 
Training for team members about incident command begins in general orientation and is included in annual education. Hospital 
leaders, including managers, directors, division directors and senior leaders are assigned incident command training , including, but not 
limited to online courses through the FEMA Emergency Management Institute Independent Study Program 
(https://training.fema.gov). Hospital leaders complete ICS 100, Introduction to Incident Command for Healthcare/Hospitals and ICS 
200, Applying ICS to Healthcare Organizations. Leaders with assigned roles in the command structure also complete ICS 700, 
National Incident Management System, An Introduction and ICS 800, National Response Framework, An Introduction . 
The Emergency Operations Plan may be activated or discontinued by the Administrator on Call (Incident Commander) or by joint 
decision by the Emergency Care Unit Physician on Duty, the Vice President of Patient Care Services (or designee) and the 
Administrator on Call. Whenever an emergency event is identified, the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Chief Operating Offic er 
(COO) will be notified as soon as possible. (See ECEP001; Region 2 Hospital Plan) 
 
The hospital keeps a documented inventory of the assets and resources it has on site that would be needed in an emergency .) 
 
An inventory of hospital assets and resources needed during an emergency is available and is reviewed at least annually and updated 
as appropriate. During an activation of any of the hospital’s emergency response plans, responsibility for monitoring quantities of key 
resources is assigned to leadership as follows: 
• Materials Management: Patient care supplies 
• Surgical Materials: Surgical supplies 
• Pharmacy: Pharmaceutical supplies  
Emergency Management Plan  
• Laboratory/Blood Bank: Testing and Blood supplies 
• Nutritional Services: Food supplies 
• Linen Services: Linen supplies 
• Plant Services: Utility-related supplies (fuel, etc.) and Waste management 
 
PROCESSES 
The hospital has a written Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) that describes the response procedures to follow when emergencies 
occur; recovery strategies and actions designed to help restore the systems critical to providing care, treatment and service s after an 
emergency; and activation and demobilization procedures for response and recovery phases.) The EOP identifies the hospital’s 
capabilities, establishes response procedures for when the hospital cannot be supported by the local community , and identifies 
alternative sites for care.  
 
The hospital’s Emergency Operations Plan is organized using an “all hazards” approach and is used to guide the hospital’s response to 
internal and external emergencies. The hospital will implement the Emergency Operations Plan when an internal or external event or 
condition produces a threat to the welfare of patients, guests and/or staff, and/or when an emergency situation confronting the hospital 
creates an influx of patients or a large increase in acuity of casualty victims. (See ECEP001) 
 
Response plans for key identified vulnerabilities are in place. See also Code Gray – Tornado Plan (ECEP004); Code Gray – Hurricane 
Plan (ECEP005); Code Black – Bomb Threat Plan (ECEP006); Code Red – Fire Plan (ECEP007); Mass Influx of Infectious Patients / 
Bioterrorism Plan (ECEP008); Code Purple – IS/Telecommunications Failure (ECEP009); Code Orange – Chemical Contamination 
Plan (ECEP010); Code Green – Radiation Plan (ECEP013); Code Yellow – Mass Casualty Incident Plan (ECEP016); and Code Silver 
– Active Shooter/Hostage (ECSE019). 
 
Resource relationships are established to support hospital operations during emergencies where the community is unable to provide 
support. Capacity is evaluated at least annually and following each exercise or plan implementation  where supplies or facility 
resources are tested.  
 
Alternative care sites are coordinated within the FMOLHS structure as well as through the Louisiana Hospitals Emergency Respo nse 
Plan. Whenever possible, patients will be transported to hospitals within the community or to other FMOLHS facilities. If alt ernate 
care sites are not available within the FMOLHS group, sites outside of Louisiana will be activated.  
 
A. Critical Area - Communication 
 
The hospital prepares for how it will communicate during emergencies including plans for notifying staff when emergency response 
measures are initiated; plans for ongoing communication of information and instructions to its staff; processes for notifying external 
authorities; plans for communicating with patients and their families. The hospital defines the circumstances and plans for 
communicating with the community and/or the media during emergencies and plans for communicating with purveyors of essential 
supplies, services and equipment once emergency measures are initiated. The hospital plans for communicating with other health care 
organizations that together provide services to a contiguous geographic area regarding: Essential elements of their command 
structure; Names and roles of individuals in their command structure; Resources and assets that could potentially be shared; Names 
of patients and deceased individuals (in accordance with applicable law and regulation) ; Circumstances for communicating 
information about patients to third parties; Communicating with alternative care sites; and establishes back-up communication 
systems and technologies for the above. -2, 8) 
 
The Emergency Department is often the initial point of contact for a community -wide disaster. Upon notification of a community-
wide disaster, the Emergency Department will contact the Administrator on Call (AOC) who is responsible for evaluating the po tential 
impact of the event and initiating the incident command structure. Should a disaster occur during evening or weekend hours, t he 
Emergency Department Charge Nurse and the House Manager/Supervisor will assume the administrator’s duties until he/she arrives. 
The AOC will approve and direct departments to activate their disaster call rosters and will approve emergency call -out when 
necessary. Personnel within the hospital are notified by overhead paging of an emergency code indicating the hospital is resp onding to 
a disaster situation, and by a mass alert issued electronically to computer workstations, pagers and/or telephones. The hospital has 
adopted standardized codes for communicating emergency situations used in hospitals across Louisiana. See ECEP012 for a list of  
Emergency Management Plan  
codes. Use of standardized codes and common terminology supports community coordination for an effective response. Ongoing 
communication to staff is provided electronically with the Team Member Alert template and regularly scheduled briefings for 
department leaders. Alerts and updates are also communicated to Team Members via the Lake Alert Text System.  Information is also 
posted as a recorded message on the Disaster Information Line (765 -6651) and using web communication tools such as Lake MD.  
 
The Liaison Officer is responsible for communicating with the East Baton Rouge Parish Office of Emergency Preparedness and 
Homeland Security (EBROHSEP) and other community agencies regarding an emergency event with community -wide implications. 
Infection Control information is relayed to the Office of Public Health (OPH) to convey suspected cases of infectious disease , 
including cases where a biological agent is suspected. (See ECEP008, IC4004). Telephone or radio contact is maintained with other 
area hospitals and with local ambulance services. The Hospital Designated Regional Coordinator as defined in the Region 2 Hospitals 
Plan will be included when EBROHSEP is contacted in order to facilitate communication and information sharing with other hospitals 
in the Region. (See Region 2 Hospital Plan)  
 
A Public Information Office (PIO) is assigned to coordinate communication to the community and/or media during a disaster eve nt. 
Contact information for media and other community partners is maintained by the Corporate Communications department. The PIO is 
responsible for ensuring contact with any Joint Information System established by the community during the disaster. OLOL has  
implemented an all-hazards incident command system that is consistent with other hospitals within Region 2. In addition, OLOL is 
identified as a Designated Regional Hospital in the Health and Human Services Region 2 Hospitals Plan. This role includes 
responsibilities for communicating with other health care organizations within Region 2 and the State during disasters.  
 
The Hospital Designated Regional Coordinator serves as a liaison with other hospitals and OLOLRMC and is responsible for initiating 
and coordinating information sharing including key positions within hospital command structures, resources for sharing and pa tient 
information (when appropriate).  
 
The hospital uses a web-based resource tracking tool provided by the State of Louisiana, to communicate bed availability and other 
key resources during disaster events. The hospital Beds Coordinator /House Supervisor is responsible for updating information 
submitted at established intervals (usually every 8-12 hours) or as often as necessary to communicate an accurate picture of hospital 
resources.  
 
When necessary, information about patients will be shared through the Louisiana Hospitals Association to facilitate prompt 
communication with family members who may be searching for an evacuated patient or patient cared for at OLOL  Facilities in 
response to the disaster. Information about the deceased will be provided to the appropriate Parish Coroner’s Office. 
 
Communication with patients and family members is the responsibility of the Public Information Officer (PIO). The PIO will 
coordinate with department leaders to provide information about the event and protective measures or other action needed on an 
ongoing basis during a disaster event. 
 
Key vendors are alerted as early as possible when a threat is known (for example a hurricane) to prepare additional supplies to be 
delivered to the hospital when needed. Contact information for vendors is maintained in Materials Management, Surgical Materials, 
Linen Services, Nutritional Services and Plant Services and reviewed at least annually.  
 
Redundancies to internal communication systems are available in the form of access to internet, cellular telephones, pagers, and 700 
MHz radio for external communication. Internal communication is supported with Voalte phones. Hand-held radios (walkie-talkies) 
are available for use by mobile staff (i.e., Security). An 800 MHz radio is available for contacting the Hospital Designated Regional 
Coordinator at the East Baton Rouge Parish Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness (EBROHSEP). Government 
Emergency Telecommunication Systems (GETS) telephones and satellite telephones are available and may be activated by the 
Incident Commander when necessary to facilitate critical communication.  
 
B. Critical Planning Area - Resources 
 
The hospital prepares for how it will manage resources and assets during emergencies  including obtaining medication, medical and 
non-medical supplies required throughout response and recovery phases, sharing of resources and assets with other healthcare  
Emergency Management Plan  
organizations within or outside the community and how quantities of resources and assets will be monitored.  
 
Materials Management, Surgical Materials, Linen Services, Pharmacy and Nutritional Services are responsible for maintaining 
adequate patient care, surgical, pharmaceutical, and nutritional supplies to maintain hospital operations during a disaster response. 
Relationships with vendors and suppliers are in place to ensure adequate supplies are available. A cache of patient care supp lies is 
secured by the hospital’s primary distributor for delivery on request during a disaster event. In addition, an on -site cache of personal 
protective equipment (PPE) and pharmaceuticals is maintained. Pre-event orders are obtained to supplement on-site resources for care, 
pharmaceutical and nutritional supplies through identified vendors and distributors. A Logistics Chief is assigned to support  
monitoring of existing resources and to communicate expected needs through the command structure. When necessary, the hospita l 
will use the Region 2 Hospital Plan to request support from Parish, State or Federal agencies.  
 
Resource sharing within the local and state community will be accomplished using the Region 2 Hospital Plan. Region 2 hospitals 
have worked together in purchasing critical equipment and supplies and in providing training for staff to enhance community -wide 
sharing during disaster events. The Hospital Designated Regional Coordinator is the access point for this plan and will facilitate 
resource sharing between Region 2 hospitals and outside the area when needed. The Hospital Designated Regional Coordinator is also 
the avenue through which Parish, State and Federal assets may be requested by the hospital. (See Region 2 Hospitals Plan) 
 
The EOP describes the hospital’s arrangements for transporting patients, supplies, equipment, staff and information when the 
environment cannot support care, treatment and services.  
 
The hospital’s primary strategy is to shelter in place however a plan for evacuating individual departments to safe areas within the 
hospital as well as for evacuating to safe areas outside the hospital is in place  in situations where the hospital environment is no longer 
safe. The Incident Commander has the authority to activate the hospital evacuation plan. Staff is trained in evacuation technique s for 
safe patient movement when equipment is not available for their transfer and tested at least annually. The decision to evacuate will be 
made when it is determined the facility environment cannot adequately support patient care.  (See ECEP003) Patients will be evacuated 
to other hospitals within the community using the Region 2 Hospitals Plan or to other Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health 
System facilities. If alternate care sites are not available within the FMOLHS group, alternate care sites outside Louisiana will be 
activated.  
Local transportation will be accomplished using emergency medical transportation (ambulances) made available by Acadian 
Ambulance and the City of Baton Rouge Emergency Medical Service. FMOLHS will coordinate transportation to other FMOLHS 
facilities or outside Louisiana. If transportation resources are not available when needed, the hospital will request support  through the 
Parish and/or State Emergency Operations Center. Patients will be transferred with medications and care equipment when necessary. 
Items will be labeled using a patient label and recorded on the patient transport log. A copy of the patient’s medical record will be 
collected and transferred to the alternative care site with the patient. If the patient is transferred to an alternate care site that is not 
within the FMOL Health System, the electronic medical record may not be available therefore a paper copy of the record will be 
prepared and sent with the patient.   
 
C. Critical Planning Area - Security and Safety 
 
The hospital prepares for how it will manage security and safety during an emergency  including internal security and safety; defining 
the roles of community security agencies and how the hospital will coordinate with them; Identifying a process for managing 
hazardous materials and waste and a means for radioactive, biological and chemical isolation and decontamination. The hospital 
establishes processes for controlling: Entrance into and out of the facility ; Movement of individuals within the facility and vehicles 
accessing the facility.  
 
Security is responsible for controlling access to the hospital during emergencies. A card -access system has been installed to limit 
access to the main hospital building and to critical (high risk) areas within the hospital. Employees and members of the medi cal staff 
are required to wear an identification badge that is programmed with access appropriate to their job role. Coordination with 
community security agencies such as the police or constable’s office is the responsibility of the Safety and Security Officer  in the 
command structure. Security will implement procedures to secure the hospital’s perimeter including vehicle access to the property. 
When necessary, access to the Emergency Care Unit parking area will be closed and traffic redirected as appropriate.  
  
Emergency Management Plan  
Hazardous Materials and Wastes are kept in a locked storage area until collected by the hospital’s waste contractor. Security  cameras 
are in place to record activity in the storage area.  
 
A team of staff are trained to decontaminate victims who have been contaminated with radiation, biological or chemical agents . 
Decontamination supplies including protective equipment and decontamination showers are available. Should additional resources for 
decontamination be needed, the hospital will request assistance through the Region 2 Hospital Plan and/or from the EBROHSEP. The 
hospital also maintains a relationship with the River Bend Nuclear Power Plant to provide staff training and equipment used w hen 
responding to a patient contaminated with radiation. Companies within the Region provide Safety Plans specific to their organ ization 
about the types of chemicals utilized and proper decontamination processes.  
 
D. Critical Planning Area - Staff  
 
The hospital prepares for how it will manage staff during an emergency and defines the following: the process for communications, 
resources and assets, safety and security, utilities and patient management; the process for assigning staff to essential sta ff functions; 
to whom staff report in the command structure; how the hospital will manage staff and family support needs . Staff is trained for their 
assigned roles and the hospital communicates in writing to LIPs their roles and to whom they report in an emergency EOP describes 
how the hospital will identify care providers and other personnel assigned to areas during an emergency.  
 
All employees are considered essential during a disaster response. The Incident Commander will determine if special staffing is 
required and will direct reassignment of available personnel to ensure critical functions are supported. Staff roles and responsibilities 
are detailed in specific emergency event plans, disaster checklists and job action sheets. Staff is oriented to disaster resp onsibilities 
during general orientation, departmental orientation and reinforced with annual education.  
 
All hospital employees and members of the Medical Staff are issued a photo identification badge to be used as positive identi fication 
daily and during emergencies. Leaders who are assigned roles within the Incident Command structure are identified with red vests th at 
are labeled with the leaders’ command role.  
 
The Incident Command Team is responsible for evaluating the need for staff support during an emergency. When appropriate and 
available, staff will be provided transportation to the hospital and housing within the hospital during a disaster. The decis ion to offer 
shelter / housing during disasters will be made by the Incident Command team based on an event -to-event basis. Cots and air 
mattresses are available for rest / sleep areas when needed. A Critical Incident Stress Management Team is available to provide 
emotional support to staff involved in responding to an emergency event 
 
Processes are in place for the hospital to grant disaster privileges to volunteer licensed independent practitioners (LIPs) and for 
assigning responsibilities to volunteer practitioners who are not LIPs during disasters.  
Volunteer licensed practitioners (such as Registered Nurses, Respiratory Therapists, Pharmacists, etc.) may be requested by the 
Incident Commander when needed to sustain the hospital’s response during a disaster. Volunteer practitioners will be required to 
provide photo identification prior to assignment during disaster events and to wear a photo ID during assignment. Primary source 
verification of licensure will be completed as soon as possible following activation. Physicians who respond to the hospital during a 
disaster will be coordinated by the Medical Staff Office. Emergency privileging will follow procedures enunciated in the Medi cal 
Staff Bylaws. (See ECEP001, ECEP015, Medical Staff Bylaws). 
 
E. Critical Planning Area - Utilities 
 
The hospital prepares for how it will manage utilities during an emergency  and identifies an alternative means of providing for: 
Electricity; Water needed for consumption and essential care activities; Water needed for equipment and sanitary purposes; Fuel for 
building operations and essential transport activities; medical gas/vacuum systems; and other essential utility needs.  
 
In the event of failure of an essential utility, Plant Services will implement the Utility Failure Plan appropriate to the affected utility 
system. A Logistics Chief will be assigned to coordinate communication of utility status during disaster and need to activate 
emergency response procedures if a utility is affected by the disaster.  
  
Emergency Management Plan  
Emergency electricity is available through back-up generators that are tested monthly to verify function and capacity. (See ECUS003) 
Emergency generator (diesel) support is prioritized for critical areas through a uniquely identifiable (red) receptacle. ( See ECUS004) 
In addition, a bank of stand-by generators (natural gas) is available to supplement the emergency generators in supporting facility 
systems. A process is in place for responding to partial or total loss of electricity. ( See ECUS023) Fuel reserves at The Regional 
Medical Center are maintained in an on-site underground 10,000-gallon diesel tank; at Children's Hospital in an on-site aboveground 
40,000-gallon diesel tank, and at OLOL Ascension a 5,000-gallon diesel tank.  Agreements are in place with the fuel vendor to 
provide additional fuel when requested during a disaster event. (See ECUS007)  
 
If the hospital’s supply of potable water is disrupted, Nutritional Services will obtain additional supplies through existing ag reements 
and “disaster orders” with primary distributors. Disruption of water for equipment and sanitary purposes triggers conservation plans.   
 
Medical gas and vacuum systems are supported using additional tanks of portable gasses through agreement with the hospital’s 
medical gas vendor and portable suction units are available through central supply.  
 
Downtime procedures are in place for supporting the hospital information systems structure during short -term interruptions. A disaster 
recovery plan is in place to support information systems that includes offsite, out of state back -up locations. (See FMOLHS IS 
Disaster Recovery Plan) 
 
F. Critical Planning Area - Patient Clinical and Support Activities 
 
The hospital prepares for how it will manage patients during emergencies including activities as a part of patient scheduling, triage, 
assessment, treatment, admission, transfer, discharge; Evacuation; Surge for services for vulnerable populations served by the 
hospital; Personal hygiene and sanitation needs of patients; Mental health service needs of patient; Mortuary services; and p lans for 
documenting and tracking patients’ clinical information.  
 
The Incident Commander is responsible for ensuring hospital operations are maintained during a disaster event. An Operations Chief 
position is assigned to coordinate clinical activities including patient scheduling, triage, assessment, treatment, admission , transfer, 
and discharge. (See ECEP016 – Code Yellow / Mass Casualty Events) Decisions to modify or discontinue patient care activities 
during a disaster will be made jointly by the Incident Commander and Operations Chief.  
 
The decision to evacuate is the responsibility of the Incident Commander with input from Command Staff and outside experts wh en 
needed. Evacuation will be considered when the hospital environment is no longer safe for patient care. When the decision to evacuate  
is made, patients will be evaluated to determine the order in which they will be transported and to what alternate care locat ion. Effort 
will be made to evacuate patients to other hospitals within the community whenever possible in order to reduce the travel tim e and risk 
of injury to the patient. When the community is unable to receive patients, other hospitals within Louisiana including FMOLHS  
facilities will serve as care destinations. Agreements are in place to transport patients to hospitals outside of Louisiana i f necessary. 
(See also Section B. Critical Planning Area – Resources). 
 
Trained staff are available for assuring that vulnerable populations (pediatrics, elderly, mental health) a re cared for during a disaster. A 
Pediatric Emergency Care Unit is in place to address the unique needs of pediatric patients who require emergency care. Staff  from the 
Children’s Hospital will support the Pediatric Emergency Care Unit when needed during a disaster. A mental health evaluation team 
(COPE Team) is in place to provide assessment services for patients with mental health needs. Inpatient acute and geriatric a s well as 
outpatient mental health services is offered by the hospital. The COPE Team is available for assessment of mental health service needs 
of patients during disaster events. In addition, a Critical Incident Stress Management team is in place to support immediate crisis 
intervention needs. Pastoral Care is available for spiritual support to patients and staff during a disaster response.  
 
Personal Care Kits are available to provide for patient hygiene needs through materials management. Waterless products are available 
for patient and staff hygiene if water systems are not available.  
 
The morgue will be used to store deceased patients until they can be delivere d to an appropriate disposition. Morgue capacity is 
limited; therefore, the hospital will coordinate with Parish and Regional resources to facilitate timely collection and/or expand storage 
capacity when necessary. Requests for additional mortuary resources are coordinated by the Hospital Liaison with the Region 2  
Emergency Management Plan  
Hospital Designated Regional Coordinator.  
 
Documenting and tracking patients’ clinical information is the responsibility of the Patient Tracking position within the com mand 
structure. This position will be staffed with leaders from the Access Services or Health Information Management departments. 
Patients admitted as part of a disaster response are identified using disaster registration numbers or other unique identifie rs to 
effectively track the patient within the hospital system. Clinical information is documented using existing methods. If computer -based 
documentation systems are not available, downtime procedures will be used. If in the course of the response patients are tran sferred to 
an alternate care site(s), patient information will be provided to the alternate care site at the time of transfer in order t o ensure 
continuity of care for the patient.  
 
G. Emergency Operations Plan Evaluation 
 
The hospital evaluates the effectiveness of its emergency planning activities through an annual review of risks, hazards and potential 
emergencies as defined in its hazard vulnerability analysis (HVA) and annual review of its Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) an d 
inventory process.  
The hospital tests its emergency operations plan twice a year either in response to an actual emergency or in a planned exercise and 
at least once a year includes an influx of actual or simulated patients. At least one exercise a year is escalated to evaluate how 
effectively the organization performs when it cannot be supported by the local community . Hospitals that have a defined role in the 
communitywide emergency management program participate in at least one communitywide exercise a year . Planned exercises are 
realistic and related to the priority emergencies identified in the hospital’s HVA and are evaluated by a designated individu al who is 
knowledgeable in the goals and expectations of the exercise and documents opportunities for improvemen t. During planned exercises, 
the hospital monitors: Communication; Resource mobilization; Safety and security; Staff roles and responsibilities; Utility systems; 
Patient clinical and support care activities. All exercises are critiqued to identify deficiencies and opportunities for impr ovement 
through a multidisciplinary process and modifications are made to the EOP in response to critiques . Planned exercises evaluate the 
effectiveness of improvements made in response to critiques and this evaluation communicated to a multidisciplinary improvement 
team responsible for monitoring environment of care issues.) 
 
Emergency planning activities are evaluated within the annual evaluation of the Environment of Care program. An HVA is completed 
annually to identify and prioritize potential natural, technological and/or human emergency events that may affect demand for  or the 
hospital’s ability to respond to demand for services. Disaster drills /exercises are performed to test the hospital’s emergency 
management plan. Tests include at least one test involving an influx of simulated victims. Exercises are planned to test the hospital’s 
response in priority emergencies identified in the HVA. OLOL has a key role in the community -wide response and therefore 
participates in at least one community-wide exercise each year.  
 
Evaluation of disaster drills is the responsibility of the Manager, Environmental Safety, and members of the Emergency Management 
Committee. Evaluators monitor exercise activities and collect performance information during the exercise. This is documented  
through After-Action Reports and is used to identify opportunities for improvement and to develop action plans. A summary report of 
exercise performance and resultant action steps is reported at least quarterly to the Environment of Care Committee.  