POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Emergency Management 
Subject:  Volunteer Practitioners Section:  A 
Date of Origination:  June 15, 2006 Supersedes:  
Date Last Revised: 6/18/2009 Serial Code:  ECEP015 
Date Last Reviewed: 05/06/2024 
 
POLICY 
The Incident Commander is authorized to activate volunteer practitioners to support patient care operations under the 
following circumstances:  
• The emergency management plan has been activated, and 
• The hospital is unable to meet immediate patient needs. 
 
Volunteer practitioners are defined as individuals qualified to practice a healthcare profession (for example, a nurse) and 
are engaged in the provision of care and services.  
 
The decision to engage volunteer practitioners is made on a case-by-case basis in accordance with the needs of the 
hospital and our patients, and on the qualifications of the volunteer practitioner.  
 
PROCEDURE 
1. Activation: The Incident Commander will request volunteer practitioners to assist in providing patient care during a 
disaster after consultation with the Planning Chief and Personnel Pool Leader regarding staffing resource needs.  
 
2. Identification: Volunteer practitioners must at a minimum present a valid government-issued photo identification 
issued by a state or federal agency (for example, a driver’s license or passport) and at least one of the following: 
a. A current hospital photo identification card that clearly identifies professional designation 
b. A current license, certification or registration 
c. Primary source verification of licensure, certification, or registration (if required by law and regulation to 
practice a profession) 
d. Identification indicating that the individual is a member of a Disaster Medical Assistance Team (DMAT), or 
Medical Reserve Corps (MRC), Emergency System for Advance Registration of Volunteer Health 
Professionals (ESAR-VHP), or other recognized state or federal organizations or groups 
e. Identification indicating that the individual has been granted authority to render patient care, treatment and 
services in disaster circumstances (such authority having been granted by a federal, state, or municipal entity) 
f. Identification by current organization member(s) who possess personal knowledge regarding the volunteer 
practitioner’s qualifications 
 
3. Verification of Licensure 
a. Whenever possible, primary source verification will be completed. 
b. If circumstances exist where primary source verification cannot be completed within 72 hours, visual 
verification will suffice until such time that primary source verification can be completed. 
c. Documentation of the reason why primary source verification was not completed will be maintained in the 
volunteer practitioner’s file.  
 
4. Assignment: Volunteer practitioners will be assigned disaster responsibilities through the Personnel Pool. Assignment 
will be made based on the organization’s needs and the volunteer’s qualifications.  
a. The Personnel Pool is responsible for  
1. Providing a brief orientation to the hospital upon activation.  
2. Providing a temporary identification badge with the current date and assignment location. The 
temporary identification badge will be reissued daily by the Personnel Pool.  
3. Assigning the volunteer practitioner to a patient care area appropriate to the organization’s need.  
 
b. The Unit Manager that receives the volunteer is responsible for  1. Assigning a preceptor to ensure oversight of professional performance.  
2. Ensuring that skills verification and competency is performed, documented and forwarded to the 
Personnel Pool daily.  
 
c. Volunteer practitioners are responsible for  
1. Checking in and out with the Personnel Pool each day during activation 
2. Wearing the hospital issued temporary identification badge 
3. Completing all tasks as assigned including documentation of care provided 
 
5. Termination: The Incident Commander will determine within 72 hours of activation of the volunteer practitioner(s) to 
continue or terminate the assignment. This decision will be made in consultation with the Planning Chief, Operations 
Chief and Personnel Pool Leader. 
 