 
 
 
 
 
D ECON TAMINATION AND TREATMEN T 
OF 
THE RADIOACTIVELY CONTAMINATED 
PATIEN T(S) 
 
AT 
 
OUR LAD Y OF THE LAKE REGION AL 
MED ICAL CEN TER 
 
 
 
Effective Date: 10/24 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
1 10/24 
 
 
Section  Page 
1 PURPOSE 3 
2 PREREQUISITES 3 
3 GENERAL 4-9 
 3.1 ACTION LEVEL 4 
 3.2 RADIATION ACCIDENT PATIENT 4 
 3.3 SUPPORT SERVICES 5 
 3.4 NOTIFICATION 6 
 3.5 CLEANUP OF REA 7 
 3.6 PATIENT TRANSFER TO DEFINITIVE CARE 7 
 3.7 HANDLING MULTIPLE VICTIMS 7 
 3.8 POST ACCIDENT CRITIQUE 9 
4 PROCEDURE 9 
ATTACHMENT 1 CHARGE NURSE (OR DESIGNEE) 11 
ATTACHMENT 2 PHYSICIAN 12 
ATTACHMENT 3 DECON NURSE 13 
ATTACHMENT 4 BUFFER ZONE NURSE 14 
ATTACHMENT 5 CIRCULATION NURSE 16 
ATTACHMENT 6 HOUSEKEEPING PERSONNEL 17 
ATTACHMENT 7 SECURITY PERSONNEL 18 
ATTACHMENT 8 RADIATION SAFETY OFFICER 19 
ATTACHMENT 9 NUCLEAR MEDICINE TECHNICIANS / 
RADIATION PROTECTION TECHS 
 
20 
ATTACHMENT 10 RADIOLOGY DEPARTMENT 24 
ATTACHMENT 11 DATA INFORMATION SHEET 25 
ATTACHMENT 12 RADIATION EMERGENCY AREA (REA) 
DIAGRAM 
26 
ATTACHMENT 13 AMBULANCE ARRIVAL DIAGRAM 27 
ATTACHMENT 14 DRESS OUT PROCEDURE 28 
ATTACHMENT 15 PERSONNEL DOSIMETRY LOG 29 
ATTACHMENT 16 PERSONNEL SURVEY ANATOMICAL 
DIAGRAM 
30 
ATTACHMENT 17 PATIENT EXIT PROCEDURE 31 
ATTACHMENT 18 STAFF EXIT PROCEDURE 32 
ATTACHMENT 19 SAMPLE COLLECTION 33 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
2 10/24 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 20 GUIDELINES FOR PATIENT 
DECONTAMINATION 
35 
ATTACHMENT 21 EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF 
THE IRRADIATED PATIENT 
40 
ATTACHMENT 22 INTERNAL CONTAMINATION 44 
ATTACHMENT 23 LUDLUM MODEL 3 OPERATIONAL CHECK 45 
ATTACHMENT 24 REFERENCES 46  
3 10/24 
 
1. PURPOSE 
 
The purpose of this procedure is to describe the response of Our Lady of 
the Lake Regional Medical Center to an injured and radioactively 
contaminated patient. The procedure will describe the responsibilities of 
the hospital staff, the set-up of the Radiation Emergency Area, notification 
protocols, and equipment and supplies, decontamination and 
contamination control techniques. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center is a support hospital for the 
River Bend Nuclear Power Station and has agreed to provide medical care 
to patient(s) who sustained injuries and who may be contaminated and/or 
overexposed to ionizing radiation. 
 
2. PREREQUISITES 
 
2.1 If the patient is from the River Bend Nuclear Station, then the plant 
will place a notification call to the hospital emergency department. 
Prior to sending a contaminated patient to the hospital, plant 
personnel shall perform the following: 
• Administer emergency medical care. 
• Notify the hospital and provide appropriate information; 
description of injuries, contamination status, number of patients, 
vital signs and estimated time of arrival. 
• Decontaminate the patient to the extent compatible with the 
injury. 
• Assign a radiation protection technician to accompany the patient 
to the hospital. 
2.2 If the patient is a member of the general public who has evacuated 
the River Bend area, the patient may arrive unannounced.  
4 10/24 
 
3. GENERAL 
3.1 ACTION LEVEL 
This plan is activated by the initial notification of the Emergency 
Department of the impending arrival of a 
contaminated/overexposed patient. This procedure may also be 
activated by the unannounced arrival of a contaminated patient. 
3.2 RADIATION ACCIDENT PATIENTS 
 
Patients involved in a radiation accident are sent to a hospital because 
of a physical injury or illness that may be complicated by the presence 
of radioactive materials. Since radiation injuries are not immediately 
life threatening, primary attention should always be directed at 
traumatic life-threatening injuries. Concurrently or as soon as the 
patient is medically stable, the patient should be decontaminated. 
Radiation accident patients can be classified as an external exposure 
case, contamination case or combination of both. 
 
External Exposure 
An external exposure is one in which the injured person is exposed to 
a radiation source that is not in contact with his body. An example of 
an external exposure is a patient that receives an x-ray. 
In the absence of contamination this type of patient (irradiated patient) 
does not present a health hazard to the hospital staff and can be 
handled and treated as any other emergency department admission. 
 
Contamination 
A contaminated patient is an individual who has sustained a physical 
injury and has radioactive materials (particles or liquid) on his clothing, 
body and/or in wounds. The first priority is patient stabilization 
followed by decontamination. Decontamination is the removal of the 
contaminated material: i.e. removing clothing and/or washing the 
contaminated area.  
5 10/24 
 
3. GENERAL (Continued) 
 
Contamination is seldom a hazard to attending personnel. The presence 
of adequate procedures to prevent the spread of contamination and 
protect personnel will minimize exposure to attending staff. 
 
EXPOSURE CONTAMINATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3. SUPPORT SERVICES 
REAC/TS 
In the event that the patient has incurred excessive radiation exposure 
and/or internal contamination, the services of REAC/TS (Radiological 
Emergency Assistance Center and Training Center) in Oak Ridge, TN can 
be called upon. This assistance may include direct consultation with 
REAC/TS and/or transfer of the patient to a radiological definitive care 
center for specialized treatment as determined necessary by the patient’s 
condition. 
 
REAC/TS (865) 576-1005 (24 hours) 
(865) 576-3131 (days) 
 
LDEQ 
In addition to REAC/TS, the Louisiana Department of Environmental 
Quality (LDEQ) should be contacted concerning any overexposures to 
radiation. LDEQ can provide technical guidance and assistance to 
hospital emergency departments for the treatment and decontamination of 
contaminated injured persons. 
 
LDEQ (225) 219-0941 (24 hours) 
 
6 10/24 
 
 
3.4. NOTIFICATION 
 
3.4.1 The notification call regarding a contaminated injured patient shall 
be directed to the Emergency Department Charge Nurse. The 
Charge Nurse shall complete the Data Information Sheet, 
Attachment 10. 
 
3.4.2 If the notification call is not received over the River Bend Hospital 
Hotline (blue phone), then the Charge Nurse shall place a return 
call to River Bend Station to validate the initial call. To reach the 
Control Room dial (225) 381-3600 extension 2299 on commercial 
phone, or dial 101 on the River Bend Station Hospital Hotline (blue 
phone). 
 
3.4.3 The Charge Nurse (or Designee) shall notify the following 
personnel and direct them to the appropriate sections of this 
procedure: 
 
a) Emergency Department Charge Nurse Attachment 1 
b) Physician(s) Attachment 2 
c) Nursing Personnel Attachments 3-5 
d) Housekeeping Attachment 6 
e) Security Attachment 7 
f) Hospital Radiation Safety Officer Attachment 8 
g) Nuclear Medicine Technicians Attachment 9 
h) Administration Section 4.11 
i) Public Relations Officer Section 4.12 
The following personnel will be notified if needed: 
a) Respiratory Therapy 
b) Laboratory 
c) Radiology (if needed) 
d) Pharmacy  
7 10/24 
 
 
3.5. CLEANUP OF REA 
 
3.5.1 Clean-up and disposal of waste material should be performed by 
Nuclear Medicine / radiation protection technicians (RPT's) or 
designated personnel. 
 
3.5.2 Personnel involved in clean-up activities should don appropriate 
protective clothing. 
 
3.5.3 The hospital areas requiring clean-up should be isolated (i.e. 
doors shut, roped off and security posted) until the clean-up 
personnel arrive and complete the job. 
 
3.5.4 Make necessary arrangements to store contaminated material 
until such time that transportation of such material can be made. 
3.5.5 Removal and disposal of the radioactive waste is the 
responsibility of River Bend if the patient originates from the River 
Bend Station. For all other patients, the responsibility for removal 
and disposal of radioactive waste is that of the State (LDEQ) 
authority. 
 
3.6. PATIENT TRANSFER TO DEFINITIVE CARE CENTER 
 
3.6.1. If it is determined by the attending physician that the patient 
will require transfer to a definitive care center for evaluation and 
long term care, Radiological Emergency Assistance Center and 
Training Center (REAC/TS) will be advised. 
(865)576-1005 (24 hrs) or (865) 576-3131 (days) 
3.6.2. Arrangements can be coordinated through the River Bend 
Emergency Planning Department. 
 
3.7 HANDLING MULTIPLE VICTIMS 
3.7.1. Multiple injuries occurring at River Bend Station would be 
managed by utilizing the principles of disaster planning. These 
include triage at all levels of care and primary attention to life- 
threatening injuries. Radiation exposure and contamination 
should receive secondary consideration.  
8 10/24 
 
 
3.7.2. Local EMS should institute triage principles with primary 
attention to life-threatening injuries. Patients should be 
evacuated to a higher level of care in the following order: 
Major trauma 
Severe acute radiation syndrome 
Symptomatic exposures to radiation 
Asymptomatic over-exposures to radiation 
Difficult contamination problems 
 
3.7.3. Minimum decontamination should include the removal of 
contaminated clothing. If time, permits and patients' medical 
condition warrant, further decontamination can be 
accomplished prior to transport. Every contaminated patient 
sent to the hospital should be accompanied by a radiation 
protection technician. Less seriously injured victims should 
be completely decontaminated at the plant and be transported 
to the hospital in a "clean" ambulance. 
 
3.7.4. Patients with real or suspected over-exposures and no 
associated trauma or illness should be handled as follows: 
Symptomatic: decontaminate at the plant site, and admit to 
the hospital for observation, evaluation and treatment. 
Asymptomatic: decontaminate at the plant site, and identify 
for observation and evaluation at plant site or as an out- 
patient at the hospital. 
 
3.7.5. The hospital triage team should dress in protective clothing. 
The REA should be set up to receive multiple contaminated 
and injured patients. In order to expand the REA to 
accommodate multiple contaminated and injured patients, the 
buffer zone can be used as an additional 
treatment/decontamination area. In this manner, at least three or 
four patients can be simultaneously treated in the expanded REA. 
An imaginary buffer zone can then be established in the hallway 
near the Emergency Department to act as a control point 
between contaminated and clean areas of the hospital. 
 
3.7.6. Upon arrival of the ambulance the triage team should 
evaluate the medical and contamination status of the 
patient(s). Non-contaminated patients should be directed to 
a clean area. The most seriously injured brought into the 
decontamination/treatment room. If more than one patient 
requires immediate care, then they should be brought into the 
expanded REA for treatment. However, if possible, the less 
seriously injured should remain in the ambulance.  
9 10/24 
 
 
3.7.7. Hospital personnel and plant radiation protection technicians 
should be assigned to begin decontamination in the ambulance. 
Contaminated clothing can be removed and collected and 
contaminated areas can be wiped with a damp cloth. If 
decontamination cannot be completed, the areas should be 
covered with plastic or cloth. 
 
3.7.8. The Decon Table should be used for patients with extensive 
contamination. Patients with localized contamination can be 
decontaminated using large waste containers, basin, 
shampoo tray, wet towels or other methods to contain wash 
water. 
 
3.7.9. After the patients have been treated and decontaminated, the 
REA should be closed off; radiation protection personnel should 
survey and decontaminate hospital supplies, equipment, 
ambulance and the area prior to releasing it for routine usage. 
 
3.8 EMS MONITORING AND DECON 
 
EMS crews will be monitored and decontaminated at pre-designated 
emergency worker monitoring and decontamination stations (EWMDS). 
Contact LDEQ for a list of available EWMDS. 
 
3.9 Post Incident Critique 
 
Within 72 hours, a post incident critique should be conducted as part of an 
ongoing mechanism to assure the quality of the management and care of 
the injured/ill contaminated patient. 
All appropriate parties involved, in any and all aspects of the case, should 
be in attendance. A place and exact time will be determined and agreed 
upon. 
   
10 10/24 
 
 
 
4 PROCEDURE 
 
4.1 Emergency Department Charge Nurse (or designee) 
 
4.1.1 The Emergency Department Charge Nurse should use 
Attachment 1 as a guideline. 
 
4.2 Physician 
 
4.2.1 The Physician should use Attachment 2 as a guideline. 
 
4.3 Decon Nurse 
 
4.3.1 The Decon Nurse should use Attachment 3 as a guideline. 
 
 
 
 
  
11 10/24 
 
4. PROCEDURE (Continued) 
 
4.4 Buffer Zone Nurse 
 
4.4.1 The Buffer Zone Nurse should use Attachment 4 as a 
guideline. 
 
4.5 Circulation Nurse 
 
4.5.1 The Circulation Nurse should use Attachment 5 as a 
guideline. 
 
4.6 Housekeeping 
 
4.6.1 Housekeeping personnel should use Attachment 6 as a 
guideline. 
 
4.7 Security 
 
4.7.1 Security personnel should use Attachment 7 as a guideline. 
 
4.8 Radiation Safety Officer / Nuclear Medicine Representative 
 
4.8.1 The Radiation Safety Officer / Nuclear Medicine Rep should 
use Attachment 8 as a guideline. 
 
4.9 Nuclear Medicine Technicians / Radiation Protection Technicians 
 
4.9.1 The Nuclear Medicine Technicians / Radiation Protection 
Technicians should use Attachment 9 as a guideline. 
 
4.10 Radiology 
4.10.1 The Radiology Department should use Attachment 10 as a 
guideline. 
4.11 Administration 
 
4.11.1 If necessary, hospital administration should ensure that a 
responsible hospital representative is available to address any 
media concerns. 
 
4.12 Public Relations Officer 
 
4.12.1 If necessary, designate and prepare an area to address the 
media. Ensure a representative from the utility is available. 
River Bend Emergency Planning (225) 378-3310  
12 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 CHARGE NURSE (OR DESIGNEE) 
 
Prior to Patient Arrival 
 
1. Ensure internal notifications are made. 
 
2. Provide the physician with Attachment 2. 
3. Direct maintenance/ER staff to set up the REA using Attachment 12. 
4. Assign nursing staff to respective positions. 
• Decon nurse (inside REA) 
• Buffer zone nurse (outside REA) 
• Circulation nurse (outside REA) 
5. Direct the following personnel to don protective clothing and dosimetry. 
• Physician (if inside the REA) 
• Decon nurse 
• Buffer zone nurse 
 
NOTE 
The hospital Radiation Safety Officer should be notified of 
anyone reaching 200 mR during the event. 
 
The staff exposure limit is 1000 mR as read on their dosimeter. 
6. Ensure Radiation Emergency Area (REA) is set up. 
 
7. Ensure appropriate equipment and supplies are available in the REA 
for medical treatment. 
 
Patient Arrival 
 
1. Provide guidance and directions to team members. 
 
2. Ensure appropriate medical equipment and supplies are available. 
3. Ensure proper staffing is available for handling non-contaminated 
patients.  
13 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 2 PHYSICIAN 
 
Prior to Patient Arrival 
NOTE: 
In the absence of the hospital Radiation Safety Officer, 
the Physician should also perform Attachment 8 
1. Obtain briefing from Charge Nurse. 
 
2. Ensure that the REA treatment room is prepared by maintenance/ER staff 
(ropes/signs, decontamination equipment, etc.) 
 
3. If entering the REA, don protective clothing and dosimetry in accordance 
with Attachment 14, Dress Out procedure. 
NOTE: 
The hospital Radiation Safety Officer should be notified of 
anyone reaching 200 mR during the event. 
The staff exposure limit is 1000 mR as read on their dosimeter. 
4. In the event of multiple patients, ensure that additional staff is notified. 
 
5. Ensure that additional physician coverage is available for the emergency 
department. 
Patient Arrival 
1. Obtain information regarding the patient’s medical condition and 
contamination status from EMS and radiation protection technician 
accompanying patient. 
 
2. Direct and/or perform necessary medical treatment. 
3. Ensure radiation surveys are performed by nuclear medicine technician / 
radiation protection technician. 
4. Direct and/or obtain samples of the contaminated area in accordance with 
Attachment 19, Sample Collection. 
 
5. Direct and/or perform patient decontamination in accordance with 
Attachment 20, Guidelines for Patient Decontamintation. 
 
6. Direct and/or perform transfer of patient from REA to appropriate section 
of the hospital in accordance with Attachment 17, Patient Exit Procedure. 
 
7. Exit REA and remove clothing in accordance with Attachment 18, Staff 
Exit Procedure  
14 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 3 DECON NURSE 
 
NOTE: 
Decon Nurses are located in the Decon Room (REA) and are 
responsible for treatment and decontamination. 
 
May be required to assist in preparing the REA. 
(Refer to Attachment 6, Housekeeping Responsibilities) 
 
Prior to Patient Arrival 
 
1. Obtain briefing from Charge Nurse. 
 
2. Don protective clothing and dosimetry in accordance with Attachment 14, 
Dress Out Procedure. 
 
NOTE: 
The hospital Radiation Safety Officer should be notified of 
anyone reaching 200 mR during the event. 
 
The staff exposure limit is 1000 mR as read on their dosimeter. 
3. Obtain stretcher/decon table top and be prepared to meet arriving 
ambulance. 
 
Patient Arrival 
 
1. Meet patient at ambulance entrance and perform clean team transfer. 
 
2. Assist attending physician in patient assessment and stabilization. 
 
3. Obtain radiological samples from contaminated area in accordance 
with Attachment 19, Sample Collection. 
 
4. Perform decontamination of patient in accordance with Attachment 20, 
Guidelines for Patient Decontamination. 
 
5. Perform patient exit procedures in accordance with Attachment 17. 
 
6. Exit REA and remove protective clothing in accordance with Attachment 
18.  
15 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 4 BUFFER ZONE NURSE 
 
NOTE: 
May be required to assist in preparing the REA. 
The Buffer Zone Nurse is located in the Buffer Zone (clean area) 
and does not handle contaminated patients unless required to 
enter the Decon Room for assistance. 
Prior to Patient Arrival 
 
1. Obtain briefing from Charge Nurse. 
 
2. Conduct radiological briefing: 
• Do not eat, drink, smoke, chew, touch your face, etc. while working 
around potential radiological contamination. 
• Contamination limit is 300 CPM 
• Survey at 1 inch from the surface at a rate of 2-3 inches per second. 
• Instruct monitored staff to report dosimetry every 15-30 minutes. 
• Remind staff of notification limits and exposure limits: 200 mR notify the 
RSO of the exposure, at 1000 mR leave the area immediately and then 
notify the RSO of the exposure. 
 
3. Don protective clothing and dosimetry in accordance with Attachment 14, 
Dress Out Procedure. 
 
NOTE: 
The hospital Radiation Safety Officer should be notified of 
anyone reaching 200 mR during the event. 
 
The staff exposure limit is 1000 mR as read on their dosimeter. 
4. Ensure personnel entering REA wear protective clothing and dosimetry. 
 
5. Distribute Dosimeters of Legal Record (DLRs), finger rings and self- 
reading dosimeters and document using Attachment 15, Personnel 
Dosimetry Log. 
 
6. Periodically (every 15-30 minutes) record the dosimeter readings for 
each person in the REA using the Personnel Dosimetry Log. 
 
Patient Arrival 
 
1. Record the medical data. 
 
2. Transfer clean materials/supplies into the REA.  
16 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 4 BUFFER ZONE NURSE (continued) 
 
3. Control entrance and exit of personnel and supplies at the control point 
entering the REA. 
4. Ensure that no person or article exits the REA unless a radiological survey 
is performed. 
 
5. Record results of radiation surveys using Attachment 16, Anatomical 
Diagram. Information should include survey results, location and 
time of day. 
 
6. Assist in patient exit procedure in accordance with Attachment 17. 
7. Do not enter treatment room unless requested by the attending physician. 
 
8. Remove clothing in accordance with Attachment 18. 
 
9. Collect dosimeters and record readings. This task may be 
performed by a nuclear medicine technician.  
17 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 5 CIRCULATION NURSE 
 
NOTE: 
Should life threatening conditions arise, care of the patient takes 
precedence over taking the time to dress out in protective clothing. 
In that instance, wearing of dosimetry is the minimum requirement. 
 
Circulation Nurse is located outside the REA and is not 
required to dress in protective clothing or wear dosimetry. 
1. Circulation Nurse is responsible for obtaining supplies from 
Emergency Department and transferring the supplies to the Buffer 
Zone Nurse. 
 
2. If additional personnel are required in the REA, the Circulation Nurse 
should don protective clothing and dosimetry prior to entering the REA.  
18 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 6 HOUSE KEEPING PERSONNEL 
 
Prior to Patient Arrival 
 
1. Upon notification, obtain the Radiation Emergency Area (REA) equipment 
and supplies and begin preparation of the area in accordance with 
Attachment 12. 
 
2. Remove any unnecessary equipment from the REA. 
 
3. Obtain radiation emergency supplies and stage in the REA. 
 
4. Stage REA in accordance Attachment 12, to include the following: 
 
• Stanchions, 
• Rope and signs 
• Step off pad, 
• Wall procedure charts 
• Waste receptacles 
• Anti-Contamination clothing removal procedure  
19 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 7 SECURITY PERSONNEL 
 
Prior to Patient Arrival 
 
1. Place Herculite, ropes, signs and stanchions at the ambulance receiving 
area using Attachment 13, Ambulance Arrival Diagram. 
 
Patient Arrival 
1. Direct ambulance to designated receiving area. 
2. Secure ambulance with rope and stanchions. 
3. Restrict access to ambulance area by unauthorized personnel. 
4. Ensure ambulance personnel remain until a nuclear medicine 
technician / radiation protection technician clears them for release. 
5. Direct non-contaminated patients to alternate Emergency 
Department entrance.  
20 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 8 RADIATION SAFETY OFFICER 
 
NOTE: 
During the management of contaminated injured/ill cases, 
the hospital Radiation Safety Officer will be in charge. 
 
The Nuclear Medicine Techs (or River Bend RP Techs) are in a support 
position and are under the lead of the RSO. 
The Physician may have both the Physician and the 
Radiation Safety Officer duties. 
1. Ensure the monitoring of the ambulance, ambulance equipment and 
personnel 
 
2. Assume overall responsibilities of radiation safety of the involved 
personnel and patient. 
 
3. Direct the Nuclear Mecicine Techs (and/or RP techs) to provide 
immediate assistance as required. 
 
4. When notified that any staff member reaches the exposure limit of 
1000 mR, ensure that the individual is replaced. 
 
5. Refer to Section 3.5, Cleanup of REA. 
 
NOTE: 
Hospital Radiation Safety Officer and plant Nuclear Medicine Techs/RP 
Techs will follow hospital and plant standard practice during radiological 
surveys.  
21 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 9 NUCLEAR MEDICINE TECHNICIANS / RP TECHS 
 
NOTE: 
During the management of contaminated injured/ill cases, 
the hospital Radiation Safety Officer will be in charge. The Nuclear Medicine 
Techs and River Bend Radiation Protection Techs are in a support position 
and are under the lead of the RSO. 
If the patient originates from River Bend Station, plant RP technicians 
will accompany the patient. These technicians can carry out the below 
responsibilities. 
 
Prior to Patient Arrival 
If the patient is coming from River Bend, a Radiation Protection Technician (RPT #1 ) 
will accompany the patient(s) in the ambulance and bring appropriate instrumentation 
with him to the hospital. If staffing permits, a second Radiation Protection Technician 
(RPT # 2) will arrive at the hospital in a separate vehicle and assist in the duties 
outlined below: 
NOTE: 
Hospital Radiation Safety Officer and Nuclear Medicine Techs / Plant RP 
Techs will follow hospital and plant standard practice during radiological 
surveys. 
Ludlum Model 3 prestaged at OLOL RMC Nuclear Medicine department by 
River Bend Station should have an operational check performed per 
Attachment 23 prior to use. 
Survey readings above 300 counts per minute (or 0.1 mR/hr) are considered 
to be contamination. 
Patient Arrival 
Technician #1 
 
1. Do not interfere with or delay patient care. 
2. If patient is not accompanied by RBS RP Tech, perform whole body 
survey of patient 
3. Provide radiation status report to the medical staff; location of 
contamination and survey readings. 
4. Ensure medical team is wearing protective clothing and dosimeters. 
 
5. Don hospital protective clothing; as appropriate.  
22 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 9 NUCLEAR MEDICINE TECHNICIANS / RP TECHS 
(continued) 
 
6. Provide advice and guidance to attending staff regarding radiation 
exposure and protective actions. 
 
7. Upon completion of medical treatment, initiate decontamination 
procedures to include: 
 
a) Complete whole body survey. Provide results to Buffer Zone Nurse 
(or Buffer Zone Nuclear Medicine Technician). 
 
b) Ensure samples from contaminated areas are obtained and 
properly labeled. 
 
c) Provide guidance regarding decontamination techniques. 
 
d) Perform frequent surveys of ER staff’s hands. 
 
8. Provide direction regarding contamination control methods. 
 
9. Ensure patient exit procedure is performed using Attachment 17. 
 
a) Prior to transfer of patient, survey ER staff’s hands and direct them 
to remove outer gown and outer set of gloves. 
 
b) Instruct Decon Team not to step on white floor covering during the 
patient exit. 
 
c) Prior to transfer of patient to clean stretcher, perform final survey of 
patient and affected area, including the back of the patient. 
10. Assist staff in removal of protective clothing and use of step-off pad in 
accordance with Attachment 18. 
11. Survey and decontaminate the hospital REA and equipment and supplies 
as required. (Refer to Section 3.5, Cleanup of REA). 
 
NOTE: 
If contamination was the result of a River Bend event, then contact River 
Bend for disposition of waste. If not, then contact LDEQ. 
12. Perform an inventory of hospital equipment and supplies and contact 
Emergency Planning to arrange for replacements.  
23 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 9 NUCLEAR MEDICINE TECHNICIANS / RP TECHS 
(continued) 
 
NOTE: 
If ambulance and paramedics are secured by hospital security personnel, 
then one technician can perform both responsibilities. Coordinate with 
security. 
 
Survey readings above 300 counts per minute (or 0.1 mR/hr) are considered 
to be contamination. 
Technician #2 
 
1. Survey ambulance personnel. Provide them with guidance if 
decontamination is required. Decontamination can be performed in the 
REA. 
2. Collect ambulance personnel dosimetry. 
3. Survey ambulance and equipment. Decontaminate, if extent of 
contamination is limited or secure the ambulance and contact River Bend 
Station or LDEQ for decontamination. 
 
4. Coordinate the ambulance clearance procedure with the following: 
▪ Radiation Safety Officer (RSO) or, 
▪ Paramedic or, 
▪ Staff RN 
 
5. Monitor route of travel from ambulance to REA and decontaminate as 
necessary. 
 
6. Assist Buffer Zone Nurse at Control Point. 
 
7. Perform surveys of articles leaving the Decon Room. 
 
8. Assist Buffer Zone Nurse with recording of radiation survey results. 
 
9. Assist Buffer Zone Nurse with patient exit procedure in accordance with 
Attachment 17. Ensure personnel entering the REA to assist in patient 
transfer take appropriate precautions. Direct Buffer Zone personnel not to 
walk into the Decontamination Area. 
 
10. Assist Technician #1 with staff exit procedure in accordance with 
Attachment 18 
. 
11. Survey patient and attendants as they exit the REA.  
24 10/24 
 
 
12. Collect dosimetry (may be done by Buffer Zone Nurse). 
 
13. Survey and decontaminate hospital REA. (Refer to Section 3.5, Cleanup 
of REA). 
 
14. Survey and decontaminate hospital equipment and supplies. 
 
15. Collect and control radioactive waste and contact River Bend Station or 
LDEQ for disposition.  
25 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 10 RADIOLOGY DEPARTMENT 
 
NOTE: 
Upon receipt of notification by Charge Nurse of incoming injured or ill 
contaminated patient the radiological technician on duty will perform the 
following procedure as necessary: 
Prior to Patient Arrival 
 
1. Ensure x-ray equipment is in operating order and is located in near the 
buffer zone. 
 
2. If necessary, don protective clothing in accordance with Attachment 14. 
 
Patient Arrival 
 
Upon request for x-ray, determine if procedure is to be handled from 
(clean) buffer zone or (potentially contaminated) REA. 
 
X- ray procedure performed from Buffer Zone 
 
1. Position machine outside of the REA. 
2. Have REA personnel position patient near doorway. 
3. Bag x-ray cassette (plastic bag) and hand into room. 
4. After x-ray is taken, a person in the REA will hold the bagged 
cassette in one hand and pull down the bag with the other hand. 
5. As the cassette is handed to the Buffer Zone Nurse it will be 
radiologically monitored. 
6. The bag remains in the REA room. 
 
 
X- ray procedure performed in the REA room 
 
1. Roll clean white herculite into the REA. 
2. Bag x-ray cassette 
3. Roll x-ray machine into the REA (on clean pathway). 
4. Perform appropriate x-rays. 
5. As machine exits room at control point it will be monitored. 
6. As the cassette is handed to the Buffer Zone Nurse it will be 
radiologically monitored. 
7. The bag remains in the REA room. 
8. Have Nuc Med Tech or RP Tech perform hand and foot survey prior to 
leaving REA.  
26 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 11 DATA INFORMATION SHEET 
 
1. Date and Time of Call:   
2. Person Calling: 
Name of Caller:  
Telephone Number:  
 
NOTE: If call is received over the River Bend Hospital Hotline (blue 
phone) a return call to the plant is NOT necessary to validate 
the information. If contacted directly by ambulance crew use 
established communications protocols used with ambulance 
crews. 
3. Accident: 
Number of Patients:  
Extent of Injuries:   
 
 
 
Name of individual:  
4. Contamination Status: 
 
 
 
 
 
5. On-site Decon Efforts:  
 
6. Expected Time of Arrival:   
27 10/24 
 
KEY 
Stretcher = 
 
 
 
Wall Chart = 
 
 
Rad Waste = 
 
 
Radiation Warning Sign = 
Stanchion(post) = 
Rad Rope = 
 
Anti-Contamination Clothing 
Removal Procedure 
ATTACHMENT 12 
 
Trauma 3 
Radiation Emergency Area (REA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PYXIS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sink Cabinet 
Radiological Eqmt and Supplies 
Headwall 
Step 
Off 
Pad  
28 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 13 
 
Ambulance Arrival Area 
 
KEY 
 
Radiation Warning Sign = 
Rad Rope = 
 
Metal Stanchion = 
 
Ground Tarp = 
  
 
 
29 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 14 DRESS OUT PROCEDURE 
 
NOTE 
Personnel may dress out in blood-borne pathogen 
clothing (CDC compliant) in lieu of the pre-packaged kits. 
Double gowns and gloves are required. 
 
Steps for dressing out in pre-package kits: 
 
1. Obtain dress out kit from REA supply cabinet. 
2. Don shoe covers over pant leg. 
3. Clip DLR on scrub top or shirt. 
4. Put on finger ring dosimeter with detecting element at palm 
surface. 
5. Don first gown and secure with attached straps. 
6. Don first set of gloves. 
7. Don second gown and secure with attached straps. 
8. Clip self-reading dosimetry to gown. 
11. Don second set of gloves. 
12. Don mask and cap.  
30 10/24 
 
PERSONNEL DOSIMETRY LOG 
 
 
NAME 
Date / Time 
Issued 
 
DLR # 
Self- 
Reading 
Dosimeter 
# 
Dosimeter Readings  
Comments  
Initial 
 
1 
 
2 
 
3 
 
4 
 
5 
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
             
30 10/24 
 
PERSONNEL SURVEY ANATOMICAL DIAGRAM 
 
PATIENT’S NAME  SURVEY TIME   
 
 
 
 
 
TYPE OF METER USED   
(Model and serial number) 
Average background cpm    
DISTANCE: Skin to Probe:  (inches) 
 
31 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 17 PATIENT EXIT PROCEDURE 
 
1. Prerequisite 
 
a. Patient is decontaminated and/or a decision is made to 
transfer the patient to appropriate hospital service. 
 
b. Change gloves and remove outer garment. 
 
2. Procedures 
 
a. Buffer Zone personnel should bring a stretcher into the REA. 
b. Perform survey of patient, including the back of the patient, prior to 
transfer to the clean stretcher. 
c. Transfer the patient from decon table to the clean stretcher. The 
Buffer Zone personnel can assist in the transfer. 
d. Transport the stretcher out of the REA. 
 
CAUTION 
The decon team members should not walk on the clean floor covering. 
The Buffer Zone personnel should not walk off the white floor covering. 
Ensure the stretcher does not roll off the white floor covering. 
e. If necessary, survey patient and stretcher at exit point from room 
(Nuclear Medicine / RP Technician discretion).  
32 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 18 STAFF EXIT PROCEDURE 
 
1. Prerequisite 
 
a. Place large lined waste container (32 gallon) at the REA exit. 
 
b. Designate sequence of staff exit. Exit one person at a time. 
 
c. Nuclear Medicine / Radiation Protection personnel should control 
the exit protocol and remind personnel of the sequence for 
removing protective clothing. 
 
d. Nuclear Medicine / Radiation Protection technician located in REA 
should assist in removing attendant’s protective clothing. 
 
2. Procedure 
 
NOTE 
Place all items in waste container inside the REA. 
 
a. Remove outer set of gloves. 
 
b. Remove self-reading dosimeter and give to Radiation Protection 
Technician outside of the REA. 
 
c. Remove outer gown. 
 
d. Remove mask. 
 
e. Remove cap. 
 
f. Remove second gown, from inside out. 
 
g. While facing into the REA, remove shoe covers and step on to the 
step-off pad as they are removed. Cut along front seam, if 
necessary. 
 
h. Remove second set of gloves. 
 
i. Nuclear Medicine / Radiation Protection technician should perform 
a full body survey of every staff member exiting the REA. 
 
h. Return DLR to Buffer Zone Nurse or Nuclear Medicine / RP 
Technician.  
33 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 19 SAMPLE COLLECTION 
 
A. General 
 
The collection of samples from contaminated areas is a prerequisite for a 
thorough evaluation of the radiological status of the patient. Samples should be 
obtained prior to patient decontamination. The sample collection kit should be 
used. Once labeled, return the sample to the kit. The Nuclear Medicine 
Technician will provide samples to LDEQ for analysis. If the patient is from 
River Bend, then the radiation protection technician will take samples to the 
plant for analysis. 
 
B. Principles 
 
1. The objectives of sample collection are: 
 
a. To evaluate the amount and composition of the radioactive 
contaminants on or in the body. 
b. To obtain data with regard to the patient's exposure. 
c. To supply information on the biological injury inflicted by the 
radiation exposure. 
 
2. A sample with an unidentified source (location, time taken) cannot be 
evaluated properly. Ensure that all samples are properly collected, 
stored and labeled. 
 
3. Obtain samples from the contaminated area as identified by the radiation 
protection technician during the survey of the patient. 
 
C. External Contamination Sample: 
 
1. Intact Skin: Use a cotton tip swab, moisten with a few drops of water and 
swab the contaminated area. Place swab in a separate container and 
label with time and location. 
 
2. Wound: Use either one of the following methods: 
 
a. For large wounds with visible blood or wound fluid, obtain a few cc 
sample using an eye dropper or syringe; transfer to bottle and 
label. 
b. For superficial wounds, rub gently with cotton swabs; return to 
tube and label. 
c. For wounds with visible dirt or debris, remove with cotton tip or use 
tweezers; transfer sample to small glass vial and label. 
d. Save the primary dressing in a plastic bag.  
34 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 19 SAMPLE COLLECTION (continued) 
 
 
D. Internal Contamination Samples: 
 
1. Body Orifices: Wet cotton tip swab with a few drops of water or saline 
and swab each nostril, ear and mouth with a separate swab.  Place in 
container and label with time and location. 
 
2. In cases where internal contamination is suspected: 
• Collect initial urine sample and subsequent 24 hour urine. 
• Collect fecal samples for first 72 hours. 
• For further instruction, seek advice from the radiation protection 
personnel, LDEQ, and REAC/TS. 
 
E. External Exposure Samples 
 
In cases of a total body exposure: 
 
1. Obtain 10cc of blood for complete blood count and differential. Record 
time these samples were taken. Call REAC/TS for further instructions. 
 
2. Obtain 10cc of blood in a sterile heparinized tube for radiation 
cytogenetic study. Sample should be chilled not frozen. Call REAC/TS 
prior to obtaining sample. 
 
3. Contact LDEQ for additional guidance.  
35 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 20 GUIDELINES FOR PATIENT DECONTAMINATION 
 
1. Definition 
 
Decontamination is the physical removal of the contaminant from the patient; 
i.e. clothing, intact skin, wound or body orifices. 
 
2. Objective 
 
a. To remove the contamination to reduce exposure to the patient. 
b. To minimize exposure to the attending staff and prevent contamination of 
hospital personnel. 
c. To prevent the spread of contamination beyond the REA. 
 
3. Prerequisites 
 
a. Emergency medical care and patient stabilization should be performed 
prior to decontamination. 
b. Collect samples of the contaminated areas. 
 
4. Documentation 
 
Record decontamination efforts including decontamination method, solutions 
used, location of contamination, number of washings and skin condition. 
 
5. Decontamination Supplies 
 
The REA equipment and supplies include a Decontamination Kit; solutions, 
applicators and contamination control articles. 
 
6. Decontamination Priorities 
 
a. Wounds 
b. Body Orifices 
c. Intact skin 
 
NOTE 
Priorities may be altered if prohibitive degrees of 
contamination are in/on any of the above locations. 
Simultaneous decontamination of multiple areas may be performed.  
36 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 20 GUIDELINES FOR PATIENT DECONTAMINATION 
     (Continued) 
 
7. Preparation 
 
a. Cut away clothing, roll the clothing from inside to out to avoid cross 
contamination of the skin. Discard in lined waste container. 
b. Obtain a complete body survey to identify contaminated areas. 
c. Collect samples from each contaminated site. 
d. Check the effectiveness of the decontamination by multiple radiation 
surveys. 
e. Protect "clean areas" (non-contaminated areas) by covering with water 
proof drapes. 
 
8. Decontamination of Wounds 
 
a. In general, use standard wound treatment/cleaning protocol. 
b. Cover or drape adjacent clean areas using steri-drape or waterproof 
towels (i.e. "Chux") and secure with surgical tape. 
c. Items that can be used in decontamination: 
1) Irrijet and Saline 
2) Betadine sponges (i.e. Cliniscrub) 
3) Soft brushes (i.e. E-Z Prep) or Gauze Pads, soak in Betadine or 
Saline. 
d. Suggested sequence of decon solutions: 
1) Saline 
2) Betadine 
3) Hydrogen Peroxide (3%) 
 
NOTE 
Proceed to next solution if levels have not decreased after three washings. 
Decon to background radiation levels (< 300 cpm) unless medically 
contraindicated. 
e. If wound cannot be completely decontaminated, cover with dressing and 
seek guidance from radiation protection personnel and LDEQ and/or call 
REAC/TS. 
f. Following decontamination effort, dress wound and cover with waterproof 
dressing (i.e. Steri-drape). Secure with surgical tape. 
g. Discard materials in lined waster container. 
i. Following each decontamination effort, survey area and record results.  
37 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 20 GUIDELINES FOR PATIENT DECONTAMINATION 
     (Continued) 
 
9. Decontamination of Body Orifices 
 
a. Decontaminate area surrounding orifices. 
b. Prevent cross contamination of clean areas using waterproof drape. 
c. Gently clean orifice using wet swab. 
d. Eyes 
1) Rinse with a stream of water from nose to temple direction. 
e. Ear Canal 
1) Gently swab with cotton tip swab moisten with Saline. 
2) Rinse with Saline. 
3) Suction may be required. 
f. Nostrils 
1) Turn head to side (if possible) 
2) Use cotton tip swab moistened with Saline. 
3) Suction may be required. 
4) Instruct patient not to swallow, if possible. 
 
10. Decontamination of Intact Skin 
 
a. Protect non-contaminated adjacent skin areas by covering with 
waterproof drapes (i.e. "Chux"). Secure using surgical tape. 
b. The following articles can be used to apply the various decontamination 
solutions. 
1) Soft scrub brushes (i.e. E-Z scrub) 
2) Decon Pads 
3) Gauze Packs (4" x 4") 
4) Solution Bowls 
c. General Decontamination Guidelines 
1) Proceed to next solution if radiation levels have not decreased after 
three washings. 
2) Decon to background radiation levels (<100 cpm) unless medically 
contraindicated (i.e. skin irritation, reddening.) 
3) Proceed from highest contamination level to lowest. 
Simultaneously washing of contaminated areas can be performed.  
38 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 20 GUIDELINES FOR PATIENT DECONTAMINATION 
     (Continued) 
 
d. Decontamination Method 
1) Rinse area for approximately one minute using lukewarm water or 
Saline. 
2) Wash area with lukewarm water and a mild soap or Betadine. 
3) Rinse off with copious amounts of water. 
4) Blot dry using disposable towel. 
5) Survey area and repeat. If level has decreased, continue using 
same method (i.e. soap and water). If level has not decreased 
after three washings proceed to next step. 
6) Wash area using Phisoderm. Apply with E-Z scrubs or gauze 
pads. Rinse and blot dry. If level has not decreased after three 
washings and skin is not irritated or reddened, proceed to next 
step. 
7) Wash area using Hydrogen Peroxide (3%). Apply with scrub 
brush or gauze pads. If level has not decreased after three 
washings proceed to next step. 
8) Gently apply Clorox (5%) using gauze pads or cotton tip 
applicator. Rinse with water. If radiation level has not decreased 
after three washings and skin is not irritated or reddened proceed 
to next step. 
9) Make a paste of tide and corn meal or use Boraxo soap. Apply 
with decon pad. Rinse and blot dry. 
 
CAUTION 
Care should be executed not to abrade the skin excessively. 
10) If radiation levels have not decreased after three washings consult 
with radiation protection personnel and LDEQ regarding the health 
hazard of the fixed contamination and/or call REAC/TS for 
consultation. 
10) Following completion of decontamination effort, apply skin lotion 
(i.e. Aloe Vista) to affected area. 
11) If fixed contamination is present, cover area with a dressing (i.e. 
Tegaderm Transparent Dressing) and label area with 
contamination level.  
39 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 20 GUIDELINES FOR PATIENT DECONTAMINATION 
     (Continued) 
 
11. Decontamination of Hair 
 
a. Protect clean areas using waterproof drapes (i.e. "Chux"). 
b. Shampoo area with mild shampoo (i.e. Johnson and Johnson Shampoo). 
c. Thoroughly rinse hair. 
d. If necessary, repeat several times. 
e. If contamination persists, clip affected area. 
f. Localized hair contamination (i.e. leg) may require hair to be clipped or 
shaved (i.e. Shave Prep Kit). 
 
12. Nail Bed Decontamination 
a. For contamination under nails, clip nails with nail clipper and wash area 
with Phisoderm and E-Z Scrub. 
 
13. Contamination Control Guidelines 
a. Discard all material in lined waste containers. 
b. Change gloves frequently. 
c. Prevent cross contamination of clean areas using waterproof drapes. 
d. Rinse hands before handling/touching clean areas. 
e. Respect established traffic flow patterns and control points. 
f. Wear appropriate protective clothing. 
g. Contain contamination to the REA. 
i. Request frequent radiation surveys of suspected contaminated areas. 
j. Do not pass supplies out of REA without a survey.  
40 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 21 EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF THE 
IRRADIATED PATIENT 
 
The following is a summary of information on the effects of total body and local 
irradiation. 
 
A. Definition 
The patient who has received a less than supra lethal total body or partial body 
exposure to a source of penetrating ionizing radiation will exhibit symptoms 
which are not devastating or life threatening. During the emergency phase he 
will require non aggressive symptom treatment. Supra lethal exposures may 
require aggressive treatment for CNS and cardiovascular collapse. 
B. Procedure 
1. Obtain a detailed history to include type of radiation exposure accident. 
circumstances, extent of exposure, position of source to the individual. 
 
2. Perform a physical and take photographs. Pay attention to skin lesions, 
nausea and vomiting and their relationship to the time and duration of 
exposure. 
 
C. Hematopoietic Signs and Symptoms 
For Total Body Gamma or X-Ray Radiation delivered over a short period of time 
(hours). 
 
Dose: Effect on Exposed Persons: 
 
5,000 mrad (0.05 Gy.) No detectable injury or symptoms. 
 
50,000 mrad (0.5 Gy.) Asymptomatic; Detectable minor depression of white 
cells. 
 
100,000 mrad (1 Gy.) May produce prodromal symptoms (nausea, 
vomiting, fatigue) in about 10 - 20% of persons within 
2 days. 
 
450,000 mrad (4.5 Gy.) Prodromal symptoms, followed by a latent period of 
1 - 3 weeks when moderately severe illness 
develops, due to infection and bleeding. Most people 
require hospitalization. Expect 50% mortality if 
untreated. 
 
600,000 mrad (6 Gy.) More serious degree of the illness described above. 
Approaching 100% lethality without medical 
treatment.  
41 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 21 EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF THE 
IRRADIATED PATIENT (continued) 
 
D. Gastrointestinal Signs and Symptoms 
 
For Total Gamma or X-Ray Radiation delivered over a short period of time 
(hours). 
 
Dose: Effects on Exposed Persons: 
 
>1,000 - 3,000 rad (10 - 30 Gy.) Immediate and profuse onset of nausea, 
vomiting and diarrhea followed by a short or 
no latent period. 
 
Death is probable due to massive 
denuding of the GI tract and 
accompanying septicemia, 
dehydration and electrolyte 
imbalance. 
 
E. Cardiovascular/CNS Signs and Symptoms 
 
For Total Body Gamma or X-Ray Radiation delivered over a short period of time 
(hours). 
 
Dose: Effect on Exposed Persons: 
 
>3,000 rad (30 Gy.) Death in 24 to 48 hours due to vascular 
collapse. Immediate nausea, vomiting, 
anorexia and prostration and irreversible 
hypotension. 
42 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 21 EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF THE 
IRRADIATED PATIENT (continued) 
Local Exposure 
1. Definition 
 
A localized exposure is an irradiation of a small area on volume of body 
such as face or extremities. Localized irradiation injury will seldom 
produce, initial signs and symptoms with the exception of brief exposure 
to very high (000's rem) doses. Radiation damage to the area can 
continue to occur over weeks and months producing ulcerations and 
chronic radiodermatitis. 
 
2. Skin 
 
Erythema may occur within the first 24 - 48 hours with doses in excess of 
1500 rads. Erythema may fade after the first week and return in second 
and third weeks. 
 
3. Hair 
 
Temporary hair loss occurs with doses in the range of 300 - 500 rads 
approximately 2 to 3 weeks after the exposure. It takes approximately 
700 rads for permanent hair loss. 
 
4. Eye 
 
The lens is a most sensitive area, about 200 rad of X or gamma radiation 
will produce initial cataract formations in about 10% of those so exposed. 
A cataract can develop as early as 2 or 3 months after a very high 
exposure. 
 
5. Gonads 
 
The spermatagonia B cells are among the most radiosensitive cells. 
Oligospermia can occur with doses as low as 15 rad. It is usually seen 
with 100 rad and above. Permanent sterility may occur with doses in the 
range of 600 - 1,000 rads.  
43 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 21 EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF THE 
IRRADIATED PATIENT (continued) 
F. Laboratory Tests for Evaluation of Irradiated Patient 
 
1. Complete blood count with differential and platelet count. 
Frequency: 3 - 4 times a day until a better estimate of dose is obtained. 
 
Significance of Absolute Lymphocyte Count* to the Prognosis 
Lymphocyte Count (nadir) Significance and Prognosis 
Over 2,000/cu mm Normal range; no significant injury expected; 
prognosis good. 
 
1,200 - 1,500 Significant but probably non-lethal injury has 
occurred; prognosis good. 
 
Less than 1,200 Serious injury; prognosis guarded. 
 
Less than 500 Possible lethal injury; prognosis poor. 
 
Less than 100 Lethal injury if left untreated. 
 
*When taken within the first 48 hours of an acute whole-body exposure. 
 
2. Chromosome Analysis 
 
Obtain 10 cc heparinized preservative free blood and chilled (not frozen). 
In addition, obtain a control sample from a non exposed person. 
 
Call REAC/TS prior to drawing blood for analysis.  
44 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 22 INTERNAL CONTAMINATION 
 
The following is a brief summary on internal contamination treatment. Consult 
references for detailed information. 
 
4. Definition 
 
Internal contamination occurs when the radioactive material is inhaled, ingested 
or absorbed through the skin or wound. Percutaneous absorption is not a major 
concern except in the case of iodine or tritium radionuclides. 
 
B. Procedure 
 
5. Identify the contaminate, amount and kind of each isotope present. This can 
be calculated using data from radiation surveys and smears, analyses of 
bioassay samples and whole body counts. 
 
2. The dose calculations will determine whether the amount absorbed 
requires immediate treatment. Consult with health physicist or REAC/TS. 
 
3. Treatment is targeted to reducing absorption and incorporation of the 
radionuclide and to hasten the elimination of the contaminant. 
 
Examples of treatment include: 
 
a. Purge the GI tract with emetics and cathartics. 
b. Inhibit intestinal absorption of some radionuclides with antacid and 
alginates.. 
c. Promote urinary excretion with diuretics. 
d. Block incorporation of radionuclides in a particular organ using a 
stable element that saturates the organ. An example is potassium 
iodide which will reduce the uptake of radioactive iodine. 
 
6. Treatment protocols should be discussed with a radiation medicine physician 
prior to being initiated.  
45 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 23 Ludlum Model 3 Operational Check  
 
INITIAL/DATE 
1. Perform an operational check on the survey meter.   
1.1 Verify meter is within calibration date. 
1.2 If not installed, insert batteries into the survey meter. 
1.3 If not attached, attach detector to meter. 
1.4 If installed, remove detector plastic cover. 
1.5 Set “AUD” toggle switch to ON to turn on speaker. 
1.6  Set response toggle switch to S for slow response 
(recommended). 
1.7 Turn meter switch to BAT. Verify needle lies within BAT TEST 
range on meter display. Check or replace batteries, as necessary. 
1.8 Perform instrument source check. 
a. Obtain check source provided with instrument. 
b. Meter switch should be turned to X10 scale. 
c. Using provided check source, place the check source 
(centered) firmly against the detector with the writing on the 
face of the check source towards the detector. It will take 
60 seconds for the meter to reach and stabilize on the 
highest reading. 
d. If reading is within the specified range of 14,500 – 17,500 
cpm (1450 – 1750 on the meter face on X10 scale), the 
meter is good to use. If meter reading is outside this 
range, do NOT use meter and notify appropriate person. 
1.9 Perform Ludlum 3 survey meter alarm check. 
a. Turn meter switch to X0.1 scale. 
b. Move detector towards source and verify increase in audible 
clicks and needle response. 
2. Take background reading by setting the meter switch to X0.1 
scale. Observe and record the average background reading.   
Note: Normal background ranges from 30 to 60 counts per minute. 
  
46 10/24 
 
ATTACHMENT 24 REFERENCES 
 
 
 
1. American Medical Association. A Guide to Hospital Management of Injuries 
Arising from Exposure to or Involving Ionizing Radiation. Chicago, IL, 1984. 
 
2. American College of Radiology. Radiation Accidents. Reston, VA, 1989. 
 
3. American College of Radiology. Medical Research, A Guide to Good Practice, 
Reston, VA, 1985. 
 
4. Hubner KF and Fry SA eds.: Medical Basis for Radiation Accident 
Preparedness. Elsevier North Holland, Inc., 1980. 
 
5. ICRP, The Principles and General Procedures for Handling Emergency and  
Accidental Exposures of Workers. Publication 28, Volume 2 No. 1, Vienna, 
Austria, 1978. 
6. IAEA. Manual on Early Medical Treatment of possible Radiation Injury. Safety 
Series No. 47. Vienna, Austria 1978. 
7. Linnemann, Roger E., A Systems Approach to the Initial Management of 
Radiation Injuries. In: Boyd, DR, Edlich, RF and SH Micik eds.: Systems 
Approach to Emergency Medical Care. Appleton-Century-Crofts, Norwalk, CT 
1983. 
 
8. Linnemann, Roger E., Radiation Injuries: Current Emergency Therapy". 
Editors: Richard Edlich and Daniel Spyper; and Aspen Publication, Rockville, 
MD 1985. 
 
9. Linnemann, Roger, E., Soviet Medical Response to the Chernobyl Nuclear 
Accident. Journal of the American Medical Association, Volume 258, No. 5, pgs. 
637-643, August, 1987. 
 
10. National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurement: Management of 
Persons Accidentally Contaminated with Radionuclides, Report 65, Washington, 
DC 1980. 
 
11. Shleien B: Preparedness and Response in Radiation Accidents. U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, HHS Publication, August 1983 