ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Emergency Management 
Subject:  Pandemic Influenza Section:  A 
Date of Origination:  12/20/2007 Supersedes:  
Date Last Revised: June, 2010 Serial Code:  ECEP008 Appendix B 
Date Last Reviewed:           05/06/2024 
 
PURPOSE 
To provide a response plan for Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) to prepare 
for the presence of a novel influenza virus in Louisiana that will have the potential to result in a 
pandemic.  
 
SCOPE / GOALS 
1. Describe the pandemic threat and its potential impact in Louisiana. 
2. Describe response coordination between hospitals and governmental agencies. 
3. Develop a leadership and authority structure that supports the plan and provides for timely activation 
and decision making. 
4. Develop and describe a plan for pandemic influenza disease surveillance and tracking during an 
outbreak. 
5. Describe a plan for internal and external hospital communication throughout the pandemic. 
6. Present a strategy for pandemic flu response education and training. 
7. Describe a plan for triage, clinical evaluation and admission procedure alternatives. 
8. Designate plans for facility access and increased security needs during a pandemic response. 
9. Demonstrate a strategy for addressing associate health needs during a pandemic including 
vaccination, flu prevention, clinical and psychological needs. 
10. Describe plans for pharmaceutical needs during an influenza pandemic response. 
11. Describe strategies for managing increased ventilator and respiratory therapy needs. 
12. Present plans for alternate staffing methods during patient surges and staffing shortages. 
13. Demonstrate plans for increased hospital bed capacity during patient surge. 
14. Describe plans for material management during the pandemic response. 
15. List strategies for laboratory and mortuary management during the pandemic response. 
16. Describe alternate care locations within the hospital. 
17. Describe how bioethical issues will be addressed. 
 
ETHICAL PRINCIPLES 
The following ethical principles will guide and support decision making: 
1. Autonomy – the right of persons to make moral decisions that affect oneself and are free from 
interference by others.  Limits to autonomy arise when the needs of other people must be considered. 
2. Nonmalfeasance – do no harm 
3. Beneficence – the obligation of the medical professional to provide medical benefits for the patient. 
4. Justice – for all concerned including trust required by the professional-patient relationship. 
 
Guidelines from the Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services to be taken into 
consideration: 
1. As a Catholic institutional health care service, OLOL is a community that provides health care to 
those in need of it.  This service must be animated by the Gospel of Jesus Christ and guided by the 
moral tradition of the Church (Directive #1). 
2.  As a Catholic health care institution, OLOL should be a responsible steward of the health care 
resources available to it (Directive #6). ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 2 
3. The inherent dignity of the human person must be respected and protected regardless of the nature of 
the person’s health problem or social status.  The respect for human dignity extends to all persons 
who are served by Catholic health care.  (Directive #23). 
4. The well being of the whole person must be considered in deciding about any therapeutic intervention 
or use of technology (Directive #33). 
5. An ethics committee or some alternative form of ethical consultation should be made available to 
assist by advising on ethical situations (Directive #37). 
6. The task of medicine is to care even when it cannot cure.  As a Catholic health care institution, OLOL 
will be a community of respect, love and support to patients and families as they face the reality of 
death.  Patients in danger of dying should be provided spiritual support as well as the opportunity to 
receive the sacraments in order to prepare well for death (Part Five: Issues in Care for the Seriously 
Ill and Dying, Directive #55). 
7. Effective management of pain in all its forms is critical in the appropriate care of the dying.  Patients 
should be kept as free of pain as possible so that they may die comfortably and with dignity.  
Medicines capable of alleviating or suppressing pain may be given to the dying person, even if this 
therapy may indirectly shorten the person’s life so long as the intent is not to hasten death (Part Five: 
Issues in Care for the Seriously Ill and Dying, Directive #61). 
 
PROCESSES 
A. Leadership and Authority 
OLOLRMC’s leadership response will be compliant with National Incident Management System 
(NIMS) guidelines and reflected in Incident Command System (ICS) implementation, designation of 
an incident commander (senior leadership or designee), and necessary incident command 
positions/functions.  The ICS methodology will be used to coordinate/implement decisions regarding 
bed closures, patient placement, cohorting, and allocation of scarce medical resources including 
medications, vaccines, antivirals, durable and nondurable medical equipment. 
 
B. Coordination 
1. A pandemic influenza occurrence will require an immediate, coordinated response by 
OLOLRMC including coordination with local, state, and federal levels of government.  
 
2. Coordination within the Baton Rouge Metropolitan Area will be guided by the HRSA Region 2 
Hospital Designated Regional Coordinator (DRC) who will report to the East Baton Rouge Office 
of Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness and work with local responding agencies 
such as the Region 2 Office of Public Health officials and local hospitals and healthcare 
organizations.   
 
3. Coordination at the state level OLOLRMC will coordinate via the HRSA Region 2 Hospital 
Designated Regional Coordinator in conjunction with the Louisiana Department of Health & 
Hospitals, Louisiana Office of Public Health, and the Louisiana Hospital Association.  
 
C. Activation  
The decision to activate the OLOLRMC Pandemic Flu Plan, escalate, or de-escalate the response 
level will be made by the OLOLRMC Incident Commander. This decision will be made based on 
information provided by the Infection Control Practitioner, Louisiana Department of Health and 
Hospitals / Office of Public Health, the World Health Organization (WHO), Centers for Disease 
Control and Department of Homeland Security.  
 
D. Pandemic Influenza – Background ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 3 
1. Incubation Period. The incubation period for human influenza virus is usually 1 to 3 days (range 
1 -7 days).  The incubation period for novel viruses is also short; for example, the average time 
between exposure and onset of illness is 3 days (range 2-4 days) for influenza A (H5N1).  
 
2. Route of Transmission. Transmission of human influenza is predominately by large respiratory 
droplets (>5 microns nuclei) and to a lesser degree by the fine droplet nuclei that are expelled 
from the respiratory tract during coughing, sneezing and even talking.  Transmission also occurs 
through direct contact with contaminated respiratory secretions followed by touching the nose or 
mouth.  Recent outbreaks of influenza A (H5N1) have not suggested a role for airborne 
transmission of disease.  
 
3. World Health Organization (WHO) Pandemic Periods Defined 
 
 
Period Phase Definition 
Inter-pandemic Period Phase 1 No new influenza virus subtypes have been detected in humans. An 
influenza virus subtype that has caused human infection may be 
present in animals. If present in animals, the risk of human infection 
or disease is low. 
Phase 2 No new influenza virus subtypes have been detected in humans. 
However, a circulating animal influenza virus subtype poses a 
substantial risk of human disease. 
Pandemic Alert Period Phase 3 Human infection(s) with a new subtype, but no human-to-human 
spread, or at most rare instances of spread to a close contact. 
Phase 4 Small cluster(s) with limited human-to-human transmission but 
spread is highly localized, suggesting that the virus is not well 
adapted to humans. 
Phase 5 Larger cluster(s) but human-to-human spread still localized, 
suggesting that the virus is becoming increasingly better adapted to 
humans, but may not yet be fully transmissible (substantial 
pandemic risk). 
Pandemic Period Phase 6 Pandemic: Increased and sustained transmission in general 
population. 
 
The distinction between phase 1 and phase 2 is based on the risk of human infection or disease resulting 
from circulating strains in animals. The distinction is based on various factors and their relative 
importance according to current scientific knowledge. Factors may include pathogenicity in animals and 
humans, occurrence in domesticated animals and livestock or only in wildlife, whether the virus is 
enzootic or epizootic, geographically localized or widespread, and/or other scientific parameters.  The 
distinction between phase 3, phase 4 and phase 5 is based on an assessment of the risk of a pandemic. 
Various factors and their relative importance according to current scientific knowledge may be 
considered. Factors may include rate of transmission, geographical location and spread, severity of 
illness, presence of genes from human strains (if derived from an animal strain), and/or other scientific 
parameters. 
 
E. Surveillance 
Phases 1, 2, and 3 
1. The Infection Control department is responsible for ongoing monitoring of inpatients for 
infectious disease. See also IC1002, The Infection Control Plan.  ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 4 
a. Reporting suspected cases of reportable disease is made to the Office of Public Health 
through the Reportable Disease Databank.  
2. Employee Health is responsible for ongoing monitoring of reports of employee illness for 
symptoms of influenza or influenza-like-illness (ILI).  
3. All other employees will  
a. Standard Precautions is to be routinely practiced by all health-care personnel.  
i. During the care of a patient with suspected or confirmed influenza:   
ii. Wear gloves if hand contact with respiratory secretions or potentially 
contaminated surfaces is expected.   
iii. Wear a gown if soiling of clothes with patient’s respiratory secretions is 
expected.   
iv. Change gloves and gowns after each patient encounter and perform hand 
hygiene.   
v. Decontaminate hands before and after touching the patient, after touching the 
patient’s environment, or after touching the patient’s respiratory secretions, 
whether or not gloves are worn.  
vi. When hands are visibly soiled or contaminated with respiratory secretions, wash 
hands with either a non-antimicrobial or an antimicrobial soap and water.  
vii. If hands are not visibly soiled, use an alcohol-based hand rub for routinely 
decontaminating hands in clinical situations. Alternatively, wash hands with an 
antimicrobial soap and water.   
b. Droplet Precautions - Respiratory droplets are the primary route of influenza 
transmission.  
i. In addition to Standard Precautions, observe Droplet Precautions during the care 
of a patient with suspected or confirmed influenza. 
ii. Place patient into a private room. If a private room is not available, place (cohort) 
suspected influenza patients with other patients suspected of having influenza; 
cohort confirmed influenza patients with other patients confirmed to have 
influenza.  
iii. Don a surgical mask before entering the patient’s room or when working within 3 
feet of the patient. Remove the mask when leaving the patient’s room and 
dispose of the mask in a waste container.  
iv. If patient movement or transport is necessary, have the patient wear a surgical 
mask, if possible 
v. Implement droplet precautions for all persons having respiratory symptoms of 
coughing and sneezing, running nose and/or fever. 
vi. Have tissue or surgical masks available for persons to use to cover their cough. 
vii. Keep alcohol hand sanitizer in easy access. 
viii. Have persons with respiratory or flu-like symptoms sit three (3) feet from other 
persons in waiting area. 
c. Keep respiratory etiquette signs posted and hand hygiene supplies available in common 
waiting rooms and entry points to the hospital. 
 
Phases 4 and 5 
Follow action steps outlined in Phases 1, 2 and 3. In addition: 
1. Place signs outside the Emergency Department (ED) and outpatient facilities requesting that 
persons with influenza-like illness and/or has traveled to areas where Pandemic influenza has 
been identified to identify themselves to the Triage Nurse (or e.g., security, admitting staff) upon 
entering the building.   
2. When a patient is presents to the hospital or is admitted: 
a. A mask should be placed on the patient at triage or admission.   ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 5 
b. Persons accompanying the patient should be screened for symptoms of the novel virus.  
c. Post visual alerts enforcing “respiratory hygiene” precautions.  
3. Actively screen symptomatic patients for either personal or contact history of travel to geographic 
area with reported virus activity.  
4. Decisions regarding the need for escalating infection control measures will be based on virus 
activity and transmission risks.    
a. It is anticipated that neither immunization nor chemoprophylaxis will be available in the 
early stages of a pandemic and perhaps not even available in later stages, necessitating an 
emphasis on infection prevention and control practices.   
b. Strict adherence to hand hygiene recommendations is the cornerstone of infection 
prevention and may be the only preventative measure available during a pandemic.  
5. Isolate any hospitalized or ambulatory patient with the following symptoms. Report all cases to 
the Office of Public Health. 
a. Radio-graphically confirmed pneumonia, acute respiratory distress, or other sever 
respiratory illness with no alternate diagnosis 
b. History of travel to a country with identified avian influenza in poultry or humans within 
10 days of symptom onset. 
c. Documented temperature of greater than 100.4F with one or more of the following: 
cough, sore throat, shortness of breath 
d. History of contact with poultry or a known or suspected human case within 10 days of 
symptom onset. 
6. Implement a system for early detection and treatment of healthcare personnel who might be 
infected with the pandemic strain of influenza 
a. Require all employees to report the presence of any of the following symptoms if he/she 
calls in sick: Temperature greater than 100.4F, cough, sore throat, recent travel to high 
risk country.  
b. Employee Health will monitor and follow up with those cases which meet the above 
criteria and require those employees complete testing for influenza. 
c. Employees with these symptoms will not be allowed to work until cleared by a physician. 
 
Phase 6 
In addition to action steps in Phases 1-5 begin the following: 
1. Activate appropriate Emergency Response Plans 
a. Emergency Operations Plan (ECEP-001) 
b. Mass Influx of Infectious Disease Patients / Bioterrorism Plan (ECEP-008) 
2. Actively screen all patients and staff prior to entering the facility, including monitoring body 
temperature.  
3. Conduct Influenza A and MRSA screening on all patients hospitalized with pneumonia who in 
the 10 days before illness onset traveled to or had close contact with other ill persons who 
recently traveled to an area where virus activity is reported. 
 
F. Communication Plan 
External Communication 
1. All external communication other than data reporting (for example, to the Office of Public 
Health) will be coordinated by the Public Information Officer to ensure consistent information is 
relayed.  
2. The Responsibility for external communication regarding pandemic will be assigned as 
appropriate for the following areas: 
a. Public Health Reporting – Infection Control Practitioner 
b. Clinical Spokesperson – Medical Director, or designee 
c. Media Spokesperson – Public Information Officer, or designee ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 6 
3. Identify points of contact among local media representatives, public officials and community 
leaders. 
4. Establish the method, frequency and scope of external communications. 
5. Determine how public inquiries will be handled, the types of information that will be provided by 
OLOLRMC and the types of inquiries that will be referred to the Office of Public Health. 
6. Communications between local and regional healthcare facilities and support agencies will be 
managed by the HRSA Region 2 Hospital Designated Regional Coordinator and Hospital 
Liaison, or designee, information sharing will include: 
a. Staffing needs 
b. Bed capacity 
c. Durable and consumable medical equipment and device needs 
d. Supplies of influenza vaccine and antiviral drugs 
 
Internal Communication 
1. Laboratory Services will notify Infection Control immediately of a laboratory confirmed case of a 
novel influenza virus. 
2. Infection Control will notify Senior Leadership Team, Infectious Disease Physician and 
Emergency Preparedness Coordinator. 
3. During a pandemic, key stakeholders will remain updated at often as possible but at least weekly 
on pandemic status.  Updates to include: 
a. Number of cases 
b. Severity 
c. Trends (beginning, increasing numbers, peak, decreasing numbers, end) 
d. Prevention strategies being used 
e. Allocation of resources 
4. A formal report will be presented to the Infection Control Committee monthly during the 
pandemic. 
 
G. Education and Training Plan  
1. Health-care personnel who would be involved in caring for a patient with a novel strain of 
influenza A will receive training in modes of transmission, appropriate infection control 
precautions and exposure control.  
2. Clinicians, intake and triage staff will be regularly updated on the status of the pandemic locally, 
nationally, and internationally (via email, memoranda, or meetings).  
a. Intake and triage staff will be trained on how to assess risks for the pandemic strain of 
influenza and use any applicable tools (thermometers, signs/symptoms of pandemic 
influenza) to screen patients.   
 
H. Triage, Clinical Evaluation and Admission Procedures 
Phase 1, 2, 3 
1. Triage  
a. The Emergency Department provides initial triage and screening of patients presenting to 
the hospital with symptoms of influenza.  
b. Documentation of triage and screening data will be in the electronic medical record. 
Triage questions relative to the pandemic flu are pre-loaded into the documentation 
system to standardize data collection 
 
Phase 4, 5, 6 
1. Triage 
a. A screening station will be placed outside the facility to screen patients before they enter 
the Emergency Department. ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 7 
b. At the Emergency Department, patients with respiratory symptoms will be triaged and 
provided a surgical mask to minimize the risk of transmission to other patients and guests 
in the waiting area.  
c. Alternate screening stations in the following areas will be opened based on the number of 
identified cases.  
i. Health Careers Institute 
ii. Heart Center Waiting 
iii. Main Entrance to the hospital 
iv. Lake After Hours / Convenient Care clinics will provide support for screening 
patients with mild illness.  
d. Lake Primary Care Physician Clinics will complete telephone screening of patients with 
appointments.  
e. Lake Line Direct will provide telephone triage support to the community. 
f. Patients with a suspected strain of pandemic influenza requiring medical evaluation will 
be seen in designated staging locations.  
v. If possible, the designated area will be notified prior to the patient’s arrival.    
vi. Minor care patients will be directed to the Health Careers Institute triage and 
screening location whenever possible. 
g. The patient will be required to wear a surgical mask.   
h. Persons accompanying the patient for evaluation will be screened for symptoms of 
pandemic influenza ideally prior to entering the facility.  
2. Pandemic Influenza Screening Form will be completed and faxed to infection control.   
3. Documentation of triage and screening data will be in the electronic medical record. Triage 
questions relative to the pandemic flu are pre-loaded into the documentation system to 
standardize data collection. 
a. If / when the electronic system is not available, staff will document screening using a 
paper form.  
4. All patients presenting with signs and symptoms of influenza will be screened using the 
electronic form.  
a. Triage information about patients with strong epidemiological risk factors (for 
example, recent travel to high risk area) will be provided to the Infection Control 
Department for surveillance. 
5. Medical Staff: Members of the hospital medical staff may be asked to limit hospital admissions, 
transfers, and discharges (in accordance with local/state recommendations and regulations) in the 
event that hospital transmission of a pandemic strain of influenza occurs.   
 
I. Clinical Guidelines 
Phase 1, 2, and 3  
1. Further evaluation and diagnostic testing should also be considered for outpatients with strong 
epidemiological risk factors and mild or moderate illness. 
2. Updated information on areas where novel influenza virus transmission is suspected or 
documented is available on the WHO website 
(http://www.who.int/csr/disease/avian_influenza/country/en/index.html). 
3. For persons who live in or visit affected areas, close contact includes touching live poultry (well-
appearing, sick or dead) or touching or consuming uncooked poultry products, including blood. 
For animal or market workers, it includes touching surfaces contaminated with bird feces. In 
recent years, most instances of human infection with a novel influenza A virus having pandemic 
potential, including influenza A (H5N1), are thought to have occurred through direct transmission 
from domestic poultry. A small number of cases are also thought to have occurred through 
limited person-to-person transmission or consumption of uncooked poultry products. 
Transmission of novel influenza viruses from other infected animal populations or by contact ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 8 
with fecal contaminated surfaces remains a possibility. These guidelines will be updated as 
needed if alternate sources of novel influenza viruses are suspected or confirmed. 
4. Close contact includes direct physical contact, or approach within 3 feet of a person with 
suspected or confirmed novel influenza. 
5. Hospitalization should be based on all clinical factors, including the potential for infectiousness 
and the ability to practice adequate infection control. If hospitalization is not clinically warranted, 
and treatment and infection control is feasible in the home, the patient may be managed as an 
outpatient. The patient and his or her household should be provided with Home Quarantine and 
Self-Help information. The patient and close contacts should be monitored for illness by local 
public health department staff. 
6. Suspected cases of novel influenza will be reported to the Louisiana CDC. See the Surveillance 
section of this plan for guidance.  
7. The general work-up should be guided by clinical indications. Depending on the clinical 
presentation and the patient’s underlying health status, initial diagnostic testing might include: 
▪ Pulse oximetry 
▪ Chest radiograph 
▪ Complete blood count (CBC) with differential 
▪ Blood cultures 
▪ Sputum (in adults), tracheal aspirate, pleural effusion aspirate (if pleural effusion is 
present)  
▪ Gram stain and culture 
▪ Antibiotic susceptibility testing (encouraged for all bacterial isolates) 
▪ Multivalent immunofluorescent antibody testing or PCR of nasopharyngeal aspirates or 
swabs for common viral respiratory pathogens, such as influenza A and B, adenovirus, 
parainfluenza viruses, and respiratory syncytial virus, particularly in children  
▪ Legionella and pneumococcal urinary antigen testing for adults with radiographic 
evidence of pneumonia. 
▪ If clinicians have access to rapid and reliable testing (e.g., PCR) for M. pneumoniae and 
C. pneumoniae, adults and children <5 yrs. with radiographic pneumonia should be 
tested. 
▪ Comprehensive serum chemistry panel, if metabolic derangement or other endorgan 
involvement, such as liver or renal failure, is suspected. 
8. Guidelines for novel influenza virus testing as per Louisiana State CDC. All the following 
respiratory specimens should be collected for novel influenza A virus testing:  
▪ nasopharyngeal swab.  
▪ nasal swab, wash, or aspirate.  
▪ throat swab; and  
▪ tracheal aspirate (for intubated patients) stored at 4° C (39°F) in viral transport media; 
and  
▪ acute and convalescent serum samples. 
9. Given the unknown sensitivity of tests for novel influenza viruses, interpretation of negative 
results should be tailored to the individual patient in consultation with the state health department. 
Novel influenza directed management might need to be continued, depending on the strength of 
clinical and epidemiological suspicion. Antiviral therapy and isolation precautions for novel 
influenza may be discontinued on the basis of an alternative diagnosis. The following criteria may 
be considered for this evaluation: 
▪ Absence of strong epidemiological link to known cases of novel influenza 
▪ Alternative diagnosis confirmed using a test with a high positive-predictive value 
▪ Clinical manifestations explained by the alternative diagnosis. 
 
Phase 4, 5, and 6 ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 9 
1. Antiviral therapy and isolation precautions for pandemic influenza should be discontinued on 
the basis of an alternative diagnosis only when both the following criteria are met: 
▪ Alternative diagnosis confirmed using a test with a high positive-predictive value, 
and 
▪ Clinical manifestations entirely explained by the alternative diagnosis 
2. Strict adherence to Standard and Droplet Precautions (See also Surveillance / Infection 
Control section.) 
3. See guidance from the state on laboratory testing during the Pandemic Period. Generally, 
specimens should include respiratory samples (e.g., nasopharyngeal wash/aspirate; 
nasopharyngeal, nasal or oropharyngeal swabs, or tracheal aspirates) stored at 4°C in viral 
transport media. 
NOTE: Routine laboratory confirmation of clinical diagnoses will be unnecessary as 
pandemic activity becomes widespread in a community. CDC will continue to work with 
state health laboratories to conduct virologic surveillance to monitor antigenic changes 
and antiviral resistance in the pandemic virus strains throughout the Pandemic Period. 
4. The decision to hospitalize should be based on a clinical assessment of the patient and the 
availability of hospital beds and personnel. 
a. When necessary, cohorting may be used to enhance the number of bed available for 
patient care.  
b. Laboratory confirmation of influenza infection is recommended whenever possible 
before cohorting patients. 
5. The individual patient work-up should be guided by clinical indications. Depending on the 
clinical presentation and the patient’s underlying health status, initial diagnostic testing might 
include: 
a. Pulse oximetry 
b. Chest radiograph 
c. Complete blood count (CBC) with differential 
d. Blood cultures 
e. Sputum (in adults) or tracheal aspirate Gram stain and culture 
f. Antibiotic susceptibility testing (encouraged for all bacterial isolates) 
g. Multivalent immunofluorescent antibody testing of nasopharyngeal aspirates or 
swabs for common viral respiratory pathogens, such as influenza A and B, 
adenovirus, parainfluenza viruses, and respiratory syncytial virus, particularly in 
children 
h. In adults with radiographic evidence of pneumonia, Legionella and pneumococcal 
urinary antigen testing 
i. If clinicians have access to rapid and reliable testing (e.g., PCR) for M. pneumoniae 
and C. pneumoniae, adults and children <5 yrs. with radiographic pneumonia should 
be tested. 
j. Comprehensive serum chemistry panel, if metabolic derangement or other end-organ 
involvement, such as liver or renal failure, is suspected. 
 
6. Guidance on the reporting of pandemic influenza cases is provided in the Surveillance 
section of this Plan. 
7. Patients with mild disease should be provided with home-care kits, including standardized 
instructions on home management of fever and dehydration, pain relief, and recognition of 
deterioration in status. Patients should also receive information on infection control measures 
to follow at home. Patients cared for at home should be separated from other household 
members as much as possible. All household members should carefully follow 
recommendations for hand hygiene, and tissues used by the ill patient should be placed in a 
bag and disposed of with other household waste. Infection within the household may be ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 10 
minimized if a primary caregiver is designated; ideally, someone who does not have an 
underlying condition that places them at increased risk of severe influenza disease. Although 
no studies have assessed the use of masks at home to decrease the spread of infection, using a 
surgical or procedure mask by the patient or caregiver during interactions may be beneficial. 
Separation of eating utensils for use by a patient with influenza is not necessary, as long as 
they are washed with warm water and soap. 
 
J. Palliative Care  
1. Palliative Care Team is available to assist with pain and symptom management of patients with 
the pandemic flu. It is expected that there will be three primary patient groups: 
a. Patients who receive ventilator support. 
b. Patients who receive curative treatment attempts, but no ventilator support 
c. Patients who receive palliative treatment 
2. Palliative Care will focus on pain and symptom management in conjunction with the patient’s 
primary service provider (admitting physician, Hospital Medicine Service, Intensivist) to 
determine treatment goals and to provide education and support to the patient and family.  
a. Care provided will focus on meeting the patient’s spiritual and emotional needs, 
addressing social issues and providing psychological support when needed.  
b. A Pharmacist is included in the Palliative Care team to assist with managing medications.  
3. The Palliative Care Team will also interface with Long Term Care, Home Health, Hospice 
providers within the community whenever possible.  
 
K. Post-Mortem care of Hospitalized Pandemic Influenza Patients 
1. Health care workers must follow Standard Precautions when caring for a patient with pandemic 
influenza who is deceased. 
2. Full Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) must be worn if the patient died during the infectious 
period (i.e. within 7 days after resolution of fever in adults and 21 days after the onset of 
symptoms in children). 
3. Transfer to the mortuary should occur as soon as possible after death. 
4. If the family wishes to view the body, they may be allowed to do so.  If the patient died during 
the infectious period, the family should wear gloves and a gown. 
5. Disposition of the body will be documented on the Morgue Log according to existing process. 
Should the patient be transferred to a mass fatality holding area instead of a funeral home, 
documentation of which holding area will be recorded on the form. 
6. The deceased patient’s family will be informed of the location of the body.  
 
L. Security/ Facility Access 
1. Managed Access: When pandemic influenza is present in the community, effective management 
of patient and guest access to the facility will be essential. Decisions to restrict access to the 
facility will be made by the Security Director and Incident Commander. See also policy 
ECEP011 – Emergency Security Procedures for specific guidance.  
2. Visiting 
a. Guests and visitors to the hospital may be restricted based on the prevalence of virus 
within the community.  
b. Decisions to limit visiting will be made by the Security Director and Incident 
Commander, and communicated to hospital staff, patients and the community.  
 
M. Occupational Health Plan  
1. Vaccination  ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 11 
a. Annual seasonal influenza vaccination will be offered to all hospital staff, licensed 
independent practitioners and volunteers. All hospital workers are encouraged to be 
vaccinated against influenza.  
b. A risk stratified scheme for prioritizing vaccination of healthcare personnel who are most 
critical for patient care and essential personnel to maintain the day-to-day operation of 
the healthcare facility will be followed when necessary. 
c. It is recommended that all health care workers who meet the following criteria be 
vaccinated with the current WHO recommended influenza vaccine as soon as possible:  
i. Healthcare workers expected to have contact with a novel influenza A virus or a 
patient infected with novel virus, or  
ii. Have contact with an environment that is likely to be contaminated with the 
influenza virus. 
2. Managing ill workers 
a. Implement plans to detect signs and symptoms of influenza in healthcare workers before 
they report for duty.  
b. Implement Employee Health procedures for managing healthcare workers with 
respiratory symptoms with and without elevated temperature.   
c. Consider assigning staff who are recovering from influenza to care for influenza patients. 
d. Ensure that time-off policies and procedures consider staffing needs during periods of 
clinical crisis. 
e. Personnel at high risk for complications of influenza (such as pregnant women, persons 
immunocompromised or over 65 years of age) will be evaluated on a one-on-one basis to 
determine if reassigning them to low-risk duty or placing them on furlough will be 
needed. 
3. Post Exposure to novel influenza virus 
a. Infection Control and Employee Health will follow post-exposure follow-up guidelines of 
healthcare personnel after unprotected exposures to novel strains of influenza A.  
Guidelines will be based in guidance issued by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) 
and Office of Public Health (OPH). Follow-up will be inclusive of medical staff, hospital 
employees, students, contract and volunteer services. 
b. If a healthcare worker provides care at more than one facility, the healthcare worker will 
be instructed to notify Infection Control if one of the facilities is providing care to novel 
virus patients.  
c. If quarantine is used as an exposure management tool, some healthcare workers may be 
placed on ‘home/work restrictions’ to ensure sufficient staffing levels.  Healthcare 
workers on home/work restrictions should travel only between home and the healthcare 
facility for the duration of the restriction.   
d. Health care workers will have access to mental health professionals to help them cope 
with the emotional strain of managing a pandemic (e.g., Employee Assistance Program 
and Critical Incident Stress Management). See also policy OrgOpsGN028 – Critical 
Incident Stress Management Team.  
4. Managing Well Employees 
a. Whenever possible, well, unexposed employees should work in non-influenza areas 
b. Asymptomatic employees may work even if influenza vaccine and antivirals are 
unavailable. 
c. Meticulous attention should be paid to hand hygiene and employees should avoid 
touching mucous membranes of the eye and mouth to prevent exposure to the influenza 
virus and other infective organisms. 
d. Provide Mental Health Services and Crisis Counseling for employee/s that need 
counseling to maximize professional performance and personal resilience by addressing ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 12 
management of grief, exhaustion, anger, fear, self and family physical needs, and ethical 
dilemmas. 
5. Determining if an Employee may work.  
a. Employees may be considered “Fit to Work” when one of the following conditions apply: 
i. They have recovered from pandemic flu, during earlier phases of the pandemic 
ii. They have been immunized against the pandemic strain of influenza (if vaccine is 
available.) 
iii. They are on appropriate antivirals. 
iv. Such employees may work with all patients and may be selected to work in units 
where there are patients who, if infected with influenza, would be at high risk for 
complications. 
b. Staff with Influenza-like Illness (ILI) should be considered “Not Fit to Work” and should 
not work. In cases of extremely limited resources, employees may be asked to work if 
they are well enough to do so and must follow these guidelines: 
i. They must work with non-exposed patients (non-influenza areas) and should be 
required to wear a mask if they are coughing. 
ii. They must pay meticulous attention to hand hygiene. 
iii. They should not be redeployed to intensive care areas, nursery or an area with 
severely immunocompromised patients, i.e. transplant recipients, 
hematology/oncology patients, patients with chronic heart or lung disease, or 
patients with HIV/AIDS and dialysis patients. 
 
N. Use and Administration of Vaccines, Antivirals, and Antibiotics 
1. If available, staff will be provided vaccines, antiviral prophylaxis and/or antibiotic medication.  
2. If supplies are not available to provide medications to all employees, administration will be 
prioritized to staff based on risk of exposure.  
3. If necessary, a mass dispensing center will be established for hospital staff.  
 
O. Surge Capacity 
1. Staffing 
a. When the OLOLRMC plan is activated, Department Directors will evaluate staffing to 
determine needs and how to adjust shift assignments to ensure adequate coverage. (See 
also ECEP014- Disaster (Hurricane) Staffing Team.)  
b. All team members are essential and are expected to report for work according to his/her 
assignment.  
c. All scheduled vacation / PTO will be recalled in the event of an actual event.  
d. Staff not assigned will report to the Personnel Pool for assignment to an area where 
staffing needs are identified.  
• Staff may be reassigned to a role outside of their normal job to maintain patient 
care operations. 
• Clinicians whose regular job is in a nontraditional role may be reassigned to a 
clinical position when necessary. These staff will complete a self assessment of 
clinical competency to guide decision making.  
e. All staff will be assessed as they check-in for work for flu symptoms prior to shift start. 
Any staff with possible flu symptoms will be directed to Employee Health for further 
screening prior to beginning work.  
f. The VP Nursing will meet with key members of Senior Management Team and the 
Medical staff to determine what service areas should be closed to divert the necessary 
staff to needed areas.   ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 13 
g. The Incident Command Center will receive staffing reports and be in contact with other 
hospitals in our area for coordination purposes, and in touch with the Department of 
Health.  
h. The Incident Commander will determine if on-campus sleep areas will be opened to 
house employees who need to stay over to staff patients.  
i. The Incident Commander will determine if child/dependent care services for employees 
who need to work but need child/dependent care services for their family members. 
2. Surge Capacity / Beds    
a. The Hospital Beds Coordinator is responsible for managing placement of patients within 
the hospital to maximize bed resources.  
b. Every effort will be made to co-locate flu patients in the same unit. 
c. Flu patients will be prioritized for placement in negative pressure (isolation) rooms. A 
current list of negative pressure isolation rooms is available in Plant Services. 
d. Bed capacity may be increased by cohorting patients with like symptoms (same gender) 
e. Alternate care locations will be opened when needed to increase the number of beds 
available for patients during the pandemic. See the Alternate Care Site section for 
details.  
 
P. Ventilators 
1. Stockpile ventilators and related supplies when possible. 
2. Coordinate with OLOL College to reassign their personal and students to the hospital as needed  
3. Develop criteria to prioritize the workload during times of limited staff.  
 
Q. Materials 
1. The rapid consumption of goods (i.e. PPE) is currently tracked through established PAR levels.  
Each item is set up in the system with a PAR Level (desired stocking level), an automatic reorder 
point, and a reorder quantity. As an item is consumed and reaches the reorder point, a supply 
requisition is automatically generated for the reorder quantity set in the system. 
2. If the items are consumed at a pace faster than normal and the stock is completely depleted prior 
to shipment arrives, Materials Management will evaluate current census and other contributing 
factors and adjust par levels, reorder points, and reorder quantity accordingly. 
3. A stockpile of N95 respirators has been developed. Additional supplies to be stockpiled include 
surgical masks (without face shield), goggles, N95 masks, gloves, and gowns for potential 
pandemic.   
a. Materials Management is responsible to rotate stock to avoid expiration. 
4. Extra resources (in addition to any stockpiled supplies) will be ordered when the World Health 
Organization alerts the hospital through the Office of Public Health, Centers for Disease Control 
that a suspected case of pandemic flu has been identified in North America. 
5. A contingency plan for obtaining supplies after resources are depleted will be created with the 
distributor, FMOLHS Purchasing and other HRSA Region 2 healthcare facilities.  
 
R. Laboratory / Mortuary Services 
1. Specimen Type and Collection  
a. Use Standard Precautions in handling of all specimens.  Specimens suspected of being 
contaminated with influenza virus are regarded as potentially infectious and staff that 
collect or transport clinical specimens should adhere rigorously to protective measures to 
minimize exposure.  
b. Pneumatic tube system will not be used to transport these specimens. 
c. The request form accompanying the specimen will be clearly labeled as “novel influenza 
virus” or influenza A (H5) or (H7) if one of these subtypes is suspected.  ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 14 
d. The hospital laboratory as well as the State Lab will be notified by phone when the 
specimen is being transported. 
e. Preliminary testing will be completed on site. Confirmatory testing will be sent to Public 
Health Lab. 
2. Guidelines for prioritization of laboratory services. 
a. Laboratory testing will be performed according to existing priority scheme. 
b. Phlebotomy services to nursing area may be reduced due to available staffing. When 
necessary, outreach draw stations will be closed and staff transferred to the main 
Laboratory.  
3. Morgue 
a. Assess current capacity for refrigeration of deceased persons. Current capacity at 
OLOLRMC is a maximum of 10 bodies.  
b. Contact will be made to the East Baton Rouge Parish Coroner’s Office to request support 
and storage of bodies when the OLOL morgue is at 50% capacity.  
c. OLOL will work with the East Baton Rouge Parish Coroner and State in implementing its 
mass fatality plan.  
 
S. Alternate Care Sites 
1. OLOL will work within the Region 2 Healthcare coordination system to facilitate the most 
effective use of hospital and healthcare resources during a pandemic. 
2. The following alternate care sites have been identified: 
Location Patients 
OLOL Health Careers Institute  
• Skills Lab 
Mild illness 
OLOL Auditorium Moderate Illness 
Critical Care Waiting Room Moderate Illness / Palliative Care 
Main OR Waiting Room Moderate Illness / Palliative Care 
Tau Center Group Rooms Mental Health and/or Minor Illness 
 
a. Medical and Support Staffing and Supplies needed to operate the facility would need to 
be provided through surge capacity planning. 
b. Food and supplies will be transported from the main campus. 
c. All sites can be secured by limiting entry points.  
 
T. Bioethics Model 
1. Ethical decisions that will need to be made during a pandemic will follow the stages and 
guidelines listed below. 
a. Stages 
i. Stage One:  (Confirmed cases that avian influenza has been transmitted from 
person to person.) 
1. Bioethics team gathers for consult. 
2. Team consists of representatives from the ethics committee, physician, 
nurse, Chaplain, and Social Services. 
3. Provides framework for decision making related to scarce resources. 
ii. Stage Two: (Confirmed cases that human transmission of avian influenza has 
occurred in the United States.) 
1. Team begins to review data and current patient population. 
iii. Stage Three: (Confirmed cases that avian influenza has been transmitted in 
human cases in Louisiana.) 
1. Team gathers to set tier decision making in place. ECEP008 Appendix B – Pandemic Influenza, 15 
iv. Stage Four:  (Confirmed deaths in Louisiana related to avian influenza.)  
1. Implement tier decision making model. 
  
Tiered Decision-Making Model.1st level:  Persons that would immediately benefit from 
ventilator such as those patients that can gain strength by being on the ventilator. 
2nd level:  Persons that may benefit from ventilator, however, may take longer to gain 
strength. 
3rd level:  Persons that are terminally ill where ventilator care would be futile. 
v. The decision would be a case by case decision between the team with input from 
the patient’s primary physician, a member of the Senior Management Team (if 
they are not a part of the Bioethics team), and other members of the patient’s 
medical team that is appropriate. 
vi. Patient may be involved in the decision if able; and family may be consulted 
depending upon the level of crisis reached. 
 
References: 
Ashley, B. M., Deblois, J., and O’Rourke, K.D. (2007) Health care ethics; A Catholic theological 
analysis. (5th ed.).  Washington DC: Georgetown University Press. 
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (2009).  Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic 
Health Care Services (Fifth Edition). 
 
 