POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Hazardous Material and Wastes 
Subject: Hazardous Materials And Waste Spills & Slug Plan 
For Bulk Chemicals 
Section:  
Date of Origination: October 1, 1995 Supersedes: HWM 4008 
Date of Last Revision: February 2, 2000 Serial Code: ECHM008 
Date of Last Review: 9/12/202   
PURPOSE: 
To effectively communicate to all department heads and supervisory personnel that they have the responsibility to ensure 
that their departmental personnel are prepared to properly respond to the spill of a hazardous material, and that they have 
the proper spill cleanup equipment ready and available at all times, and how to notify the proper in-house support 
departments/personnel to assist with clean up and proper disposal of hazardous waste.  
POLICY: 
Each department head will be individually responsible for the management of hazardous materials and waste spills, to 
include and not limited to the following: 
1. Have a complete and up to date list of chemicals used in the department, each with a copy the most current or up to 
date materials safety data sheet (SDS).  
2. Use the SDS sheets to train all employees on how to work safely with each chemical substance that they are require to 
work with during the normal scope of the employees daily work, how to respond and clean up a chemical spill, and 
how to call for assistance in cleaning up and disposal of all waste. 
3. Properly maintain in each department, all necessary personal protective equipment for working safely with chemicals 
and have a spill kit or a number of items on hand needed to clean up and dispose of a chemical spill.  
A list of all hazardous materials routinely received and distributed by Materials Management Department will be available 
to all departments, upon request, along with copies of the most up to date Safety Data Sheets on each chemical. 
A Spill Kit containing some or all of the following items should be readily available in each department. Your spill supply 
needs determination should be made by reviewing all SDS sheets in the department, and by what types of chemicals that 
are currently being used. 
Absorbents Surgical Masks  
Plastic Bags and Containers Head Covers 
Nitrile Gloves Isolation Gowns 
Goggles Impervious Shoe Covers 
Wet-Vac Vermiculite 
Plastic Storage Drum Chemical Warning Labels 
 
The Spill Kit will be routinely checked to see that all required materials are present and in usable condition. 
Each department will maintain a spill kit inventory, and shall be checked after each use and rechecked monthly.  
In the case of a spill, the Safety Data Sheet for that material shall be quickly obtained and proper procedure followed. 
Each employee shall know where to locate and how to use the spill kit and properly to protect himself/herself and others 
from chemical exposure. 
In general the response shall be as follows:  
MAJOR SPILL Note: A major spill has occurred under the following conditions;  
• A life threatening condition exists,  
• the condition requires the assistance of emergency personnel, 
• the condition required the immediate evacuation of all employees from the area or the building,  
• the spill involves quantities greater than 2.0 liters,  
• the contents of the spilled material is unknown, the spilled material is highly toxic,  
• you feel physical symptoms of exposure, highly toxic, biohazard, radioactive or flammable. 
Procedure: 
• Hold breath if possible and quickly determine what has spilled. 
• Evacuate the personnel in the area and close all doors. 
• Notify people in the immediate area, supervisor and Manager Safety, Housekeeping, Plant Service, and 
Hazardous Waste Coordinator at extension 5-8292 
• Locate the SDS sheet to determine safety needs, clean up and disposal procedures. 
• Report name of spilled chemical (if known) amount spilled and location. If flammable, state that it is a flammable 
liquid. 
• Stand by the area of spill to direct Emergency Response personnel. If any special hazard such as flammability, 
corrosiveness, toxic fumes, etc. notify emergency personnel and the Housekeeping and Plant Services 
departments. 
• Re-enter area only after spill has been eliminated. 
MINOR SPILLS 
Note: A minor spill is characterized by the confidence and the capability of unit personnel to clean up the spill without the 
assistance of emergency personnel even thought the cleanup procedure may require specialized knowledge and 
specialized equipment. A relatively small area is affected and only a relatively small number of personnel may need to 
leave the area until the spill is cleaned up. 
Procedure: 
• Put absorbent from the spill kit on the material if the material spilled is in liquid form (and if this can be done 
safety). 
• Call in personnel from Plant Services department and Housekeeping department only if needed to assist. This is 
an option based on needs. 
• Locate the safety data sheet (SDS) for safety procedure guidelines. Follow written departmental guidelines for 
safety and clean up if there are any. 
• Take appropriate action to remove the hazard. 
• Clean up the area. 
• Additional information or assistance on minor spill cleanup may be obtained from the Hazardous Waste 
Coordinator at extension 5-8292 and the Manager Safety at extension 5-5978. 
• Do not use respiratory protective equipment unless you are trained in its safe use. 
• Departmental personnel will be oriented and in-serviced ANNUALLY in the use of the spill kit, evacuating the 
area, and alerting emergency response personnel. 
NOTE: All chemical and spill control waste shall be delivered to the Plant Services department for proper disposal by the 
Hazardous Materials Coordinator, at 765-8292. 
 SLUG PLAN FOR BULK CHEMICALS 
All bulk chemicals used or stored in all departments of 5 gallons or more, or bulk chemicals located near or in the vicinity 
of sanitary sewer floor drains, shall have the following measures in place to prevent that accidental release of bulk 
chemical into the sanitary sewer (chemical slug prevention).  
• All floor drains in the immediate vicinity of stored bulk chemicals, will be diked or have the drain inlet raised to a 
height to prevent drainage by gravity. A 2" or 3" high barrier plastic pipe of the appropriate size to the floor drain 
diameter size, will be caulked to the floor, and shall be installed and inspected by the Plant Services Department.  
• The drain can be sealed, blanked off, and caulked to prevent chemical liquids from accidentally entering the drain. 
• If there is a substantial amount of chemicals stored greater than 50 gallons then a containment barrier should be constructed at the room doorway or at any other potential liquid spill exits. Secondary, plastic spill pans of sufficient 
size to hold or contain the entire contents of the vessel can be used in place of the floor barriers. The normally stored 
chemical should be placed in the plastic pan, on the floor.  
• Inspections should be made on a routine basis to check for container or drum leaks. (Daily or Weekly)  
In the event of accidental release (spills) of chemicals into the sanitary sewer system or storm wastewater drain system, 
follow the procedures outlined for a major spill stated in this document. Notify and call for assistance of the Hazardous 
Waste Coordinator, at 765-8292 immediately.    