 ECLS000 
Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section: Fire Prevention 
Title: Fire-Life Safety Management Plan 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS000 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 1, 1997 Review Date: 09/12/2023 
Revision Date: 01/13/18; 12/27/19 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
The Life Safety Management Plan establishes procedures to support and maintain a fire-safe 
environment of care. This plan defines the Fire Prevention Management activities for Our Lady of the 
Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) and includes all locations at which OLOL operates.  
 
POLICY: 
 
Patients, personnel, visitors and property are protected through the safety features of the physical 
structure, an active fire alarm system, automatic fire doors, automatic air shut down system, placement 
of fire extinguishers, fire hose connections, fire plan and evacuation plans. OLOL will maintain 
compliance with the Life Safety Code (LSC) 101 standards regarding structural requirements for fire 
protection. When features of fire safety are compromised, Interim Life Safety Measures are 
implemented to offset the risk. 
 
The Code RED Safety and Response Plan articulates the hospital’s strategy to safeguard patients, 
personnel and property from injury related to fire, smoke, or other products of combustion. The policy 
includes information regarding the roles and responsibilities of staff, students, contractors, volunteers, 
and licensed independent practitioners at the fire’s origin, away from the fire’s origin, and procedures 
for evacuation.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
Responsibility  
Plant Services Leadership is responsible for assessing and maintaining compliance with the Life Safety 
Code (LSC) and coordinating action plans to address identified deficiencies when necessary.  Current 
documentation demonstrating compliance with the LSC, including a current hospital wide Statement of 
Conditions (SOC) is available in Plant Services. The responsibility for completing the eSOC is assigned 
to the Director of Plant Services who has experience and education appropriate to performing LSC 
assessment activities.  
 
Department Leaders are responsible for monitoring their department’s life safety concerns in order to 
protect patients, staff, visitors, and property.  Monitoring includes: Facility inspections, fire drills, and 
fire safety training.  
  ECLS000 
Page 2 of 5 
Life Safety Assessments 
Building Life Safety Assessments are conducted at least annually by competent staff or contractors and 
outside regulatory agencies.  Identified deficiencies are corrected in a timely manner.  These 
assessments may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
• Basic Building Information 
• Facility construction drawings 
• Fire hazard identification 
• Means of egress compliance 
• Fire detection and suppression equipment 
• Emergency power 
• Required fire/smoke separation 
 
The use of Interim Life Safety Measures (ILSM) is required in construction areas or where identified 
LSC deficiencies cannot be immediately corrected. ILSM applies to and is enforced with all personnel, 
including contracted construction workers. Plant Services Leadership or designee is responsible for 
identifying situations where life safety deficiencies exist, the degree of deficiency, and what specific 
measures are required to minimize the effect of the deficiency. Plant Services Leadership or designee is 
responsible for monitoring implementation of ILSM and acting when they are not observed. The 
schedule of monitoring and documentation needs is determined on a per project basis.  All LSC and fire 
protection deficiencies, failures, and user errors are reported to Plant Services. Plant Services Leadership 
or designee is responsible for ensuring investigation of all reported LSC and fire protection deficiencies, 
failures, and user errors. 
 
Smoking Policy 
Smoking is not permitted on any OLOL location. (see OrgOpsEC006, Tobacco Free Environment) 
 
Orientation and Education 
Orientation for the general life safety issues and fire prevention processes occurs in new staff 
orientation. Department-specific issues and job-specific hazards are addressed in Departmental 
orientation.  Staff also receive refresher training through annual education. 
 
Unannounced fire drills are employed to assess staff knowledge and skill, and ability to participate in the 
Code RED Safety and Response Plan. Drills are performed on each shift.  When deficiencies in staff 
knowledge or skill are identified, the Department Manager is informed and is responsible for addressing 
the issue with staff. Plant Services is responsible for addressing identified deficiencies regarding fire 
safety equipment or building features.  
 
Equipment 
OLOL Plant Services is responsible for ensuring qualified contractors and staff complete the inspection, 
testing, and maintenance of fire protection and life safety systems in accordance with the following: 
 
a. Fire Protection Testing: 
The testing of the fire alarm system and components complies with NFPA 72 standards and on a 
routine schedule in accordance with the EOC standards.  Testing of the various components will 
adhere to the following schedule: 
  ECLS000 
Page 3 of 5 
Quarterly: Supervisory signal devices (including control valves; pressure supervisory; 
pressure tank, pressure supervisory for a dry pipe, steam pressure; water level 
supervisory signal initiating device: water temperature supervisory; and room 
temperature supervisory) 
Semi-Annual: Valve tamper switches and mechanical water-flow devices 
Annually: Duct detectors, electromechanical releasing devices, heat detectors, manual fire 
alarm pull stations, smoke detectors and occupant alarm devices (audible and 
visual) 
Off-site fire responder notification equipment 
 
b. Water-based Automatic Fire Extinguishing Systems: 
The testing and maintenance of the water-based automatic fire extinguishing systems complies with 
NFPA 25 standards and testing is maintained on a routine schedule as outlined in accordance with 
NFPA and EOC standards.  Testing of the various components adheres minimally to the following 
schedule: 
 
Monthly: Electric motor-driven fire pumps under no flow conditions 
Quarterly: Fire department connections, water flow devices 
Semi-Annual: Sprinkler valves 
Annually: Fire pumps (water flow required) and drain tests at all system risers 
 
c. Kitchen automatic fire extinguishing systems: 
The testing and maintenance of kitchen automatic fire extinguishing systems complies with NFPA 
17A and NFPA 96 standards.  Inspections of the systems are completed semi-annually. 
 
d. Gaseous automatic fire suppression systems: 
The testing of gaseous automatic fire suppression systems complies with NFPA 2001 and NFPA 12 
standards.  Inspection, testing and maintenance of all gaseous automatic fire suppression systems to 
include Halon and FM-200 Suppression systems.  Inspections of these systems are completed 
annually. 
 
e. Portable Fire Extinguishers: 
OLOL Plant Services is responsible  
• for the installation, maintenance, and testing of fire extinguishers in accordance with NFPA 
10 and the Louisiana State Fire Marshals.   
• for ensuring proper fire extinguishers are correctly mounted and clearly identified. 
• to ensure that all fire extinguishers function properly, are inspected monthly and annually and 
receive regular preventative maintenance in accordance with NFPA 10 and manufacturer 
specifications. 
 
f. Standpipe Systems: 
Testing of maintenance of standpipe systems, both wet and dry, comply with NFPA 14 and NFPA 
25 standards.  Testing of these components adheres minimally to the following schedule: 
• Every 5 years - Standpipe hydrostatic and water-flow tests 
• 5 years after install then every 3 years - Standpipe occupant hose hydrostatic tests  ECLS000 
Page 4 of 5 
 
g. Fire and Smoke Dampers: 
Inspection and maintenance of fire/smoke dampers complies with NFPA 90A.   
This includes: 
• the identification and maintenance of all fire/smoke dampers to ensure proper operation 
• inspection of all fire/smoke dampers to be completed after 1 year then every 6 years 
• inspection of all fire/smoke dampers (dampers with fusible links removed are operated no 
less than every four years to ensure full closure) 
 
h. Horizontal and vertical sliding and rolling fire doors and shutters: 
Testing and maintenance of horizontal and vertical sliding and rolling fire doors and shutters 
complies with NFPA 80.  All rolling and sliding fire doors are tested annually to ensure proper 
operation and full closure.  Deficiencies noted during inspections are corrected in-house or through 
contract services. 
 
i. Smoke Control Systems: 
Engineered smoke control systems are tested and maintained in accordance with established 
engineering principles as indicated in NFPA 92.  
 
j. Fire Doors 
The annual testing and inspection of fire/smoke doors to comply with NFPA 80 is completed by 
qualified persons.  Periodic inspection of other doors is completed by trained Plant Services and 
Environment of Care rounding staff. 
 
k. Fire Fighter’s Emergency Elevator Operations 
All elevators provided with firefighters’ emergency operation require a monthly inspection as stated 
by ASME A17.1/CSA B44 with Phase I recall by use of the key switch and a minimum of one-floor 
operation on Phase II.   
 
Records and documentation demonstrating effective maintenance of fire safety equipment and building 
features is available in Plant Services.  
 
OLOL fire protection features include fire barriers with fire-rating based on the type of occupancy and 
location within the facility. 
 
Annual Evaluation 
Data regarding Life Safety indicators including, but not limited, to the number of fires and the function 
of signal and detection systems is collected and submitted to the Environment of Care Committee to 
facilitate internal monitoring. Effectiveness of the Plan is evaluated annually and is submitted to the 
Hospital Board through the Performance Improvement Leadership.  
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES:  ECLS000 
Page 5 of 5 
Joint Commission Environment of Care and Life Safety Standards 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 101-2012, Life Safety Code 
NFPA 10-2010, Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers 
NFPA 12-2011, Standard on Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems 
NFPA 14-2010, Standard for Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems 
NFPA 17A-2009, Standard for Wet Chemical Extinguishing System 
NFPA 2001-2012, Standard on Clean Agent Fire Extinguisher Systems 
NFPA 25-2011, Standard for the Inspection, Testing, & Maintenance of Water Based Fire Protection Systems 
NFPA 72-2010, National Fire Alarm & Signaling Code 
NFPA 80-2010, Standard for Fire Doors and Other Opening Protectives 
NFPA 92-2012, Standard for Smoke Control Systems 
NFPA 96-2011, Standard for Ventilation Control & Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations 
 
 