 
ECLS-012 7073_Department Code RED Safety and Response Plan for O’Donovan Pharmacy 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Department Code RED Safety and Response Plan for 
O’Donovan Pharmacy 
PAGES:  3 
 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
ECLS-012 7073 (05/17/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 06/08/2018   
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
11/30/2021 
POLICY NUMBER:  
ECLS-012 7073 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions that indicate the 
presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present by addressing aspects of fire 
prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the 
event of a fire. 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the OLOLH’s written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and 
prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction of unit manager 
or designee. 
 
Each OLOLH department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency Operations Plan 
(ECEP001) and the OLOLH Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide the preparation and response in 
the event of a fire. 
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
11/30/2021 1:06 PM 
 
 
ECLS-012 7073_Department Code RED Safety and Response Plan for O’Donovan Pharmacy 
2 
Locations of Exits 
• Illuminated EXIT signs within O’Donovan Pharmacy are located (1) between the two shelving units that hold 
medications towards the back of pharmacy, (2) between the two shelving units that hold medications towards 
the front of pharmacy, and (3) above the door to exit the pharmacy.  Illuminated EXIT signs in the main 
hallways on the 4th floor of Building MOB IV are located  (1) above the stairwell which is to the right when 
exiting the elevator on the 4th floor and adjacent to the Men’s restroom, (2) at the end of the hallway to the 
right when exiting the pharmacy, (3) at the end of the hallway to the left when exiting the pharmacy, and (4) 
above the stairwell adjacent to Renal Associates Administration office. 
• Neither O’Donovan Pharmacy nor any other departments in the building have smoke compartments. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Department is open Monday through Friday from 8:00am to 4:30pm 
• All available staff will clear the hallway of any equipment or obstacles. 
• The staff member working pick up and/or drop off window or assigned designee will close the window, and 
the pharmacist(s) or assigned designee will make sure the door leading out of the pharmacy is closed. 
• The staff member working pick up and/or drop off window or assigned designee will help evacuate patients 
and visitors in the waiting area to safety.  The pharmacist(s) and/or Patient Assistance Program (PAP) 
technician(s) will help evacuate patients they are assisting in the offices to safety.  The patients and visitors 
will be told, “The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety”. 
• The pharmacist(s) or assigned designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities. 
• The pharmacy manager and/or pharmacist(s) on duty will ensure all employees are accounted for. 
• All pharmacist(s) and technicians will collectively ensure all patients and visitors are accounted for. 
• The fill technician or assigned designee will ensure each room/office within the pharmacy is empty and will 
mark the door/door frame with chalk to indicate the room is empty. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• There is one fire extinguisher within the four walls of O’Donovan Pharmacy.  It is located on the wall to the 
left-side of the pharmacy between the last two offices. 
• There are three fire extinguishers on the 4th floor of Building MOB IV.  (1) The closest fire extinguisher to the 
pharmacy is located immediately to the right when exiting the patient waiting area. (2) The second fire 
extinguisher is located in the hallway leading to Renal Associates Administration office and near the stairwell.  
(3) The third fire extinguisher is located near the associate break-room which can be found by taking a right 
upon exiting the elevator and another right into the hallway. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• O’Donovan Pharmacy will only utilize vertical evacuation routes since the building has no smoke 
compartments. 
• The primary vertical evacuation route will be to exit the pharmacy into the main hall area and take a left, and 
then another left down the hallway (following the exit signs) and heading towards the Renal Associates 
Administration office.  All team members, patients, and visitors will use the stairs at the end of the hall to the 
right-hand side to evacuate the building and walk to Employee Parking Lot 4 across the street from the 
building. 
• The secondary vertical evacuation route will be to exit the pharmacy into the main hall area and take a right, go 
to the end of the hallway and take a right (following exit signs), and continue past the elevators.  All team 
members, patients, and visitors will use the stairs at the end of the hall to the left-hand side and adjacent to the 
Men’s restroom to evacuate the building and walk to Employee Parking Lot 4 across the street from the 
building. 
 Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate from, 
revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion.  
ECLS-012 7073_Department Code RED Safety and Response Plan for O’Donovan Pharmacy 
3 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• PH.2444_Environmental Safety  
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 