ECLS-012 RMC 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Respiratory Care Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Respiratory Care/RMC 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 RMC 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 03/01/2018 Review Date: July 9, 2024 
Date of Revision: July 9, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• The illuminated EXIT sign is located in the main entrance/exit of the department in the lobby 
area.  
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Hours of operation are 24-7, and always fully staffed.   
• Respiratory leadership, supply tech, or designee will clear the hallway and place items in the ECLS-012 RMC 
Page 2 of 2 
soiled utility room. 
• The respiratory leaders, or designee, will close doors to offices.  
• The respiratory staff will assist patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• The respiratory staff will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities 
• The respiratory supervisor, or designee will ensures all employees are accounted for. 
• The respiratory supervisor, or designee will ensures each room is empty.  
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
The respiratory supervisor, or designee will shut off the medical gases on the first floor near the back 
hall equipment room if needed.   
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• There is a fires extinguisher located in the main lobby of the department near the front door.  
• The nearest fire alarm pull station is on the back hall, next to the elevator.  
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Oxygen cylinders may be located on a ventilator or Bipap device in the soiled utility room 
waiting to be cleaned.  
• The respiratory department is a special badge access area and the Code RED response team 
should have access.  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary evacuation route would be down the hall way, through the double doors toward the 
front lobby and out the front door.  
• The secondary evacuation route would be down the hallway, toward the back hall, toward linen 
services and out the back entrance into the employee drop off area. 
 