ECLS-012 7508 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Respiratory Care Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Respiratory Care/7508 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 7508 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 9/10/2019 Review Date: August 24, 2022 
Date of Revision: October 11, 2021 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• The illuminated EXIT sign is located in the main exit of each hall in which the department is 
located.  
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Hours of operation are 24-7, and always fully staffed.   
• Respiratory leadership or designee will clear the hallway and place items in the soiled utility ECLS-012 7508 
Page 2 of 2 
room. 
• The respiratory leaders, or designee, will close doors to offices.  
• The respiratory staff will assist patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• The respiratory staff will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities 
• The respiratory supervisor or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• The respiratory supervisor or designee will ensures each room is empty  
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off:  
The respiratory supervisor, respiratory therapist or designee will shut off the medical gases on the 
fourth-floor hall across from the respiratory equipment room if needed.   
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• There is a fires extinguisher located in the main hall of the department near the front door.  
• The nearest fire alarm pull station is on the hall, near the staff elevator on the fourth floor.  
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Oxygen cylinders may be located on a ventilator or Bipap device in the soiled utility room 
waiting to be cleaned.  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary evacuation route would be down the hallway, through the double doors on either 
side, toward the front lobby to the stairwell, down to the first floor.  
• Then evacuation route would be down the hallway, toward the back hall, the security desk and 
out the back entrance into the employee entrance doors. 
 