Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Environment of Care 
Title: Code Silver Active Shooter/Active 
Threat/Hostage Response Plan 
Policy Reference #: ECSE019 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: September 27, 2010 Last Review Date: 11/15/2022 
Last Revision Date: 8/1/2020 
 
 
OBJECTIVE 
To coordinate a proper response that would minimize the risk and number of casualties in the event of a person 
using a weapon, threatening to use a weapon, or one who has taken hostages within any of Our Lady of the 
Lake RMC campus buildings, including the Children's Hospital Campus, OLOL Ascension Campus, Livingston 
Campus, North Emergency Department or on OLOL property. The objective is also to assist law enforcement in 
locating and disarming the suspect. 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center is committed to maintaining a safe and secure environment.  
Any suspicious activity, threats, battery or any other workplace violence will be reported to the Security 
Department. 
 
DEFINTIONS 
1. Code Silver Exterior- Report of a person(s) using or displaying a weapon in a threatening manner outside 
of any building on the OLOL Hospital Campus, Children's Hospital Campus, OLOL Ascension Campus, 
Livingston Campus, North Emergency Department or on its property. 
 
2. Code Silver “Location” - Report of a person(s) using or displaying a weapon inside a building on the 
OLOL Hospital Campus, Children's Hospital Campus, or OLOL Ascension Campus, Livingston Campus, 
North Emergency Department, Example: “Code Silver – 4th Floor Main Hospital H & VI Building.” 
 
3. Level 1 Secured Access  -This access level only requires Security to lock all doors to all campus buildings 
after normal business hours . Security will ensure all doors equipped with badge access are functioning 
properly. 
 
4. Level 2 Secured Access  -This access level will require Security to lock all doors to all campus buildings 
and post a Security person at various entrances. 
 
5. Level 3 Secured Access -This access level is the highest Secured access level. This will require the support 
of a personnel pool. In addition to securing all doors, this Secured Access Level will require the issuing of 
armbands or temporary IDs to all individuals entering the facility. Exiting the facility will always be 
available. 
 
6.  “Shelter in Place” is a term used to seek shelter outside of view. Employees should remain calm; clear the 
hallway of patients, visitors, and staff (if possible), close all blinds, turn out lights, silence cell phones and 
remain quiet. If possible, try to barricade or lock yourself and/or others behind a door in a room, office, or 
hallway. 
 
7. Weapons are defined as any firearm, knife, or any other article, liquid, or substance that that may be placed, 
thrown, or used in any other fashion and its use may result in death, bodily harm, or the destruction of 
property. Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
 
 
POLICY: 
 
1. If an individual use or displays a weapon in a threatening manner, procedures to minimize the risk to 
patients, visitors and employees by evacuation, restricted access and/or “shelter in place” will be 
implemented. 
  
2. Staff should not attempt to intervene or negotiate in situations where a patient, visitor or team member is at 
risk of confrontation by a person with a weapon.  
 
3. Weapons are prohibited in all buildings, property, and grounds, including parking lots and garages and all 
hospital vehicles except by persons who are authorized by law to carry a weapon in the performance of their 
duties, such as City, Parish, State or Federal law enforcement officers. (See also policy ECSE014, 
Weapons.)  
 
PROCEDURES:  
 
1. Contact Security Dispatch immediately if an individual with a weapon is seen but is not threatening 
others. (DO NOT initiate a Code Silver.) 
 
Any staff member who encounters or observes a person using a weapon in a threatening manner or who 
threatens the safety of hospital patients, visitor or staff on campus will: 
 
2. Take immediate action to protect the safety of patients, guests, and team members.  
 
3.    Call PBX, utilizing “Plain Talk” descriptive NOTE: (Departments, clinics and other affiliates not 
located within a hospital, including all MOB (Medical Office Buildings), will immediately call 911. 
 
4.    Provide the PBX Operator with the following: 
a. Location (including the building, i.e Main Hospital, Children's Hospital, OLOL Ascension, etc.) 
b. Number and description of suspects (include clothing description) 
c. Type of weapon displayed or being used, etc. 
d. Any casualties/hostages 
e. Direction of travel 
f. Any other relevant information 
 
PBX Operator will 
1. Announce “Code Silver” and location of the threat (three times). 
Example: Code Silver, Individual with weapon, Emergency Room, Shelter in Place. 
2. This can be followed with full “plain talk” descriptor  
Example: Code Silver a white male wearing a gray jacket and blue jeans holding a gun/knife last 
seen in the emergency department. Do not approach the subject. Team members secure in your 
current location. Patients and visitors remain in your room with door closed and silence your cell 
phone.  
3. After the announcement, the Operator will contact the following: 
a. Security to relay the above information. 
b. House Supervisor and/or Administrator on Call informing him/her of the threat. Page 3 of 5 
4. Updates providing situational awareness and ongoing plain talk directives will be provided under the 
direction of Incident Command or designated lead. Response activities will remain ongoing until official 
“All Clear” has been determined. 
5. Incident Command will provide direction in support of recovery efforts as needed. 
 
Security Dispatch will: 
1. Immediately notify the Extra Duty Officer, if present, of the threat. 
2. Notify Local Police Department by dialing 9-911. 
3. Notify all Security Officers of the threat via radio communication and/or cell phone as appropriate. 
4. Immediately activate Level 3 Secured Access (see ECSE020 Secured Access Policy for complete 
description of all Secured Levels) 
5. Immediately activate the “Rave” texting system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hospital Employees 
1. Upon notification of a “Code Silver”, employees in immediate danger of the active violence will take 
immediate action to ensure the safety of patients, guests, and team members.  
a. Remain calm. 
b. Do not do anything that will provoke the active shooter. 
c. Barricade or lock you and others behind a door in a room, office or hallway using heavy 
furniture or whatever means possible to block entrance into the room and secure the area. 
d. Close all doors, blinds, turn lights out, silence cell phones and remain quiet.  
 
2. Do not attempt to intervene or negotiate with the individual who is threatening with the weapon.  
3. All other areas will “shelter in place”. DO NOT go to the area specified in the “Code Silver”. Limit 
movement in the hospital or medical office building. 
4. Remain calm. Confidently and calmly assure patients and visitors to stay within the secured area. 
5. Suspend all discharges, non-urgent medical procedures, and other non-urgent patient movement during 
the incident. 
6. Listen for additional overhead announcement and follow procedures after announcements are made. 
7. Wait for “Code Silver All Clear” notification or “Rave” texting system all clear message before 
resuming normal operations. 
 
Security Officers 
1. Available on-site Security Officers will respond to the general vicinity at a safe distance (at the Security 
Officer’s discretion) to observe and report suspect information to the Security Dispatcher. 
2. One Security Officer will wait for the Local Police Department to direct them to the last known area of 
the suspect. 
3. Security Officers will communicate with as many people as possible to alert them of the potential danger 
and instruct them to evacuate immediately or take “shelter in place” behind a secure area if unable to 
evacuate. 
4. The Security Supervisor or Dispatch will provide Administration/Incident Command and law 
enforcement with all known information as quickly as possible. 
 
Local Law Enforcement 
1. Will respond and assume command of the situation. 
NOTE: CODE BLUE medical teams should not enter the area until it has been declared safe. Page 4 of 5 
2. Direct evacuation of patients, guests and team members if appropriate. 
3. Ensure the crime scene is not contaminated by excess traffic. 
 
Administration 
1. Notify house manager/supervisor to implement Incident Command as soon as possible using the 
Administrative Conference Room (if safe to do so). 
a. The following positions will be activated (minimum) 
i. Incident Commander 
ii. Safety/Security Officer 
iii. Public Information Officer 
b. Other command positions may be activated after the initial situation assessment is complete.  
2. Alert triage in ED on possible number of injuries; OR and Trauma Services should also be contacted. 
3. Coordinate with Law Enforcement for evacuation or other response actions.  
 
Department Directors/Managers 
1. Will report to their respective departments and assume control of their areas following the above stated 
procedures. (If safe to do so.) 
a. Managers of departments in the danger zone will report to the Command Center.  
2. Endeavor to make sure all patients and staffs are present and accounted for and advise the Command Center 
of any discrepancies. 
 
NOTE: Hostage negotiation requires special training and skills. At NO TIME is staff to attempt to negotiate 
with a hostage taker. 
 
General Guidelines for survival if taken hostage: 
• Remain calm- avoid displays of emotion. 
 
• Do what you are told. 
 
• Initially, do not speak unless you are spoken to. Do not volunteer anything. 
 
• Keep a low profile; don’t stand out. 
 
• Never argue, lie, confront, or provoke your captor. 
 
• Remove symbols of authority (name tag and uniform), if possible. 
 
• Sit down if possible and act relaxed. Get rid of personal effects (i.e., photographs of spouse or 
children, keys), if possible. 
 
• Don’t try to negotiate with hostage taker, unless under threat of being killed. 
 
• Try to rest but remain alert and facing toward hostage takers. 
 
• Remain observant; you may be released.  At times, it may be appropriate to ask for medication 
(BP, insulin, etc.). Some hostage takers may release sick hostages. 
 
• If released, cooperate with police and security personnel. Raise arms to communicate to police 
you are not the shooter.  
 Page 5 of 5 
• Expect noise and light if rescue attempt is made. Get on the floor immediately and stay down 
until you are told to move. 
 
Post Event Activity 
The Incident Commander has the authority to terminate the Code Silver response. This decision will be made in 
coordination with law enforcement responding to the hospital.   
 
The Incident Commander is responsible for the following: 
1. Directing staff to complete a damage assessment of the building 
2. Ensuring clean-up is completed timely (after consulting with law enforcement). 
3. Ensuring documentation of all response activities is completed and maintained. 
 
Critical Incident Stress Management 
• Critical Incident Stress Management / Debriefing will be offered to all team members affected by the 
event.  
• The Incident Commander will ensure that the Critical Incident Stress Debriefing Team is notified to 
provide the necessary intervention related to psychological trauma of the event as soon as reasonably 
possible.  
• Pastoral Care should also be contacted for employee support. 
 
Training 
• OLOLRMC will refresh all hospital personnel on this policy each year annually during annual 
education. Drills will be conducted periodically. The drills will be evaluated with plans for improvement 
to be implemented.  
 
Secured Access Levels Protocol 
 
See Secured Access Policy ECSE020  
 
 
It is critical that all employees wear their ID badges. This is the only item that will get you into the facility. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 