POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual: Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Security 
Subject: Use of In-Room Safes Section:  
Date of Origination: 3/16/2006 Supersedes:  
Date Last Revised: 12/31/2019 Serial Code: ECSE017 
Date Last Reviewed: 11/15/2022 
 
PURPOSE: In-room safes are available in certain patient rooms in the Main Hospital only, (see Attachment 1) and can be 
used by guests to store personal belongings and valuables while admitted to the hospital.  
 
POLICY: On admission, the patient/guest will be instructed how to create his or her personal access code to the safe. 
Staff may not request a guest’s code under any circumstances. At the time of discharge, the patient/guest is expected to 
remove all personal belongings from the safe.  
 
How to Create the Personal Access Code 
1. Close the door to the safe. 
2. Enter a 4 (four) digit number and press the “LOCK” (#) key.  
3. The word “CLOSED” will appear on the screen.  
4. To open the safe, enter the 4 (four) digit number.  
 
If a situation arises that the patient/guest cannot open his or her in-room safe, a request to open the safe will be made of 
the Plant Services Locksmith or Security Services using the following procedure. 
 
In-Room Safe Override Access Procedure 
1. In-room safes may be accessed by staff only at the patient/family’s request.  
2. The Security Shift Supervisor or Plant Services Locksmith will be notified of the request to open the safe by dialing 
ext. 5-8825. 
3. The Unit Charge Nurse will accompany the Security Shift Supervisor or Plant Services Locksmith to the patient’s 
room to unlock the safe. 
4. The Security Shift Supervisor or Plant Services Locksmith will enter the master override code to open the safe. The 
patient/guest must be present at the time the safe is opened.  
• Exception: Under extreme circumstances the safe may be opened without the patient/guest present. If the 
patient/guest is not present at the time the safe is opened, contents of the safe will be inventoried in the presence 
of both the Security Shift Supervisor/Locksmith and the Unit Charge Nurse. Contents will be documented on the 
In-Room Safe Log. These items will be secured in the hospital safe and returned to the owner as quickly as 
possible. 
 
5. Documentation that the safe was opened using the master override code will be completed on the In-Room Safe Log 
while in the patient’s room. The following information will be documented:  
• Guest/Patient Name who requested the safe to be opened. 
• Patient Room number or location of the safe 
• Date and time the safe was opened using the master override code.  
• Name of Locksmith/Security staff who opened the safe 
• Name/Department of staff person who witnessed the safe being opened. 
• Contents of the safe when opened (if patient/guest is not present) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Attachment 1 
 
Location of Patient Room Safes 
 
 
Unit # of safes 
Med 6 10 
Car 1 10 
Surg 11 
STU 35 
Ortho 30 
Neuro 32 (except Rooms 5201, 5216, and 5221) 
Sur 2 35 
 