  
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Security Section: Security 
Title:  Use of Metal Detector /Scan Policy Reference #:  ECSE011 
Supersedes #:   
Date of Origination: September 09, 2016 Last Review Date: July 23, 2021 
Last Revision Date: September 17, 2021   
Policy 
To Ensure all individuals found to be in procession of a weapon, dangerous device or contraband are engaged by 
Law Enforcement upon entry into the OLOLRMC Emergency Department. All persons entering the facility shall 
be subject to a search as a condition of entry to this property, persons refusing search will not be allowed to 
enter the property. 
Intent and Scope: 
The Intent of this policy is to provide a safe environment for healthcare delivery. This procedure applies to all 
individuals entering the Emergency Department. Exceptions and deviations from this policy may be made in the 
best interest of the facility and patients, provided the intent is observed. This screening process should not 
inhibit any patient from entering the emergency room seeking medical care; any patient requesting or 
presenting for emergency care on hospital property will be triaged and offered a medical screening by a provider 
(refer to Emergency Services Policy, ADM 01, Treatment and Transfer of Individuals Requesting/In Need of 
Emergency Medical Services) 
General Procedure for Handheld device:  The Handheld Metal Detector will be used upon every 
assessment/admission deemed necessary by clinical staff. 
The Handheld Metal detector will be placed at the entrance of the ED B-Holding Monitoring Area, CH ED Psych 
Area and any other areas designated by ED Administrators. 
The ED Staff will be present during every operation. All required persons will be searched by the detector unless 
medically unqualified to do so.  
Procedure For Standing Metal Detector Device: 
The Metal detector is installed in the foyer of the Emergency Entrance. 
Both Law Enforcement and Security will be present to address all entries. 
Individual will place detectable items in the container provided before passing through the detector. 
These items will remain visible to the owner and retrieved from the container immediately following detector 
clearance. 
Large handbags, purses, backpacks will travel with the customer through the detector 
Handbags, purses, and backpacks will be opened and reviewed by Security Staff following the walk-through  
All returning individuals must repeat the scanning process (no exceptions). 
Security will not hold/store any property belonging to an individual.  All individuals will be responsible for their 
own property. 
Security Lockers/Safe will be available to properly secure patient’s legally possessed items/property.   
This Policy does not pertain to commissioned officers.  
Reference: Weapons Policy ECSE014 
 