Security Management Plan1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Security  
Subject:  Security Management Plan Section:   
Date of 
Origination:  
January 1, 1997 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised:  12/13/19 Serial 
Code:  
ECSE000 
Date Last 
Reviewed: 
11/15/2023 
 
OBJECTIVE and SCOPE 
The hospital manages safety and security risks.  
Leaders identify an individual(s) to manage risk, coordinate risk reduction activities in the physical environment, collect 
deficiency information, and disseminate summaries of actions and results.  
The Security Management Plan is established to support a safe and secure environment by maintaining order and 
protecting patients, parents, visitors, and employees from harm within the facility. The plan applies to Our Lady of the 
Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) and includes all locations at which OLOLRMC operates business.  
 
 
PROCESSES 
The hospital identifies safety and security risks associated with the environment of care, takes action to minimize or 
eliminate these risks.  
Security risks are included in the annual risk assessment and Hazard Vulnerability Analysis (HVA). Ongoing risk 
assessment is completed by the Director/Manager of Security, and results and recommendations for action are reported to 
the Environment of Care Committee.  Security issues concerning patients, parents, visitors, employees and property are 
documented through the Safety Event Reporting structure and the Security Officer’s Incident Report form. Security 
Services is responsible for responding to and investigating all security-related issues. After initial response by Security 
Services, other appropriate managers will be advised of the incident as needed. Reports of patient, parent and visitor 
incidents are directed to the Risk Manager and are maintained in the Risk Management and Claims Department. (See 
ECSF007) 
 
The hospital identifies individuals entering its facilities; controls access to and from areas it identifies as security 
sensitive.  
All employees are provided an identification badge and are required to wear it while on duty. Department managers are 
responsible for enforcing all identification standards. Contract employees are required to wear an identification badge 
issued by Security Services/Facilities. Vendor identification and access to the facility is guided by the Materials 
Management Department Policy (MM.01.004) Patients are identified with wristbands on admission to the hospital. Parent 
or guardian is identified with an identification badge/card that corresponds with the patient’s identification band on 
admission. (See ECSE001, ECSE015). Security Services facilitate VIP visits by secured parking and escorts. 
 
Access to security sensitive areas is guided by policy and procedure and includes areas such as Surgery, Pharmacy, 
Cashiers, Information Systems, Emergency Care Unit, PICU and other clinical areas. Specific areas are secured using 
electronic card access or coded locks to manage entry. All pediatric patients always require that a parent or guardian stay 
with the patient. Parents are given corresponding identification badges/card coinciding with the child’s identification on 
admission. Access to the hospital building after regular business hours is limited with a lock-down procedure and single-
entry access via Emergency Department. Uniformed security officers patrol the campus and buildings throughout the day. 
The Emergency Care Unit is staffed with an off-duty law enforcement officer, contracted through the local Law 
Enforcement Offices and contract security. Additional security is provided with targeted video surveillance throughout the 
campus. Cameras are recorded via DVR and are monitored by the Security staff. (See ECSE001, ECSE016) 
 
The hospital has written procedures to follow in the event of a security incident, including an infant or pediatric 
abduction.  Security Management Plan2 
Security Services is responsible for monitoring the environment and responding to all security related issues. Security 
Services assists with managing violent or abusive patients, parents and visitors, as well as responding to suspected 
pediatric abduction and patient elopements. Security Officers, Emergency Department and Mental and Behavioral Health 
staff are trained in non-violent crisis intervention techniques (CPI). Uniformed Security Officers perform regular 
surveillance rounds of the hospital building and campus 24 hours-a-day. The Emergency Care Unit is staffed with an off-
duty law enforcement officer, contracted through the local Law Enforcement Offices and contract security. Code White is 
used throughout the hospital to communicate an urgent security emergency event. Employees are oriented to Code White 
through general and departmental orientation. (See ECSE001, ECSE007) 
 
Pediatric identification and Code PINK policy and procedures are in place to manage the risk of infant or pediatric 
abduction throughout the hospital. All employees are trained in specific roles when responding to a Code PINK. Response 
procedures are tested using announced and unannounced drills. Staff response is evaluated and feedback regarding 
performance is provided. (See ECSE001). Staff also complete Code PINK procedural review via Annual Education. 
  
Security Services addresses Work Place Violence in collaboration with Human Resource, Risk Management, Safety and 
Administration by managing an environment on our premises in which everyone associated with Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center, including patients, parents, visitors and employees, does not feel unsafe because of any threatening 
actions of another patient, visitor or employee. Security provides immediate response, preventive security measures and 
thorough investigative procedures for all reported events.   
 