POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Security 
Subject:  Security Emergency-Code WHITE Section:    
Date of Origination:  October 1980 Supersedes:   
Date of Last Revision: 12/13/19 Serial Code:   ECSE007 
Date of Last Review:  11/15/2022 
PURPOSE  
This policy provides a mechanism for immediate response to an emergency where a client's and/or visitor's 
behavior becomes a threat to themselves or others.  
 
POLICY 
When a Code White is announced, all available personnel in the area will give prompt assistance until the 
situation is under control. 
 
PROCEDURE 
Whenever any Staff member in immediate danger, or in a situation which may pose a danger, when a patient, 
visitor, or other Team Member presents themselves in a hostile, threatening and/or violent manner, a Code 
White will be called by contacting the paging operator (5-3333 at Main Hospital and Children's Hospital) 
or by using the overhead paging system (enter *71 and make announcement at Ascension Campus). 
Announcement will state "Code White, Location". 
Prompt response of all available staff is expected. 
Measures to control the emergency will be initiated only when enough staff members have arrived to use a 
team approach. 
The charge nurse identifies a Code White Leader. The Code White Leader will: 
• Immediately designate a staff member to keep all unnecessary persons from entering the location 
during the emergency.  
• Direct a staff member to remove other patients from the area.  
• Direct the staff regarding the course of action to be used before approaching the individual  
• Direct the staff regarding use of seclusion/restraints according to policy if indicated. 
If a patient requires transfer to the Psychiatric Unit, a staff member from the transferring unit will accompany 
the patient.   
If a patient requires a more secure environment, use of restraints may be necessary to ensure the individual’s 
safety.  
In Mental and Behavioral Health areas, Team Members will utilize their personal panic alarms to alert 
Security of the Code White. Two consecutive panic alerts will result in the Code White being identified by 
Security Dispatch as an emergency situation whereby MBH staff needs immediate assistance from all 
personnel.  
 