 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section: Security 
Title: Use of Force Policy Reference #: ECSE023 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 7/14/2022 Last Date Reviewed: 05/02/2024 
Last Date Revised: 12/14/2022 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
To establish a protocol in connection with the authorization and regulation of the use of force by Our 
Lady of The Lake Hospital Security Response Officers (“SROs”). This use of force policy is intended to 
aid each SRO in the execution of their duties and must be read with the common sense and 
reasonableness that should guide an SRO’s actions. It is impossible to anticipate every situation and an 
SRO must continue to rely upon their training, skill, and judgment. 
 
APPLICABILITY: 
 
All SROs employed by Our Lady of The Lake Hospital. 
 
POLICY: 
 
The lawful use of force by any Hospital employee, including an SRO, is an action of last resort when de-
escalation and other measures have failed or are not available under the circumstances.  
 
An SRO who encounters a situation in which the SRO reasonably believes the use of force against a 
violent individual is warranted must use the minimum amount of force necessary to protect all 
concerned, including the SRO. The force options will be dictated by the actions of the threatening or 
violent individual at the time the SRO encounters the individual. Use of deadly force with a firearm 
requires the SRO to understand the legal, ethical, and moral implications in taking a human life. The 
SRO must make his/her decision based on reasonableness and the totality of the circumstances.  
 
Force options include: 
 
A. Use of Force to Detain 
 
It is the policy of Our Lady of The Lake Hospital that an SRO uses only that amount of force 
reasonably necessary to effect detainment or achieve other lawful objectives. The level of force 
used will consider the safety of the SRO, the public, and the individual the force is being used 
against. An SRO will use force in a manner and technique consistent with their training. 
 
 
 
B. Use of Deadly Force  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 4 
 
Deadly force means that level of force that a reasonable and prudent person would consider 
substantially likely to cause death or great bodily harm. An SRO may use deadly force only if the 
SRO reasonably believes that he/she or someone else is in imminent danger of losing their lives 
or receiving great bodily harm. Deadly force will not be used in any circumstance where no force 
or a lesser type of force would produce the acceptable objective. 
 
If anyone is injured by force, the SRO will call the appropriate Code for Medical Rapid Response Team 
assistance at the injury location. 
 
 
PROCEDURES 
 
A. Force Options 
 
The levels of force described in this Policy are based on an ideal situation where the SRO can 
advance the level of force in a step-by-step manner in response to a subject who increases the 
level of resistance in a step-by-step manner.  
 
Most situations requiring use of force are not ideal and the SRO is required to decide upon the 
level of force needed at a particular moment. An SRO is not expected to attempt levels of force 
less than necessary to overcome the threat. An SRO may be required to escalate or de-escalate to 
required levels of force, often skipping force levels in the list to follow. As long as the force used 
is reasonable, it does not have to be the least aggressive reasonable force available. 
 
1. Officer Presence – The presence and identification of the SRO on the scene. 
 
2. Verbal Warning – An SRO verbally directs the person to do something or informs the person 
of impending actions. 
 
3. Verbal Command – An SRO specifically directs the person to do something to which they 
are expected to comply. 
 
4. Soft Empty Hand Control Techniques – The techniques which fall into this category are the 
use of transport wrist locks, pressure points, and simple strength techniques which place the 
resisting subject into a position of detainment while awaiting local law enforcement arrival. 
 
5. Hard Empty Hand Control Techniques – Empty hand control techniques which have a 
probability of causing bruises or lacerations to the skin or the use of respiratory and mental 
stuns. 
 
6. Expandable Batons (ASP) – Use of an expandable baton as weapon which has the probability of 
causing bruising or lacerations to the skin. The device can assist with pressure points, and simple 
strength techniques. 
 
7. Deadly Force – Force that is substantially likely to cause serious bodily harm or death.  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 4 
 
B.  Firearms 
 
 The qualifications, training, and certification necessary for an SRO to be issued a firearm by Our 
Lady of The Lake Hospital Security Department is governed by Security Policy ECSE022_.  
No SRO will be issued a firearm unless all requirements set forth in that Policy are met. 
 
C. Prohibitions 
 
The use of a firearm by any SRO is subject to the following prohibitions: 
 
1. Firearms are not to be discharged as warning shots. 
 
2. An SRO shall not remove his handgun from the holster or display a weapon without 
sufficient justification – and never in jest or horseplay. 
 
3. Firearms will not be used to intimidate or bluff an individual. Such actions as unnecessary 
drawing or pointing a service firearm at an individual is prohibited. 
4. Deadly force will not be utilized for the protection of or recovery of property. 
5. Firing from a moving vehicle is prohibited. Firing at a moving vehicle is only authorized if 
the vehicle is purposely being used as a deadly weapon and is specifically targeting the SRO 
or immediate bystanders in the area. 
6. The use of a firearm as a club, sap, or baton is prohibited. 
7. Firearms will be utilized only if the SRO is reasonably certain of the target.  
8. Firearms will be utilized only if the SRO has a clear “field of fire.”  Be conscious of any 
potential secondary environmental and or ballistic effects.  
 
9. An SRO who discharges his/her issued firearm while on duty, except for training purposes, 
shall notify law enforcement, their immediate supervisor on duty at the time, Security 
Supervisor, and the Director of Security. This oral report must be made as soon as practical 
after the incident. A written report shall be forwarded to the Director of Security. The 
incident area will immediately be considered a crime scene, and all efforts must be made to 
preserve the area for investigation purposes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D. Liability  Policy Reference Number 
Page 4 of 4 
 
SROs may be subject to civil damage suits and/or criminal charges resulting from unauthorized, 
illegal, or imprudent use of firearms. Insurance coverage excludes any willful and wanton, 
intentional acts in violation of the law. Any employee may be subject to civil damage suits 
and/or criminal charges resulting from use of force. 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
LSA R.S. 14:19 
LSA R.S. 14:20 
LSA R.S. 14:21 
LSA R.S. 14:22 
 
 
 