POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center  
 
Chapter:  Security 
Subject:  Weapons Section:    
Date of Origination:  October 1980 Supersedes:   
Date of Last Revision: 10/22/2020 Serial Code:   ECSE014 
Date of Last Review: 8/1/202009/30/2021 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to define responsibilities of employees when a person(s) is discovered carrying a weapon on 
any property owned or operated by Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center. 
POLICY 
Weapons of any kind including firearms, explosives and knives (with a blade over 3" long) are expressly prohibited on 
any property owned or operated by Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center unless carried by commissioned law 
enforcement officers. 
Visitors 
If a visitor is found in possession of a weapon, contact Security Services and ask the individual to stay in place until 
Security arrives. If the visitor does not cooperate the employee should not try to interfere or follow; rather a description of 
the weapon holder should be given to Security and they will follow up. 
Security will be called, and the security guards will either escort the person to their vehicle to secure the weapon or the 
weapon shall be locked in the security office or weapons safe until the person leaves the hospital.  
Patients 
Patients being admitted with weapon(s) will be asked to give the weapon to a family member to remove it from the 
property. 
If the patient doesn't have any family members available to take the weapon, Security Services will be notified to secure 
the weapon in a gun locker or safe in the security office until the patient is discharged from the hospital. The weapon may 
also be given to a person designated by the patient. 
Law Enforcement Officers 
Commissioned Law enforcement officers shall be allowed to carry their weapons on Medical Center property except in a 
Mental and Behavioral Health Department. If an armed Law Enforcement Officer arrives to the Medical Center for 
emergency medical treatment, the weapon(s) will be secured by Security Services or the officer’s supervisor will be called 
to recover the weapon(s). 
Employees 
Employees are expressly prohibited from bringing weapons onto property owned or operated by Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center. 
 