POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Security 
Subject:  Management of Security for High Profile 
Individuals 
Section:    
Date of Origination:  August 1997 Supersedes:   
Date of Last Revision: 12/17/2019 Serial Code:   ECSE013 
Date of Last Review: 11/15/2022 
POLICY 
A procedure is established to manage security of high-profile individuals (patients and guests) who have the potential to 
attract overt attention from the public or media. 
PROCEDURE 
Implementation 
Upon notification of the arrival or anticipated arrival of a High-Profile Individual as a Patient the Chief Executive Officer 
or his/her designee (Administrator on Call) will notify the following persons: 
• Vice President/Director of Patient Care Services, or House Manager/Supervisor.  
• Director/Manager of Security, Security Shift Supervisor or Designee.  
• Medical Director.  
• Emergency Department Physician on duty. 
Triage Team 
A Triage Team composed of the Charge Nurses and/or Physicians shall make ready a patient receiving area, i.e. Main 
Emergency Treatment Room-and discharge and/or transfer patients who may be in that designated area. 
Communications and Hospital Spokesperson 
All communication with Media will be managed by Corporate Communications. When necessary, a location for assembly 
of the Media will be identified for Press Releases. 
Any inquiry from the news media (newspapers, magazines, radio, and television) shall be directed to Corporate 
Communications. 
Inquiries from reporters to interview patients or personnel shall be referred to Administration. 
If a patient prefers not to be interviewed, the hospital will provide the media with the routine information, which is 
releasable. 
All staff shall maintain confidentiality of information by not discussing the case with anyone who does not have a need 
for this information.   
Receiving 
The Vice President/Director of Patient Care Services, Director/Manager of Security, Medical Director and Emergency 
Physician on duty will determine the most appropriate location to receive a High-Profile Individual. 
Ongoing Stay 
When possible, High Profile Individuals who are admitted as inpatients shall be admitted to a patient room that has an 
Anteroom attached. If necessary, the floor/wing will be vacated and secured. The Admissions clerk will admit the patient 
as a "Secured Patient". The patient's name will not appear on computer screens or certain reports to prevent unauthorized 
viewing. The patient must be registered under the correct name for lab work and blood transfusions as risk prevention. 
Security 
Coordination with external law enforcement provided by State, Federal or Local agencies will be the responsibility of the 
Director/Manager of Security or Designee. 
. 