POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:   
Subject:  Disruptive Behavior Plan for Patients and/or 
Guests 
Section:  Environment of Care 
Date of Origination:  11/14/2011 Supersedes:  
Date Last Revised: 2/15/2021 Serial Code:  ECSE021 
Date Last Reviewed: 11/5/2022 
 
Policy 
The objective of this Disruptive Behavior Plan is to describe measures team members will take to respond 
to disruptive behavior which threatens the therapeutic environment for patients and/or undermines a 
culture of safety. This policy applies to all Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) 
treatment areas, including inpatient units, clinics and affiliates.   In addition, this policy can be utilized in 
conjunction with the Administrative Discharge Policy (OrgClin/063). 
 
If the disruptive individual is a minor, or otherwise considered legally incompetent, involvement of a 
legally authorized representative is desired. However, we will use appropriate means to prevent harm to 
patients, guests, medical staff, and/or OLOLRMC team members, with or without the presence of an 
authorized representative. 
 
Definitions: 
1. Disruptive Behavior – Patient or guest behavior that intimidates threatens patient care or the 
safety of team members and/or undermines a culture of safety. These situations include, but are 
not limited to: 
• Refusal to comply with reasonable requests from medical staff and/or OLOLRMC team 
members, including refusal to comply with medical protocol and/or OLOLRMC rules and 
regulations. 
• Possession or use of illegal drugs, alcohol, and use of tobacco products on OLOLRMC 
premises. 
• Use of prescription medications that are not prescribed to the user. 
• Use of substances or procedures that are not approved in writing (or electronically) by a 
member of the OLOLRMC medical staff. 
• Disruptive confrontations, threats or verbally or physical intimidating behavior. 
• Intentional failure to adhere to organizational rules and/or policies. 
 
2. Disorderly Conduct – Any person who solicits anyone to engage in, or who engages in, lewd or 
dissolute conduct in any public place, or in any place open to the public or exposed to public 
view. These situations include, but are not limited to: 
• Soliciting handouts and continue after being asked to stop. 
• Drunkenness, under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug or controlled substance. 
• Family and Civil Disturbances on hospital property (including any physical or violent act) 
• Making unreasonable noise and continue after being asked to stop (this includes loud 
music). 
• Use of offensive or abusive gestures or language. 
• Loitering or wandering on property without visible or lawful business (not seeking medical 
treatment or visiting a patient) 
 
3. Escalating Behavior: A change in behavior from acceptable to unacceptable or unstable with 
increasing intensity such as calm to verbal aggression, pacing or anxious to challenging, or verbal to physical aggression. 
 
4. Administrative Discharge - A discharge when the optimal course of treatment would be for the 
patient to remain in the facility, however, his/her behavior has threatened the ability to provide a 
safe environment. 
 
5. Guest - Anyone who is not a patient, OLOLRMC team member, or member of the OLOLRMC 
medical staff.   
 
 
Escalating Behavior:  
Team members should attempt to de-escalate the behavior before it becomes disruptive. Care should 
always be taken to maintain personal safety. 
 
Common warning signs of escalating behavior in a patient or guest include but are not limited to: 
• Asking challenging questions:  ex. “What are you going to do if I don’t stop…?” 
• Refusing to comply with requests of OLOLRMC team members or medical staff. 
• Intimidating behavior either verbal or physical. 
 
There may be precipitating factors that we may not be aware of that could play a role in the individual’s 
escalating behavior such as: 
• Patient or guest current medical/mental status. 
• Anxiety or fear of the unknown. 
• A previous negative experience in a healthcare setting. 
• Patient or guest concern that they are not being listened to by team members. 
• Patient or guest family situation. 
 
Disruptive Patient 
 
Notification and Documentation: 
1. At the first instance of escalating or disruptive behavior, OLOLRMC team member(s) and/or 
physician(s) will: 
a. Counsel the patient and document the behavioral problems. 
b. Document that the patient was informed that such behavior is unacceptable and 
inappropriate. 
c. Inform them that their behavior prohibits continued treatment and does not meet 
hospital/health care measurement and must stop immediately.  
d. The Charge Nurse and Nurse Manager should be made aware of the conversation with the 
patient.  
 
2. If necessary, inform ancillary team members to speak or collaborate with the unit’s team before 
approaching a disruptive patient or guest. 
 
3. Each instance of escalating or disruptive behavior should be documented to establish a pattern of 
repetitive disruptive behavior or otherwise unacceptable conduct.  Unit based leadership should 
re-counsel the patient and document the conversation in the patient’s chart.  
 
4.    Incidents of patient escalating, or disruptive behavior should also be documented in a safety 
event report. 
 4. If the above two attempts to counsel (including attempts by unit leadership) are unsuccessful, the 
unit should engage the assistance of the House Manager/Supervisor on duty. 
 
5. House Manager/Supervisor/Administrator on Call or designee or Security may engage law 
enforcement for assistance and possible arrest of patient. 
 
6. Employee(s) who are victims of a patient violent behavior may press criminal charges against the 
patient 
 
7. A workplace violence prevention safety flag is to be placed in the patient’s electronic 
medical record  
 
 
Procedure: 
1. Every effort should be made to maintain a positive patient/hospital relationship including: 
• Counseling the patient and his/her family, focusing on the need for compliance and the 
consequences (i.e., discharge) of continued inappropriate behavior. 
• Engaging the patient’s family and physician for input and support. 
• Consulting Mental and Behavioral Health, Medical Management, and/or Pastoral Care.  
• Moving the patient to a private room (if applicable). 
 
2. When communicating with a disruptive person it is important to be calm and polite. This can be 
difficult to do since disruptive people often seek conflict. 
a. Clarify what the individual is saying. 
Example: Patient or guest makes vague or specific threat: “If you touch me, it’ll be the 
last time.” It is the employee’s responsibility to ask if this statement is a threat. 
 
b. If the patient confirms the threat, advise the individual that this is unacceptable behavior. 
Example: “Mr. Jones, we do not tolerate violence, or even threats of violence. If you 
continue, I will ask for assistance from Security.’’ 
 
c.   If disruptive person is a guest, you may ask them to leave if behavior continues. Notify 
Security and the House manager if guest refuses to leave. 
Example:” Mr. Jones, you need to leave this area now.” 
3. Use your resources: Co-workers, unit leadership, House Manager, and Code White.”  
 
4. Use special sensitivity and caution when dealing with mentally ill and/or physically aggressive 
patients. 
▪ If assistance is needed with a mentally ill or physically aggressive patient, a Code 
White (ECSE007) should be called to prompt appropriate available team members to 
assist. 
▪ Should the patient be restrained, use the minimum force necessary to maintain 
control and prevent harm to the patient or anyone else.  
▪ If restraint and/or seclusion are necessary, the Restraint and Seclusion Policy must be 
followed. (OrgClin/036) 
 
 Procedure for Administrative Discharge:   Refer to Administrative Discharge Policy OrgClin/063 
 
 
 
Disruptive or Disorderly Guest 
1. When disruptive behavior involves a guest, they may be asked to leave. If they refuse, the House 
Manager/Supervisor/Administrator on Call or designee and Security should be contacted 
immediately. Before any guest is asked to leave, the House Manager and security will speak with 
the individual to: 
 
a. Make him/her aware that his/her behavior violates our organizational rules. 
 
b. Advise the individual that the behavior will not be tolerated and to cease such behavior. 
 
c. Ask the individual to leave if the disruptive behavior continues. 
 
2. Depending on the nature of the guest’s actions, the following actions are possible:  
a.    Call a “Code White”. Clinical Staff can use Versus Badges, if available, to call a Silent 
Code White and immediately contact Security Services.  This should be followed up with 
a call to the operator as soon as reasonably possible. 
 
b. Security/ Designee may escort guest off-property.  
 
c.     House Manager/Supervisor/Administrator on Call or designee or Security may engage 
law enforcement for assistance and possible arrest of guest. 
 
d. Employee(s) who are victims of a guest violent behavior may press criminal charges 
against the guest. 
 
 