 ECSF013 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section: Safety Management 
Title: Electrical Equipment  
Policy 
Reference #: ECSF013 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 05/08/2018 Review Date: 08/18/2021 
Revision Date: 02/18/2020 
 
PURPOSE: 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) is committed to providing a safe and healthy 
work environment and to protecting staff from injury or death caused by uncontrolled electrical hazards 
at all locations where OLOL operates. 
 
POLICY: 
Because of safety and insurance regulations, it is necessary to manage the use of personally owned 
electrical equipment being brought into OLOL.  
1. All electrical equipment brought into any OLOL location for personal or professional non-
medical use and not property of OLOL, must primarily be approved for use by department 
leadership.   
2. Department leadership is responsible to visually inspect equipment periodically and to consult 
Biomedical Engineering (Biomed) and/or Plant Services, if needed. 
3. Equipment owner is responsible for any needed repairs and product replacement. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
General 
1. All electrical equipment will have the manufacturer’s name or trademark.  The equipment will 
also have its operating voltage, current, wattage or other rating clearly marked on it. 
2. Patients are permitted to use no more devices than can be accommodated by existing power 
outlets. 
3. All equipment is UL approved for the use for which it is designed. 
 
Portable Space Heaters 
1. Personal portable electric space heaters are not allowed in healthcare occupancies accredited by 
the Joint Commission.  Exceptions to this rule is allowed if all the following are done: 
a. Must be approved by area leadership 
b. Must be owned and maintained by OLOL and/or OLOL facility  
i. The following safety criteria must be met, and operational safety precautions must 
be followed: 
▪ The equipment is UL approved for the use for which it is designed. 
▪ The equipment has a sealed element, and does not produce any flames, fumes, 
or use any fuel.  ECSF013 
Page 2 of 3 
▪ The equipment is equipped to turn off automatically when tilted or turned 
over. 
▪ The heating elements cannot exceed 212 degrees Fahrenheit. 
c. Must be used as a temporary measure  
d. The user of the heater is ultimately responsible for any hazard or fire code violation 
created as a result of unauthorized or inappropriate use. Compliance with the following 
operational safety precautions is required: 
i. Always maintain a minimum clearance of three feet between materials and the 
heating device. 
ii. Never leave the heating unit “ON” when unattended. 
iii. Plug the heating unit directly into an outlet with enough capacity. 
iv. Never use an extension cord or power strip with heater because it may overheat 
and cause a risk of fire.  
v. Check the heating unit before each use to make sure that all indicator lights are 
working.  Remove the defective unit from service immediately. 
vi. Ensure that the power cord is properly plugged in and is not damaged, or crushed 
by objects, or covered under carpet or rug. 
 
Electric skillets 
1. Electric skillets are prohibited. 
 
Toasters and Toaster Ovens 
1. Toasters and Toaster Ovens are prohibited in healthcare occupancies except for designated areas 
such as the cafeteria. 
 
Lockout/Tagout 
1. Qualified employees will use lockout/tagout procedures on all electrical equipment while 
completing maintenance work. Lockout/tagout procedures are found in OLOL’s Lockout/Tagout 
Policy. If the equipment cannot be deenergized because it would introduce an additional or 
increased hazard, or it is infeasible due to the design or its operational limitations (i.e. emergency 
alarm systems), OLOL will hire a qualified electrical contractor to perform the work.  
 
Department Responsibilities 
1. Each department is responsible to identify types of non-patient care equipment that may pose an 
electrical hazard during intended use.  If there is any question as to the safety of the equipment, 
Biomed should be consulted. 
 
2. Each department is to ensure that all electrical equipment in their department is safe for use. 
 
Extension Cords, Power Strips, and Multi-Outlet Adapters 
1. Employees must be aware of the hazards associated with the misuse of extension cords and 
relocatable power taps (RPT)s and power strips. Extension cords are prohibited except for 
emergency situations where either Biomed or Plant Services has approved the device for 
temporary use.   
  ECSF013 
Page 3 of 3 
2. All power strips must be UL listed and used according to the manufacture’s guidelines.  
Relocatable Power Taps (RPT)s may be used for non-patient care equipment such as 
computers/monitors/printers, and in areas such as waiting rooms, offices, nurse stations, support 
areas, corridors, etc.  
 
3. Precautions needed if RPTs are used include:  
• ensuring they are never “daisy-chained” 
• preventing cords from becoming tripping hazards 
• installing internal ground fault and over-current protection devices 
– using power strips that are adequate for the number and types of devices used  
 
4. Multi-Outlet Adapters are prohibited. 
 
RPT Requirements in Patient Care Areas 
1. Power strips may be used in a patient care vicinity to power rack-, table-, pedestal-or cart-
mounted patient care-related electrical equipment assemblies, provided all the following 
conditions are met:  
• The receptacles are permanently attached to the equipment assembly  
• The sum of the ampacity of all appliances connected to the receptacles shall not exceed 75 
percent of the ampacity of the flexible cord supplying the receptacles 
• The ampacity of the flexible cord is suitable in accordance with the current edition of NFPA 
70, National Electric Code.  
• The electrical and mechanical integrity of the assembly is regularly verified and documented 
through an ongoing maintenance program 
 
2. Power strips providing power to rack-, table-, pedestal-, or cart-mounted patient care-related 
electrical equipment assemblies are not required to be an integral component of manufacturer 
tested equipment.  
 
3. Power strips may be permanently attached to mounted equipment assemblies by personnel who 
are qualified to ensure compliance. 
 
REFERENCES: 
National Fire Protection Association 99-2012, Healthcare Facilities Code, Chapter 10 Electrical 
Equipment 
National Fire Protection Association 70-2011, National Electric Code 
Joint Commission, Environment of Care.02.04.03, Element of Performance 27 
 
 