POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Safety Management 
Subject:  Helipad Safety Section:   
Date of Origination:  11/15/2012 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised:  4/29/2019 Serial Code:  ECSF012 
Date Last Reviewed: 9/12/2022 
 
PURPOSE 
To provide guidelines for those working on and around the helipad.  
 
POLICY 
Appropriate safety precautions will be implemented to ensure safety and monitor access to a helipad located on property owned  or 
operated by Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center.  
 
HELIPAD COORDINATES & WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS 
 
 Our Lady of the Lake 
Hospital  
(Baton Rouge, LA) 
OLOL Children's Hospital 
(Baton Rouge, LA) 
Our Lady of the Lake 
Ascension (Gonzales, LA) 
Our Lady of the Lake 
Livingston  
(Walker, LA) 
Coordinates Latitude: 30 degrees, 24 
minutes, 15.69 seconds N 
Longitude: 91 degrees, 6 
minutes, 16.37 seconds W 
Latitude: 30 degrees, 24 
minutes, 4.1 seconds N 
Longitude: 91 degrees, 5 
minutes, 49.4 seconds W 
Latitude: 30 degrees, 12 
minutes, 34 seconds 
Longitude: 90 degrees, 55 
minutes,  51 seconds W 
Latitude: 30 degrees, 27 
minutes, 56 seconds 
Longitude: 90 degrees, 
52 minutes, 0.04 
seconds W 
Elevation 69 Feet 30.4 feet 9.5 feet 35.5 feet 
Weight 
Limit 
Elevated, Max Weight: 
25,000 lbs. 
Ground Based, Max. 
Weight: 22,000 Lbs. 
Ground Based, Concrete 
Base 
Ground Based, Max. 
Weight: 40,000 Lbs. 
Max. 
Capacity 
Two helicopters One helicopter One helicopter One helicopter 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Access to the elevated helipad will be restricted at all times except when:  
a. Transporting patients/stretchers in or out. 
b. Roof access is needed by authorized personnel for maintenance or inspection.  
i. Orange cones will be placed on the helipad if maintenance work is being pe rformed. 
 
2. Patient Arrival 
a. Upon notification from the Emergency Room staff that a helicopter is due to land, the security officers on duty take the 
following action: 
i. Obtain an estimated time of arrival from the Emergency Room staff. 
ii. Retrieve reflective vest from dispatch area. Put on the reflective vest on prior to going outside to secure the 
designated landing area. 
iii. Security personnel will remain in a protected area until the aircraft has safely landed.  
1. Secure hats and any loose clothing that may be pulled into the rot or blade. 
iv. If the helicopter must land on the parking deck instead of the elevated helipad, the following action will be taken.  
1. Stop all vehicle traffic.  
a. Vehicle traffic may be no closer than 50 feet from the helicopter unless under direct supervision of a 
crew member and only when blades have come to a complete stop. 
b. Vehicle traffic may be allowed only when the helicopter is powered-down and rotors are stopped. 
c. Vehicle traffic is to be stopped prior to helicopter departure after the patient has been unloaded.  
2. Establish a security perimeter.  
a. Place traffic cones on all traffic lanes of parking area leading to main entrance ramp.  
b. Clear area of any debris and all unauthorized persons.  
v. Maintain radio contact with Security Dispatch and other officers at all time.  
 
b. Staff will remain in a protected area until the aircraft has safely landed. 
i. Equipment such as IV Poles and gurneys should remain in the safe area until advised to bring them forward by a crew 
member.  ii. Emergency Department staff is responsible to ensure the mattress, sheets, and blankets are secured and will not be 
displaced by the rotor wash. 
 
c. Staff shall not approach the craft while rotors are in motion unless the pilot signals for assistance.  
i. If approach is necessary while rotors are in motion, USE EXTREME CAUTION.  
1. Wait for signal from crew to approach. 
2. Approach the aircraft from the front, staying visible to the Pilot. 
3. Keep head low. Top blades may dip down. 
4. Stay at least 10 feet away from moving tail rotor. It is EXTREMELY dangerous. 
 
d. The medical crew of the craft will coordinate patient unloading from the craft.  
i. Hospital staff will follow flight crew instructions during patient unloading.  
ii. Allow flight crew to open and close doors of the aircraft. 
iii. Care is to be taken with invasive lines and portable life support equipment to avoid disruption. 
iv. Lock wheels on stretcher while loading and unloading the patient.  
v. Secure safety belts, blankets, linen or other items on the stretcher or transport isolette. 
 
3. Safety Inspections and Maintenance 
a. Security Personnel and Transport Nurses are responsible to inspect the helipad each shift and/or when notified of the 
pending arrival of helicopter. 
i. Verify the area is secure. 
ii. Complete a visual inspection of the helipad.   
1. Remove any debris on the helipad. 
2. Assess navigational aids including wind sock, beacon, perimeter lights and flood lights.  Place a work order for 
repairs as needed.     
4. Safety Training 
a. All personnel responding to the helipad should have initial helipad orientation training and participate in annual helipad 
safety training. 
 
5. Emergency Plan 
a. All team members should be aware of the location of fire response equipment and egress paths from the helipad.  
i. See also ECEP007, Code Red (Fire) Plan or ECEP007-A, Code Red (Fire) Plan – OLOL Livingston. 
b. In case of an accident at the helipad 
i. Activate the emergency operations plan.  
ii. If necessary, call 911 to activate community agencies to respond to the accident.  
iii. Contact the helicopter operator. 
iv. Do not approach the helicopter until it has stopped moving. 
c. Report all safety events using the Safety Events procedure (OrgOpsGN019).  
 