ECSF000 
1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section: Safety Management 
Title: Safety Management Plan 
Policy 
Reference #: ECSF000 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 1, 1997 Review Date: 09/12/2023 
Revision Date: 01/01/18; 12/28/19; 05/19/20 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
The Safety Management Program is established to provide a safe physical environment for patients, personnel 
and visitors at all locations where Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) conducts business in 
order to reduce the risk of injuries. Its focus is the Environment of Care Committee, into which all other 
Environmental safety-related disciplines report.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
Responsibility 
The Regulatory Safety Officer is appointed to chair the Environment of Care Committee and to coordinate the 
environment of care activities in the organization. Qualifications include knowledge and experience along with 
ongoing education and training. The Regulatory Safety Officer is responsible for ensuring regulatory 
compliance and has the authority to intervene in situations posing an immediate threat to life or health or threat 
of damage to equipment and buildings. Employees and leadership are responsible for communicating safety 
issues that may require intervention. 
 
Risk Assessments 
The Regulatory Safety Officer is responsible for coordinating risk assessments to evaluate potential hazards 
associated with buildings, grounds, equipment, occupants, and internal physical systems on patients and public 
safety. Results are reported to the Environment of Care Committee and addressed by the appropriate committee 
member. Proactive risk assessment is accomplished using a variety of methods, including the following:  
• Review of current governmental and other agency regulations  
• Environmental Rounds  
• Safety Event Reports  
• Failure Mode Effects Analysis (FMEA) 
• Hazard Vulnerability Analysis (HVA) 
• Reports made to the Environment of Care Committee 
• Scheduled testing of utility systems 
 
Renovation or new construction projects are coordinated by the Vice President of Facilities. The Vice President 
of Facilities is responsible to ensure that contractors comply with relevant state law and regulations, 
professional guidelines and standards.  
 
A pre-construction risk assessment (PCRA) is completed for each project to identify the risks and potential 
impact of demolition, renovation, or new construction activities on air quality requirement, infection control, 
utility requirements, noise, vibrations and emergency procedures. Infection risk associated with construction ECSF000 
2 
and/or renovation activities is assessed by Vendors, Contractors, Design and Construction, Plant Services, 
Infection Control and/or Safety Management prior to demolition and throughout the project. Design and 
Construction, Infection Control, and/or Plant Services is responsible for coordinating with the construction 
contractor to remedy any identified deficiencies.  
 
Product/Medication/Equipment Safety Recalls 
Response to Product Safety Recalls is managed by Materials Management, the Biomedical Department, 
Pharmacy, and Risk Management. Information regarding product alerts and recalls is distributed as appropriate 
to patient care areas, and when applicable, products are removed from stock. A summary report of Product 
Safety Recalls is submitted to the Environment of Care Committee at least annually. Risks associated with 
medical equipment are monitored through scheduled preventive maintenance. 
 
Grounds and Equipment 
Parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, external equipment, and landscaped areas are provided for the 
convenience, safety and enjoyment of all patients, visitors, medical staff, and employees. Cosmetic maintenance 
of these areas is provided by a contract landscaping service. The grounds are checked routinely by employees of 
Plant Services, Security and the Landscaping Contractor. Safety hazards or needed repairs are reported to the 
Plant Services Department for corrective action. 
 
Smoking Policy 
To encourage the health of our patients, visitor and staff, a policy regarding smoking in the hospital is in place 
and enforced. Ongoing monitoring is completed to assess compliance with the policy. An administrative 
structure is in place to address those who violate the policy. (see OOEC006 Tobacco Free Environment) 
  
Orientation and Education 
Employees, Contractors, Students, Licensed Independent Practioners (LIPs), and Volunteers are oriented to 
their roles and responsibilities within the environment of care during initial orientation (general and 
departmental) and refreshed via annual education. Education includes responsibility for monitoring the 
environment and reporting safety concerns, events and near-miss situations as well as roles in responding to 
emergency situations. Safety topics are published to provide ongoing information about the environment of care 
program and safety initiatives. In depth training is provided for emergency plan response through structured 
training and disaster drills.  
 
Incident Reporting and Investigation 
Reporting safety-related incidents and conditions is the responsibility of all employees and is accomplished 
through the Safety Event Reporting structure. Summaries of all reported events are reviewed to determine if any 
action can to be taken to prevent similar future incidents. Summary reports of security incidents, patient and 
visitor falls, occupational illness and injuries are reported to the Environment of Care Committee.  
 
Environmental Tours 
Environmental tours are conducted to evaluate employee knowledge and skill, observe current practice, and 
evaluate environmental conditions.  Results are communicated to area leadership following the tour and to the 
Environment of Care committee as tools for improving policies and procedures including orientation and 
education programs, and employee performance. Identified deficiencies are highlighted and referred to the 
appropriate area for remediation. 
 
Annual Evaluation ECSF000 
3 
Performance of the Environment of Care Management Plans is evaluated by reviewing reported incidents and 
conditions as well as monitoring plan objectives. Data regarding specific measures is reported Annually and 
evaluation of each management plan is performed by Environment of Care Committee and reported to the 
Performance Improvement Leadership Committee and the Board. The Regulatory Safety Officer is responsible 
for implementing the recommendations in the report as part of the performance improvement process.  
 
Examining Safety Issues 
The Environment of Care Committee includes representatives from Administration and Supervisory Personnel 
from Clinical and Support Services including but not limited to, Biomedical Engineering, Imaging, Infection 
Control, Laboratory, Our Lady of the Lake Physician’s Group, Mental and Behavioral Health, Patient Care 
Services, Perioperative Services, Plant Services, and Risk Management. The committee monitors key 
benchmarking indicators, reported safety events and concerns for unsafe practices or hazardous conditions in 
the facilities. Safety-related incidents or conditions are reported through the Safety Event Reporting structure. 
Performance in comparison to other healthcare facilities (external benchmarking) is accomplished through 
participation in the Environment of Care Benchmarking Database (Osborne Engineering, Inc.). Performance 
goals are established annually, and benchmarking results are evaluated quarterly for trends. Performance 
improvement results are communicated to leadership through the Performance Improvement reporting structure. 
 
REFERENCES: 
The Joint Commission Environment of Care EC.02.01.01; EC.02.06.05; EC.04.01.01 