 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Safety Management 
Subject:  Pre-Construction Risk Assessment Section:   
Date of Origination:  May 2003 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised:  8/19/2021 Serial Code:  ECSF011 
Date Last Reviewed: 8/19/20219/12/2022 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define the purpose and parameters of a Pre-Construction Risk Assessment (PCRA) and Infection Control Construction 
Risk Assessment (ICRA) for infection control and safety issues. 
 
POLICY: 
1. An assessment of the risk criteria of the impact of demolition, renovation, construction, and work project 
activities on air quality, infection control, utility requirements, noise, vibrations, emergency procedures and 
patient care activities by the ICRA team – Construction Management, Plant Services, Infection Prevention, Safety 
Management, and Department/Unit leader.  
2. A Construction Risk Assessment will be conducted for all construction, renovation, and work projects before 
work activity begins.  
3. Documentation of the OLOLRMC PCRA/ICRA form will be maintained by Construction Management or Plant 
Services project manager/coordinator and Infection Prevention. 
4. Protective actions to be taken to mitigate identified risk will be defined during the risk assessment and 
documented on the OLOLRMC PCRA/ICRA form. These protective actions are to be maintained for the duration 
of the project unless modified in a subsequent risk assessment. 
5. Monitoring of the risk status of each project will be completed daily until the project is completed. 
6. The Construction Management and Plant Services project manager/coordinator is responsible for informing  
Infection Prevention and Safety Management of all planned and ongoing construction and work project activities.   
 
PROCEDURE:  
1. Pre-construction meeting and/or discussion, construction risk assessment: 
a. The risk assessment will be conducted through the coordinated efforts of the ICRA team:  
i. OLOL PM - Project Manager/Coordinator for Construction and/or Plant Service 
ii. Contractor PM - Contractor Project Manager/Coordinator  
iii. Infection Prevention 
iv. Safety Management 
v. Department/Unit Leader 
vi. EVS leader 
vii. Patient Care Services Senior Director/leader 
viii. Other stakeholders identified 
b. OLOL and Contractor PM will provide the construction activities, scope of work, foot and material 
traffic, and project drawings necessary to guide the ICRA team and Infection Prevention with the risk 
class designation and type of risk mitigation measures to be taken. Scope of work and job details will be 
documented in the OLOLRMC PCRA/ICRA form. 
c. Protective actions in the mitigation of the identified risk will be defined. These protective actions are to be 
maintained for the duration of the project. 
d. Expectations and accountability will be designated. 
e. The ICRA team will sign the PCRA/ICRA form to the agreed risk class, risk mitigation measures, 
expectations, and accountability.  
2. Documentation of the formal risk assessment monitoring will be maintained by the OLOL PM and Infection 
Prevention. 
a. A copy of the OLOLRMC PCRA/ICRA form will be posted on all jobsites.  2 
b. In the event a change in scope and risk is identified in the course of work, an ensuing risk assessment is to 
be done and the ICRA form will be updated and signed by the ICRA team. 
3. Monitoring of the risk status of each project will be performed until the project is completed. 
a. Compliance with ILSM (Interim Life Safety Measures) is monitored by Plant Services.  See ISLM policy 
ECLS001. 
b. Compliance with ICRA is monitored by the Contractor PM and jobsite lead, OLOL PM, Infection 
Prevention, Plant Services, and Department/Unit leader.  
i. Jobsite daily checklist will be completed by the contractor and submitted weekly to OLOL PM and 
Infection Prevention. 
c. The Department/Unit leader or designee is also responsible for maintaining awareness of all projects in 
progress in their area and for promptly reporting any issues or concerns to either OLOL PM, Plant 
Services at 5-8292 or Infection Prevention at 5-8864. 
4. At the end of each project, the ICRA team performs a completion walkthrough and signs off prior to occupancy. 
5. The contractor, in conjunction with Facilities & Construction shall ensure that all safety policies and standards are 
adhered to. 
6. Specific infection control issues will be addressed by the Infection Prevention Team or the Director of Health and 
Safety. 
7. Report of all completed risk assessments will be made by Infection Prevention quarterly to the Environment of 
Care Committee. 
 
 
Construction Activity Types 
Type A Inspection and Non-Invasive Activities. Includes but is not limited to: 
• Removal of ceiling tiles for visual inspection only, e.g. limited to 2 tiles per 50 square feet 
• Painting (not sanding) 
• Wall covering, electrical trim work, minor plumbing, and activities which do not generate dust or 
require cutting of walls or access to ceilings other that for visual inspections 
• Minimal noise/vibration generated 
Type B Small scale, short duration activities which create minimal dust. Includes but is not limited to: 
• Installation of telephone and computer cabling 
• Access to chase spaces 
• Cutting of walls or ceiling where dust migration can be controlled 
• Minimal noise/vibration generated  
Type C Work that generates a moderate to high level of dust or requires demolition or removal of any fixed 
building components or assemblies. Includes but is not limited to: 
• Sanding of walls for painting or wall covering 
• Removal of floorcoverings, ceiling tile and casework 
• New wall construction 
• Minor duct work or electrical work above ceilings 
• Major cabling activities 
• Any activity which cannot be completed within a single work shift 
• Moderate to high levels of noise/vibration generated during demolition or new construction phases 
Type D Major demolition and construction projects. Includes but is not limited to: 
• Activities which require consecutive work shifts 
• Requires heavy demolition or removal of a complete cabling system 
• New construction 
High levels of noise/vibration generated during demolition and or new construction phases. 
 