 ECUS094 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL HEALTH 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section: Utilities Management 
Title: 
Environmental Control Monitoring and 
Processes for Temperatures, Humidity, 
and Pressures 
Policy 
Reference #: ECUS094 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: October 2024 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
A. To ensure accurate monitoring of environmental controls such as pressure, temperature, and 
humidity of designated spaces at Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) hospitals and affiliate locations as 
described by regulatory requirements. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
• Building Automation System (BAS) – Trane BAS software monitors certain rooms for temperature 
and humidity and provides notification to Facilities Management when a room’s temperature, 
humidity, or pressure deviates from accepted ranges. The Trane BAS software also maintains logs of 
temperature, humidity, and pressure for monitored rooms. 
• Manometer – A differential pressure gauge provides a test to determine the air flow relations through 
a doorway opening by standing outside the room and holding the Manometer at the bottom of the 
door. The pressure difference between the two rooms will appear on the instrument’s readout. 
• Documentation (Logs)– if a room requires monitoring of temperature or humidity and/or does not 
have a monitoring device, the department staff responsible for the room maintains paper logs and 
report any deviations from accepted ranges. 
 
POLICY: 
A Ventilation Risk Assessment was completed by a multi-discipline group to determine which rooms 
would be monitored based on ASHRAE requirements.  The method and frequency of monitoring the 
relevant rooms is based on the building, department, room use, and HVAC capabilities.   
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A. Temperature  
1. Monitoring 
a. Maintained by the Building Automation System (BAS) and/or room thermostat. 
b. Thermostats should be set based on parameters identified in ASHRAE 170 where 
specified.  Locations without specific parameters should adjust temperature based 
on unit specific requirements. 
2. Responding to an Issue 
a. Upon audible notification of room with temperature monitors, department staff 
respond and verify all room’s doors are closed.  If the alarm reoccurs or the 
device does not return to normal, a call is placed to Facilities Management to 
report the issue and staff submit a corrective work order.  ECUS094 
Page 2 of 3 
b. If BAS software detects a deviation in accepted temperature, Facilities 
Management is notified.  They will notify department of deviation and ask if they 
are aware.  If the alarm reoccurs or the device does not return to normal, a 
corrective action will be implemented. 
 
B. Humidity 
1. Monitoring 
a. Maintained by the Building Automation System (BAS) and/or humidity 
monitoring devices. 
b. Humidity monitoring devices should be set based on parameters identified in 
ASHRAE 170 where specified.   
2. Responding to an Issue 
a. Upon audible notification of room with humidity monitors, department staff 
respond and verify all room’s doors are closed.  If the alarm reoccurs or the 
device does not return to normal, a call is placed to Facilities Management to 
report the issue and staff submit a corrective work order. 
b. If BAS software detects a deviation in accepted humidity, Facilities Management 
is notified.  They will notify department of deviation and ask if they are aware.  If 
the alarm reoccurs or the device does not return to normal, a corrective action will 
be implemented. 
 
C. Air Pressure 
1. Monitoring 
a. Maintained by Building Automation System (BAS), Remote Pressure Monitors, 
and/or Ball in the wall devices.   
b. Pressure Monitors should be set based on parameters identified in ASHRAE 170 
were specified. 
c. Some rooms do not have wall mounted pressure monitors; therefore Facilities 
Management performs a pressure validation test periodically based on location. 
2. Responding to an Issue  
a. Upon audible notification of room with pressure monitors, department staff 
respond and verify all room’s doors are closed.  If the alarm reoccurs or the 
device does not return to normal, a call is placed to Facilities Management to 
report the issue and staff submit a corrective work order. 
b. If BAS software detects a deviation in accepted pressure, Facilities Management 
is notified.  They will notify department of deviation and ask if they are aware.  If 
the alarm reoccurs or the device does not return to normal, a corrective action will 
be implemented. 
 
D. The discovering party (either the department responsible for the room procedures or Facilities 
Management) determining a room’s trending data does not meet the criteria listed above shall 
notify the other party and a joint determination is made if the room is taken out of service. This 
decision is based upon the review of risk factors to patients and supplies. 
1. House Manager, Department Leader, and Infection Prevention will be notified of 
deficiency.  At this time, the room may be taken out of service or may be used as a non-
isolation room.  ECUS094 
Page 3 of 3 
2. Once a repair is scheduled, the room will be blocked for service, then tested prior to 
reopening as an isolation room. 
 
E. Preventative maintenance and validation of rooms 
1. Facilities Management is responsible for implementing a schedule of preventive 
maintenance on the filters, intake, and exhaust systems of the rooms identified within this 
policy. 
2. Facilities Management is also responsible for the validation of the rooms by a 
professional with air balancing certification at determined intervals. 
3. Quarterly reporting to Infection Prevention including, but not limited to, air quality 
monitoring and remediation activities. 
 
Refer to SOS010 Surgical Services Environment for Surgical Services, Sterile Processing, and 
Decontamination areas. 
 
REFERENCES: 
ANSI/ASHRAE/ASHE Standard 170-2013 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS: 
Ventilation Risk Assessment 