 ECUS033 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HEALTH REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section: Utilities Management 
Title: Utilities Failure – HVAC 
Policy 
Reference #: ECUS033 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 2018 Review Date: 10/31/202412/27/2022 
Revision Date: 10/31/2024 
 
PURPOSE:  
To provide a safe physical environment for patients, staff and visitors at all Our Lady of the Lake Health 
Regional Medical Center (OLOL) network locations. 
 
POLICY: 
To provide a continuous comfortable temperatures OLOL’s Plant Services will direct repair/replacement 
activities to resume normal operations with sustained reliability in a timely manner.  
 
Plant Services will follow standard procedures, the manufacturer’s recommendation, and/or the 
experience of the facility in their efforts to resume sustained delivery of the Heating, Ventilation, and 
Air Conditioning (HVAC) systems to the facility. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
In response to a non-functional HVAC system, Plant Services will: 
▪ Inspect functionality of the system(s), controls, distribution system, valves, etc.   
▪ Expedite needed repairs (in housein-house or via approved, outside vendor). 
▪ Notify affected departments and the House Manager of issue, approximate down timedowntime, 
and the availability of a back-up system. 
 
In the event of a large scale or facility wide disruptionIf a large scale or facility-wide disruption occurs, 
Plant Services Leadership or designee will communicate with Hospital Administration and the House 
Manager. 
  
If the loss of HVAC systems cannot be restored in a reasonable time frame, the Incident Command 
Center may be activated.  The mission of the Incident Command Center is to safely manage the operations 
of the facility during a an HVAC systems failure and minimize time to restore service.   
 
 
  ECUS033 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HVAC system is down. 
 
Repair can be made quickly.  
Call Plant Services Dispatch, 5-8292.   
Plant Services will respond immediately. 
Repair cannot be made quickly. If 
needed, provide impacted areas 
with temporary units. 
 
Determine action plan. 
 
Notify the impacted 
departments, Administration, 
and House Manager Notify the impacted departments, 
Administration, and House 
Manager 
 
 