 ECUS000 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HEALTH 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section: Utility Systems 
Title: Utilities Management Plan 
Policy 
Reference #: ECUS000 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 1, 1997 Review Date: 10/31/2024 
Revision Date: 10/31/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
The Utility Management Plan is established to promote a safe, controlled, comfortable environment in 
which to provide patient care, as well as to assess and minimize risks associated with utility failures and 
to ensure operational reliability of utility systems. The Plan applies to Our Lady of the Lake Health 
(OLOL) and all locations where OLOL operates.  
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Responsibility 
The Director of Facilities manages the planning, design, construction and commissioning of utility 
systems. The construction and commissioning programs are designed to assure compliance with codes 
and standards and to meet the specific needs of the occupants.  
 
Criteria are identified for operating components of the  
• utilities systems,  
• life support systems,  
• infection control systems,  
• environmental support systems,  
• communication systems, and  
• equipment support systems.  
 
Plant Services is responsible for setting maintenance standards and implementing a program of planned 
maintenance to ensure a safe, comfortable environment.  
 
Risk Assessments 
The risk of utility failure is assessed proactively through a process that includes design, accurate 
implementation, scheduled maintenance, monitoring, and continuous improvement of utility systems. 
All components of the utilities system have operational plans that are addressed through utility system 
policy and procedures, system / equipment operating manuals, and a preventative maintenance program. 
Recommendations for upgrades or replacement of the systems are addressed through Administration as 
part of the capital planning process.  
 
Utility systems include: 
• Electrical distribution 
• Emergency power  ECUS000 
Page 2 of 4 
• Elevators 
• Heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning 
• Plumbing 
• Boiler and steam 
• Piped gases 
• Vacuum systems 
 
All components of the utilities management systems in the program are evaluated using criteria 
developed from manufacturer’s recommendations, identified risk of failure, as well as experience. The 
Director, Facilities is responsible for managing this process. Preventive Maintenance (PM), inspection 
and testing of utility components are implemented on a schedule developed from manufacturer’s 
recommendations, identified risk of failure, as well as experience as determined by the ongoing 
assessment and improvement.  
 
An accurate inventory of systems is maintained in the Computerized Maintenance Management System 
(CMMS). Plant Services staff and contractors inspect, test and maintain critical components of the 
inventory. Daily operations include scheduled rounds, adjustment of controls, preventive maintenance 
and repair, as required. All equipment deemed high risk shall be denoted as such in the Utility 
Management System. Plant Services will report PM completion percentages for high-risk equipment to 
the Environment of Care Committee. Documentation of utility system testing is maintained in Plant 
Services. 
 
Water Management 
Management of pathogenic biological agents in water systems is accomplished by the combined efforts 
of Plant Services, Infection Control, Nursing, Construction and contract service. Infection Control 
monitors hospital lab culture results to identify the incidence of pathogenic biological agents. If a case is 
identified, Infection Control and Plant Services coordinate to test appropriate water systems including 
cooling towers, domestic hot water and aerosolizing water systems. Regular preventive maintenance is 
completed on cooling towers, domestic hot water and aerosolizing water systems. 
 
Temperature, Humidity, and Air Pressures 
Installation and maintenance of appropriate pressure relationships, air exchange rates, and filtration 
efficiencies for ventilation systems that serve areas specially designed to control airborne contaminants 
is managed by combined efforts of Plant Services and contract services that are managed by Plant 
Services. Plant Services ensures continuous monitoring of pressure sensitive areas by managing a 
schedule of regular observation of filter performance monitoring equipment, air pressure sensing 
equipment, and airflow rate sensors.  
 
Shutdowns 
Critical utility system equipment and controls are labeled to facilitate mapping of the distribution of 
systems for partial or complete emergency shutdown. Documentation that indicates the distribution and 
location of each utility system, including controls for partial or complete shutdown are maintained in 
Plant Services. 
 
Orientation and Education 
Utility system incidents, problems, failures, and user errors are documented and corrected. Significant 
problems, failures and user errors and corrective actions are reported to the Environment for Care  ECUS000 
Page 3 of 4 
Committee for review. Plant Services will coordinate response to utility system failure which may 
disrupt patient care, result in damage to property or cause an unsafe condition, or disruption of a major 
utility service. The need for emergency repairs is reported to the Plant Services Control Room. 
Employees are oriented to their response in Utility system failures through general hospital orientation 
and annual education. 
 
Emergency Power Systems 
Back-up generators are in place and tested under appropriate load conditions to ensure reliable source of 
emergency power to designated areas and utilities. Back-up sources for fuel also are in place. A list 
indicating utilities and designated units, or patient care areas fed by the emergency generator is available 
in Plant Services. Egress lighting is tested under prescribed schedules. Documentation of utility system 
testing is maintained in Plant Services.  
 
Medical Gas and Vacuum Systems 
Scheduled preventive maintenance is performed to inspect, test and maintain critical operating 
components of the piped medical gas system including:  
• Master signal panel area alarms,  
• automatic pressure switches,  
• shutoff valves,  
• flexible connectors, and  
• outlets.  
 
Inspection and testing of critical operating components of the piped medical gas system are implemented 
through written agreement with medical gas system vendor and in-house preventative maintenance 
program. Piped medical gas systems are tested when installed, modified, or repaired. Testing includes 
cross-connection testing, piping purity testing, pressure testing. All testing is performed by a licensed 
contractor. All testing and inspection are based on current NFPA recommendations, manufacturer’s 
recommendations, and relevant regulatory requirements.  Supply valve and area shutoff valves of piped 
medical gas systems are labeled and mapped. Documentation that indicates the distribution and location 
of each utility system, including controls for partial or complete shutdown are maintained in Plant 
Services.   
 
Annual Evaluation 
The annual evaluation of the Utility Systems Management Plan will include a review of the scope 
according to the current Joint Commission standards to evaluate the degree in which the program meets 
accreditation standards and the current risk assessment of the hospital.  The overall performance of the 
program will be reviewed by considering compliance to each standard and element of performance.  The 
overall effectiveness of the program will be evaluated in part by reviewing the outcomes of performance 
improvement measures.  The performance and effectiveness of the Utility Systems Management Plan 
will also be reviewed by the Environment of Care Committee.  Performance improvement results are 
communicated to leadership through the Performance Improvement reporting structure. 
 
 
 
 
  ECUS000 
Page 4 of 4 
REFERENCES: 
The Joint Commission Environment of Care 02.05.01 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA):  
 99-2012 Healthcare Facilities Code 
 101-2012 Life Safety Code 
 72-2010 National Electric Code 
 