 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Neurophysiology EEG 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  Time and Attendance Section: Organization 
Date of Origination: September 19, 2016 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: July 6, 2018January 30, 2018 Serial Code: EEG-02 
Date of Last Review:  July 6, 2018January 30, 2018 
         
PURPOSE: 
To stipulate the shifts, call-in responsibilities, and means of recording worked and benefit time. 
 
POLICIES: 
A. Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
1. The starting times for the shifts in EEG will be determined by the supervisor, and a 
schedule will be posted for all team members to view.  The hours of operation for the 
EEG department is from 0700 to 1630 Monday-Friday, and the department will be 
staffed during the regular business hours.  
2. STAT tests will follow the STAT policy, and the on call EEG tech will be called in for 
all testing ordered after hours.   
3. Each EEG team member will be given a specific shift.  Listed below are the 3 basic 
shifts: 
a. 7:00am – 3:30pm 
b. 7:30am – 4:00pm 
c. 8:00am – 4:30pm 
4. Team members are allowed to clock in as early as 10 minutes before the start of the 
shift, unless the lead tech/supervisor needs them to begin work. Employees who know 
they will be late should call the supervisor or lead tech and inform him/her of their 
approximate arrival time.  Upon arriving in the department, the late employee should 
notify the supervisor or lead tech that he/she has arrived. An employee that is habitually 
tardy will follow the hospital policy HR.06.002 for occurrences and disciplinary action. 
for more than 10% of scheduled shifts within a year, may result in disciplinary action. 
An employee will be considered tardy if more than five minutes late for the scheduled 
shift start time.  
5.4. Employees who are unable to report as scheduled due to illness or accident must 
notify the respiratory supervisor or lead tech as soon as they are aware of the need for 
their absence, but not less than 30 minutes prior to their schedule reporting time.  
6.5. Employees are responsible for using the Automated Time Management (ATM) 
system to record hours worked, hours On Call, hours of Call Back, Holidays, and PTO. 
Kronos should be used frequently, to check the accuracy and completeness of clocked 
time. The employee is responsible for errors in their clocked time if they have 
reasonable opportunity to check and correct it. Errors caused by the employee or his/her 
failure to check for and correct errors will not prompt the issuance of a special check. 
The time will be included on the next regular payroll. Details on the operation of the 
ATM system is in the Human Resources Policy. 
7.6. Only the Ssupervisor, lead tech or Director have the authority to change the 
schedule. Changes made without the involvement and agreement of one of the above named individuals will not be honored. Swaps for “on call shifts” between individuals 
should be appropriately documented on the schedule and initialed by the approving 
supervisor. All swaps must be documented and approved with the completion of the 
Swap Form. 
8.7. Employees may need to call in due to illness, child’s illness or family emergency.  
These are the only excused call ins.  Management of absences will follow the hospital 
policy HR.06.002 for occurrences and disciplinary action. All unexcused call 
ins/absences may result in disciplinary action. Team members with a call in pattern or 
excessive call ins will require disciplinary action.  The disciplinary action taken will be 
recommended in the following manner:   7 days/56 hours = verbal counselling, 9 
days/72 hours = written counselling, 11 days/88 hours = probation and >10 days/> 120 
hours = termination. The number of days stated above is number of call ins during a 12 
month period. This will be monitored with a rolling calendar, which will be audited 
monthly by a supervisor. Annual evaluations will reflect excessive call-ins and further 
administrative action may be taken.  FMLA may not be counted towards excessive call-
ins. 
9.8. Employees must use PTO for all excused absences.  In the event when PTO is not 
available this will be handled at the discretion of the director.  EIT will be utilized in 
accordance with hospital policy.  All unexcused absences will be clocked in as ABN 
(Absent not excused).  All unexcused absences are subject to disciplinary action. The 
following reasons are considered Unexcused (ABN): No Call no show, Late Call in, sent 
home for misconduct, suspension, etc. 
10.9. Scheduled time offVacation may be denied if there is not enough accrued PTO to 
cover the dates requested.  Pre-approved vacation requests will be denied at the time of 
request for any team member that has been disciplined for attendance within the 
previous 12 months. For all full time and part time employees with benefits, PTO must 
be utilized for all missed time during a work week.  This is in accordance with hospital 
policy.  
 