 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Neurophysiology EEG 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  Time and Attendance Section: Organization 
Date of Origination: September 19, 2016 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: January 18, 2022 Serial Code: EEG-02 
Date of Last Review:  January 18, 2022 
         
PURPOSE: 
To stipulate the shifts, call-in responsibilities, and means of recording worked and benefit time. 
 
POLICIES: 
A. Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
1. The starting times for the shifts in EEG will be determined by the supervisor, and a 
schedule will be posted for all team members to view.  The hours of operation for the 
EEG department are from 0730 to 1600 Monday-Friday, and the department will be 
staffed during the regular business hours.  
2. STAT tests will follow the STAT policy, and the on-call EEG tech will be called in for 
STATs ordered after hours.   
3. Team members are allowed to clock in as early as 5 minutes before the start of the shift, 
unless the lead tech/supervisor needs them to begin work. Employees who know they 
will be late should call the supervisor or lead tech and inform him/her of their 
approximate arrival time.  Upon arriving in the department, the late employee should 
notify the supervisor or lead tech that he/she has arrived. An employee that is habitually 
tardy will follow the hospital policy HR.06.002 for occurrences and disciplinary action. 
Employees who are unable to report as scheduled due to illness or accident must notify 
the supervisor or lead tech as soon as they are aware of the need for their absence, but 
not less than 30 minutes prior to their schedule reporting time.  
4. Employees are responsible for using the Automated Time Management (ATM) system 
to record hours worked, hours on call, hours of call back, Holidays, and PTO. Kronos 
should be used frequently, to check the accuracy and completeness of clocked time. The 
employee is responsible for errors in their clocked time if they have reasonable 
opportunity to check and correct it. Errors caused by the employee or his/her failure to 
check for and correct errors will not prompt the issuance of a special check. The time 
will be included on the next regular payroll. Details on the operation of the ATM system 
is in the Human Resources Policy. 
5. Only the Supervisor, Manager, or Director have the authority to change the schedule. 
Changes made without the involvement and agreement of one of the above-named 
individuals will not be honored. Swaps for “on call shifts” between individuals should 
be appropriately documented on the schedule and approved by the supervisor.  
6. Employees may need to call in due to illness, child’s illness, or family emergency.  
These are the only excused call ins.  Management of absences will follow the hospital 
policy HR.06.002 for occurrences and disciplinary action.  
7. Employees must use PTO for all excused absences.  In the event when PTO is not 
available this will be handled at the discretion of the director.  EIT will be utilized in 
accordance with hospital policy.   8. Scheduled time off may be denied if there is not enough accrued PTO to cover the dates 
requested.  Pre-approved vacation requests will be denied at the time of request for any 
team member that has been disciplined for attendance within the previous 12 months. 
For all full time and part time employees with benefits, PTO must be utilized for all 
missed time during a work week.    
 