 1 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Employee Health 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: I 
Subject:  Tuberculin Skin Test Section:  
Date of Origination:  June 26, 1997 Supersedes:  HRA016 
Date of Last Revision:  February 15, 2019 Serial Code:  EH1002 
Date of Last Review:  January 12, 2024 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
The purpose of this policy is to establish the methods for reviewing the tuberculin status of candidates 
prior to employment and employees on a regular basis throughout their employment.  The policy also 
establishes the methods for the management of the employee exposed to an active, infectious tuberculous 
source; and the management of the tuberculin converted employee. 
 
POLICY: 
 
The Employee Health Program will require a review of the candidate's tuberculin status prior to 
employment and every twelve months thereafter  upon employment ; unless exposure to an active, 
infectious tuberculous source is determined to have occurred by Infection Control.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
PRE-EMPLOYMENT: 
 
The tuberculin negative candidate must have a 2-step Mantoux Tuberculin skin test completed prior to or 
at the time of employment.  If the candidate can provide documentation that a Mantoux Tuberculin skin 
test was completed within the last 12 months prior to employment the second skin test will not need to be 
given.  
 
The Mantoux Tuberculin skin test will be administered using 5 T uberculin Units intermediate strength 
tuberculin, purified protein derivative.  A dose of 0.1 ml will be given by intradermal injection on the volar 
surface of the forearm by Employee Health.  The candidate will return to the Employee Health Department 
48 - 72 hours after injection to have the test read.  Failure to return as instructed will result in having the 
test repeated. 
 
If the candidate has a history of a positive skin test he/she will comple te a Pre-Hire TB Assessment. 
Depending on results of signs and symptoms and documentation, appropriate follow up as outlined below 
may be required. 
 
The tuberculin positive candidate with negative signs and symptoms can provide previous documentation 
of preventative treatment, then no further testing is required  and the candidate will be allowed to attend 
orientation.  If the candidate with negative signs and symptoms cannot provide previous documentation of 
preventative treatment, the candidate will be allowed to attend orientation and required to follow-up with 
TB clinic or their private physician . These candidates will be allowed 30 days to provide the 
documentation.  If the candidate has positive signs and symptoms  (fatigue without cause, unplanned or 
unexplained weight loss, night sweats, productive cough for three weeks or longer, blood in sputum, 
afternoon temperature elevation, unexplained chest pain, loss of appetite, chills/fever with no identified 
source), the candidate will be required to follow-up with TB clinic or their private physician and will be 
withheld from attending orientation.    2 
 
 
ANNUAL: 
 
All employees will receive an annual tuberculin skin test or TB assessment.  
 
Any team members within the departments that do not visit patient units, patient care areas or anywhere 
patients can congregate are exempt from Annual TB skin test, however; they must complete an Annual 
TB Assessment Form and return to Employee Health. 
 
The department head will be responsible for notifying each employee that their annual TB Screening (TB 
skin test or TB assessment) is due.  It is the employee's responsibility to complete their TB Screening. 
Employee Health will enter all completions into the Employee Health electronic health record system , 
where the department head can view their employees’ TB screenings.  In order to maintain confidentiality, 
only “TB Screening completed” is visible.  If the employee fails to complete the TB Screening, Human 
Resources will notify their department head and the employee may be subject to disciplinary action, up to 
and including termination. 
 
The tuberculin negative employee  will be given a Mantoux Tuberculin skin test using the previously 
mentioned method. The skin test will be administered under the direction of the Employee Health 
Department.  Employee Health's hours of operation are Monday - Friday between the hours of 7:00 AM to 
4:00 PM.  The results of the TB skin test will be read 48 to 72 hours after administration of the test.  
Failure to have the test read on the day instructed will result in the test being repeated. TB Skin Tests are 
not given on Thursday in the Employee Health Department.    
 
The tuberculin positive employee  will complete Annual TB Assessment.  These employees will be 
instructed to immediately report any symptoms of TB ( fatigue without cause, unplanned or unexplained 
weight loss , night sweats, productive cough  for three weeks or longer , blood in sputum, afternoon 
temperature elevation, unexplained chest pain, loss of appetite, chills/fever with no identified source ) to 
the Employee Health Department for appropriate follow-up as outlined below. 
 
MANAGEMENT OF AN EMPLOYEE WITH EXPOSURE TO AN ACTIVE INFECTIOUS 
TUBERCULOUS SOURCE: 
 
The exposure will be reported immediately to Infection Control Department.  The Department Head in 
conjunction with Employee Health will identify all potentially exposed employees. 
 
The tuberculin negative employee  - The employee's current annual tuberculin skin test  (if completed 
within 3 months of the exposure) result will be used to determine baseline status.  If the baseline exposure 
TB skin test is negative, it will be repeated in 8 to 10 weeks.  The employee is to complete the baseline TB 
skin test process within 2 weeks of notification. If the employee has not completed the TB skin test 
process within 2 weeks, his/her Department Head and Human Resources will be notified and the employee 
will not be allowed to work until the test is completed. 
 
The tuberculin positive employee – The employee should report to Employee Health for a baseline TB 
assessment. A TB assessment will be repeated in 8 to 10  weeks.  The employee must complete the TB 
assessment within 2 weeks of notification.  If the employee has not completed the TB assessment within 2 
weeks, his/her Department Head  and Human Resources  will be notified  and the employee will not be 
allowed to work until the assessment is completed. 
 
 
 
  3 
INTERPRETATION OF THE MANTOUX TUBERCULIN SKIN TEST: 
 
 A. An induration measuring less than 5 mm or no induration is considered negative. 
 
 B. A palpable induration measuring 5  mm to 9  mm will be considered positive for persons 
who have had close, recent contact with a patient with infectious tuberculosis; have 
abnormal chest radiographs; have HIV or who are immune suppressed. 
 
 C. A palpable induration measuring 10 mm to 14 mm or more will be considered positive for 
all persons with patient care responsibility or patient contact. 
 
 D. A palpable induration measuring 15 mm or more will be considered positive for all. 
 
MANAGEMENT OF THE TUBERCULIN CONVERTED CANDIDATE/EMPLOYEE: 
 
If a  candidate/employee with a previously negative test should become positive or a known positive 
employee should become symptomatic, a Tuberculin infection will be suspected.  A TB Assessment will 
be completed and candidate/employee will be required to follow -up with TB clinic or their private 
physician.  If the candidate/employee is symptomatic he/she will be restricted from work until cleared by a 
physician.  These employees will be instructed to immediately report any symptoms of TB ( fatigue 
without cause, unplanned or unexplained weight loss, night sweats, productive cough for three weeks or 
longer, blood in sputum, afternoon temperature elevation, unexplained chest pain, loss of appetite, 
chills/fever with no identified source) to the Employee Health Department. 
 
The candidate/employee will be referred to the East Baton Rouge Parish Health Unit or private physician 
for an assessment.  A letter indicating the result of the assessment and whether or not preventative 
therapy/treatment is indicated will be required from the evaluating physician for the candidate/employee's 
health file as per state regulation.  This evaluation must be completed in a timely manner, within 30 days, 
to assure that the candidate/employee does not pose a health risk to the patients or employees of Our Lady 
of the Lake Regional Medical Center.  If the employee does not complete this within 30 days due to no 
fault of the treating physician, he/she will be suspended until the evaluation is completed.  
 
If the treating physician does not feel that the candidate/employee has active TB he/she will be asked to 
comply with the treating physician's recommendations.  However, if the candidate/employee has active 
TB, the treatment regime recommended by the treating physician will become a term and condition of 
continued employment at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center.   
  
The Employee Health Department will monitor TB skin test conversions on a unit basis as well as by 
occupational group.  If a particular area has more than 2 conversions in a three -month period a focused 
review will be initiated.  This will involve testing all employees in the unit at that time. 
 
 