ECLS-012 102-10314-2505 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for (EMBH/COPE-102-
10314-2505) 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012  102-10314-
2505 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: March 15, 2018 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• EMBH exits have signage and are located:  
o North Sally Port 
o South Sally Port 
o Magnetic door South End of Patient Waiting Corridor. 
o North Access to Staff Workstation 
o South Access to Staff Workstation ECLS-012 102-10314-2505 
Page 2 of 3 
o West Access to Nurses Station 
• Adjacent smoke compartment (s) are located. 
o Radiology hallway to East 
o EAU hallway to South 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drill or Code RED response. 
• Mental Health Technician or designee will clear hallways of any carts or equipment by moving 
them to either the exam room on the North side or the patients’ belongings room on the South 
side. 
• Mental Health Technician are designee will close all doors and windows. 
• Registered Nurse and Mental Health Technician are designees will move patients and visitors to 
safety explaining, the hospital is conducting emergency procedures to ensure your safety. 
• Mental Health Technicians and designee will assist those with limited English Proficiency (LEP) 
and those with sensory or mobility disabilities. 
• Charge Nurse and COPE Manager or Supervisor (during business hours) or designee will ensure 
all employees are accounted for. 
• Charge Nurse or designee will each room is empty, and once the room has been checked, they 
will use chalk to mark the closed door with an “X”. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments. 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Wheelchairs may be used as special patient transportation devices. This is the patient specific, 
and if someone needs a wheelchair, it will be on the unit to be used during emergencies.  Geri-
chair or stretcher that can be used for transport.  Geri-chairs are available in the waiting room. 
Stretchers are located in patient or exam rooms. 
• Patients in this department are primarily ambulatory.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• The fire extinguisher is located In the Nurses’ station by the break room entrance and a second is 
located in the hall just past the Nutrition Room. 
• Manual pull stations are located inside the Nurses station by the South access to the Nurses’ 
station and by the North access to the Nurses’ station. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint. 
• These are psychiatric patients that may be legally committed.  They may be violent, aggressive, 
or psychotic and responding to internal stimuli.  Additional hospital resources will be 
required.  If horizontal or vertical evacuation is required. 
• Oxygen tanks are used/stored on the unit. 
• There is badge access for this unit however any employee may gain entry,  
• In the event of a fire drill or alarm the magnetic doors in the South and North sally ports, as well 
as the magnetic door on the patient hallway, automatically unlock.  Mental Health Technicians, 
Customer Service Representatives, Nurses and COPE Team members are required to monitor 
exit doors to ensure no one enters or leaves unless directed to.  The location of the horizontal 
and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. ECLS-012 102-10314-2505 
Page 3 of 3 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary Horizontal Evacuation route and Destination to the East is the radiology hall.  The 
primary horizontal route and destination to the South is the Express Admin unit, EAU Unit 
hallway.  The primary horizontal evacuation route and destination to the North is the Pediatric 
Emergency Room (ER) Waiting Room A. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route and destination from the radiology hall would be to 
proceed to the B-Holding area of the main Emergency room.  The secondary horizontal 
evacuation route and destination from EAU would be to continue to the TNCC hallway.  The 
secondary horizontal evacuation route and destination from the Pediatric ER Waiting Room A 
would be to proceed to the D-Pod Waiting Room. 
• The vertical evacuation route and destination from radiology hall or B-Holding would be the 
South to the second floor of the parking garage 2.  The vertical evacuation route and destination 
from EAU would be the stairwell near the entrance to the EAU to the first-floor hallway.  The 
vertical evacuation route from the TNCC hallway would be the stairwell on the hallway down 
to the Oasis.   
 