 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Emergency/Injury Protocols 
Date of  Origination:  01/04/93                       
Date of Last Review: 11/05/2013 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Emergency  
Section:  Emergency 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: EMCR01 
 
 
Distribution:                Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department 
 
Formulated By:           Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services 
 
Purpose: 
 
1. To describe certain early warning signs and symptoms of increasing risk that may require immediate              
 medical intervention. 
2. To describe clinical measurements which may be taken during the course of the emergency and 
 possible interventions which may follow. 
3. To establish guidelines and proper protocol in the event of an emergency situation, either cardiac or 
 non-cardiac, during the course of the rehabilitation session. 
4. To establish guidelines for the institution of emergency drills, both medical and non -medical, in the 
 Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation continuum. 
 
 
Applies To:                   Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
 
Policy: 
 
All indications of early warning signs and symptoms will be documented in the participant's permanent 
record, reviewed with the participant and reported to the referring physician. All untoward events will be 
documented in the patient's chart and report the wishes of the member as to the type of care the member 
deems necessary. All injured individuals will be offered treatment in the Emergency Room. If an individual 
chooses treatment in the OLOL Emergency Room, a Cardiopulmonary Rehab staff member should 
accompany the injured individual to the ER, and bring the incident report, if possible, to relay information 
to the ER personnel. All injuries (no matter how minor) should be documented on an incident report. 
 
Medical Emergency 
The professional staff will assess the emergency situation and the patient in order to determine the proper  
course of action. A participant should be instructed to stop exercising and additional assistance should be  
sought if any of the following symptoms occur: 
 • Chest pain • Severe leg claudication 
 • Extreme shortness of breath  • Mental confusion 
 • Pallor  • Irregular pulse 
 • Loss of coordination • Hypoglycemic reaction 
 • Dizziness 
   
Interventions may include the following: 
 • Immediate phone call to the referring physician to report warning situation and receive orders. 
 • The use of nitroglycerin.  • The use of oxygen. 
 • Continuous EKG monitoring. 
  • Establishment of intravenous fluids for safety precaution or if a more complicated situation is anticipated. 
 • Rapid transportation to closest emergency room. 
 • American Heart Association Advanced Cardiac Life Support algorithms are instituted in the event of a 
   cardiac emergency and a "code" is called. 
 
If the emergency is significant, and requires the close attention of staff, exercise may be discontinued for all 
participants, and other participants then cooled-down and sent home.  In the event of an emergency, the 
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Manager should be notified immediately.  Additional staff will be called to  
assist, as necessary. The participant's physician and family are notified as quickly as possible once initial 
assessment and treatment have begun. 
 
In the event of an untoward event or medical emergency, the physician's office will be notified and a copy  
of the EKG, if appropriate, will be faxed while the patient continues to be monitored.  Abnormal sessions  
may be defined as an event requiring medical attention or termination of exercise as outlined in the  
termination of exercise policy. 
 
The documentation of any emergency is made by the most involved staff member, with additional help or 
information from other professional staff or witnesses in attendance. Reports are sent to the patient's 
physician and a copy is kept with the patient's permanent record.  
 
Emergency equipment and supplies are checked and restocked by the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
staff after any emergency and on a daily basis, as necessary. 
 
For quick reference, the following policy is to be followed in  case of a cardiac emergency "code": 
1. Patient is assessed according to Basic Life Support procedure by the nearest staff member. 
 2. ECG monitor is checked; ECG strip recorded. 
 3. Code Blue is called. Second staff member dials 3333, says: "Code Blue, Cardiac Rehab, Medical  
   Plaza II, Suite 2009." 
 4. Crash cart moved to patient area by second staff member 
 5. Other patients are escorted to Lake Health Center lobby (across atrium) by second staff member,  
   or other available staff. and offered counseling as needed. 
 6. Code Blue is continued according to hospital policy. 
 7. Patient's physician is notified immediately, and family notified as soon as possible. 
 
 
EMERGENCY DRILLS 
 
Medical Emergency Drills 
Code drills or code sessions are held periodically during the year to simulate and prepare for an emergency 
in a cardiopulmonary rehabilitation session.  The simulation or teaching session may be held during a 
regular cardiopulmonary rehabilitation session, or may be held during a scheduled staff meeting. No fewer 
than four patient emergency drills may be scheduled within each calendar year. Staff members are expected 
to attend emergency drills. 
 
The format for patient emergency drills may vary. The emergency may be acted out and staff practice 
responses, or a teaching/ review session may be utilized. Regardless of format, expectations, roles, and code 
procedure will be reviewed at every patient emergency drill. 
 Regular staff scheduled at the session function as they would  in a real emergency and/ or will describe the 
roles and actions possible with each emergency scenario. The drill is documented in the staff meeting 
record and reviewed by the professional staff and assistants at the following staff meeting, if appropriate. 
 
Fire Drills and Disaster Drills 
Established protocols and evacuation plans will be followed/ practiced/ discussed for hospital fire and 
disaster drills. Patients must be instructed in proper evacuation in the event of a fire or disaster.  
 
 
EMERGENCY PROTOCOLS 
In all cases of emergency, dial 3333, give the proper code to the emergency operator, and identify the 
location of the emergency (Cardiac Rehab, Medical Plaza II, second floor, Suite 200 9). Call or page the 
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Manager (ext. 6870) immediately. 
 
 
General Emergency Plan for Potential Life-Threatening Emergency 
Staff will demonstrate ability to: 
1. Activate the emergency plan (i.e., wall switch, telephone,etc.) 
2. Locate all of the necessary communications equipment (i.e., telephone, number to call, warning alarm) 
3. Describe the location of the incident, how to get there, and the location of the exits. 
4. Locate all emergency equipment (i.e., defribrillator, crash cart, and backboard) 
5. Provide first responder assistance 
6. Assist with the incident (assisting responsibilities) 
7. Prepare the crash cart and defibrillator for use by those trained to us it (if applicable) 
8. Prepare an accurate account of the incident and what was done. 
 
Rescuer Response Protocol 
Witness or first person on the scene:  
Call for help; assess patient. Begin CPR as indicated. If no one responds to assist, perform CPR for one 
minute, and then call emergency operator, or EMS, as appropriate. 
 
Second responder: 
Call emergency operator, or EMS, as appropriate, and return to assist with CPR. If no third responder, 
perform third responder duties. Wait and direct emergency personnel when they arrive. 
 
Third responder: 
Bring emergency equipment to where victim is located. Provide assistance at the scene or wait to direct 
emergency personnel to the scene. Transcribe all actions taken during emergency care. 
 
Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) licensed personnel: 
Assess patient status via ECG. Defribrillate as indicated per ACLS guidelines. Accompany patient to 
tertiary care. Prepare and administer drug therapy as indicated. Notify patient's family and personal 
physician, as appropriate. 
 
 
SPECIFIC EMERGENCIES 
 
Patient Emergency/ Cardiac Arrest/ Stop Breathing 
Dial 3333, "Code Blue", location. Begin CPR and ACLS, as appropriate.  
 
 Fire 
Dial 3333, "Dr. Red", location. Follow fire/ evacuation protocol. 
 
Security Emergency 
Dial 3333 "Code White", or call Security at 8825. 
 
Bomb Threat 
Dial 3333,"Code Black". 
 
Pediatric/ Child Abduction 
Dial 3333, "Code Pink". 
 
First Aid, Fainting Injury 
If situation is determined to be non-cardiac, Dial 8826 (Emergency Room), ask for "Charge Nurse", relay  
information, and follow orders. Escort individual to ER using wheelchair located in Cardiopulmonary  
Rehabilitation office area or call for the wheelchair at the Medical Plaza information desk. 
 
Chest Pain/ Angina 
If patient develops chest pain or angina symptoms while in the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation area, the 
patient should immediately discontinue exercise. Check pulse, blood pressure, and ECG rhythm. If pain is 
not relieved within three minutes of rest, give one NTG 1/150 gr SL. Obtain an ECG strip for charting 
purposes. 
 
If pain is relieved, the referring physician should be notified for direction, if the angina is of new onset. If 
the patient experiences chronic stable angina, the patient may resume exercise at a lower workload 
dependent on the clinical judgment of the professional staff. The patient should be observed for recurrent 
angina if allowed to continue exercise. However, the patient may be told to discontinue exercise for the day, 
and be sent home with instructions to report any increase in frequency or severity of anginal episodes to the 
referring physician. 
 
If the pain is not relieved after one NTG, continue monitoring vital signs closely and repeat NTG after five 
minutes. If pain is not relieved, give a third NTG and call a patient emergency (Code 14). Place oxygen at 
2-4 liter per nasal cannula. Notify the referring physician. 
 
Symptomatic brady arrhythmias 
If a patient develops a bradycardiac arrhythmia and is symptomatic while in the cardiopulmonary  
rehabilitation area, the patient should immediately discontinue exercise. Check the patient’s vital signs 
(heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation), level of consciousness, and obtain an ECG  
strip for charting purposes. Call a patient emergency (Code Blue) so that the patient may receive more 
advanced medical attention. Notify the referring physician. 
 
Symptomatic tachy arrhythimias 
If a patient develops a tachycardia arrhythmia and is symptomatic while in the cardiopulmonary 
rehabilitation area, the patient should immediately discontinue exercise. Check the patient’s vital signs 
(heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation), level of consciousness, and obtain an ECG  
strip for charting purposes. Call a patient emergency (Code Blue) so that the patient may receive more 
advanced medical attention. Notify the referring physician. 
  
Acute Dyspnea 
If hyperventilation, shortness of breath, dizziness, wheezing, or coughing should occur during exercise, 
the patient should immediately discontinue exercise. Pursed lip breathing will be encouraged and a SaO2 will be obtained. Supplemental oxygen should be titrated to maintain a SaO2 of 90% or greater. 
Patient may take a dose of bronchodilator, if so prescribed. Consult the patient’s physician. If necessary, 
call a patient emergency (Code Blue) so that the patient may receive more advanced medical attention.  
 
Hypoglycemic Reaction (Insulin Reaction) 
Be alert to signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia, which may include: 
 • Headache, weakness, diaphoresis, nervousness, and shakiness 
 • Faintness, numbness of tingling of tongue and lips, blurred or double vision, and unsteady gait 
 • Tachycardia, pallor, or chilling 
 • Confusion, aggressive or erratic behavior 
 • Convulsions or unconsciousness 
 
If the patient displays any of the above symptoms, obtain a blood sugar level, if possible. If blood sugar 
level is below 80 mg/dL, or if patient remains symptomatic, administer fast acting carbohydrate, such as 
glucose tablets, 4 oz. juice, 8 oz. skim milk, or 2 pkg. of sugar dissolved in water. If blood sugar levels and 
patient symptoms remain non-critical, participant should rest for 10-15 minutes and their physician should 
be notified. If medical assistance is refused, document in an incident or variance report. The report is to be 
promptly filed following any incident. Exercise session may resume only after physician order is received 
and patient is without signs and symptoms. 
 
If blood sugar levels and/or patient symptoms are approaching critical, or if the patient is uncooperative or 
has lost consciousness, a patient emergency may be called (Code Blue), or the patient may be escorted 
immediately to the Emergency Room in a wheelchair.  
 
Hyperglycemic Reaction 
Be alert to signs and symptoms of hyperglycemia, which may include: 
• Increased thirst 
• Blurred vision 
• Frequent urination 
• Fatigue (weak, tired feeling) 
• Dry mouth 
• Dry or itchy skin 
• Weight loss 
• Recurrent infections 
• Slow-healing cuts and sores 
 
If the patient displays any of the above symptoms, obtain blood sugar level, if possible.  If blood sugar 
level is above 300 mg/dl or if patient remains symptomatic, patient should rest and cease exercise 
regime. Notify patient’s physician immediately.  If medical assistance is refused, document in an 
incident or variance report.  The report is promptly filed following an incident. 
 
If blood sugar levels and /or patient symptoms are approaching critical, or if the patient is uncooperative 
or has lost consciousness, a patient emergency may be called (Code Blue), or the patient may be 
escorted immediately to the Emergency Room in a wheelchair. 
 
Premature Ventricular Contractions (PVCs) 
Observe the patient and analyze the PVCs for the following: 
 • Number per minute 
 • Uniform or multiform in origin 
 • Pairs or runs 
 • Signs or symptoms  • Palpate pulse to evaluate for peripheral effusion 
 
Document any new arrhythmias or increase in severity with a rhythm strip and make a notation on the 
patient's chart. Contact referring physician regarding new PVCs or a change in the severity of PVCs. 
Consider decreasing workloads if single PVCs are greater than 10 per minute. Consider discontinuing 
exercise if PVCs are a new event, if they develop into pairs, or if the patient becomes symptomatic. If the 
patient's condition deteriorates and becomes symptomatic, call a patient emergency so that the patient may 
receive more advanced medical attention. 
 
If PVCs are chronic and asymptomatic, and the referring physician has been consulted to evaluate frequent 
PVCs, and the PVCs have been determined to be benign, the patient may continue to exercise unless the 
patient becomes symptomatic. 
 
Hypotension 
Remove patient from exercise area, if possible. Place patient in supine position. Check blood pressure, 
pulse, and ECG rhythm. If no response to positional change (SBP remains below 90 mmHg and/ or patient 
is symptomatic), call the referring physician for direction. If the patient's condition continues to deteriorate, 
becomes progressively symptomatic, and/ or BP continues to drop, consider calling a patient emergency 
(Code Blue) so that the patient may receive more advanced medical attention. 
 
If the patient responds to the supine position, keep supine until systolic BP is greater than 100mmHg, then 
gradually assist to a sitting position. Continue to carefully monitor vital signs and encourage fluids. Notify 
the referring physician of the episode and follow direction from the physician. 
 
Hypertension 
Check blood pressure prior to exercise and compare with previous BP pattern. If systolic BP is greater than 
170-200 mmHg, or diastolic BP is above 100 mmHg, have the patient sit and relax for a short while so that 
BP may decrease, and recheck BP.  If blood pressure remains elevated (SBP above 200 mmHg/ DBP above 
100 mmHg), the patient will not be allowed to exercise, and the referring physician should be contacted.  
 
During exercise, if SBP elevates above 220 mmHg, or DBP elevates above 110 mmHg, exercise should be 
discontinued until BP is decreased below 200/100 mmHg. If the patient is asymptomatic, exercise may be 
resumed at a lower workload. Monitor BP closely to insure that it remains within acceptable levels. If BP 
problems recur, the referring physician should be notified for follow-up or for direction. 
 
Investigate whether the patient is complying with medications, following diet, etc. 
 
 