 
 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Diabetic Care 
Date of  Origination:  01/04/93                       
Date of Last Revision: 12/21/00 
Date of Review: 06/09/2018 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Emergency  
Section:  Emergency 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: EMCR03 
 
 
 
Distribution:                Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department 
 
Formulated By:           Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services 
 
Purpose: 
 
To establish goals, objectives, and guidelines for the definitions of the various levels within the Pulmonary 
Rehabilitation program, and to describe the structure of the Pulmonary Rehabilitation program, establishing 
criteria and guidelines for advancement to more independent levels of care. 
 
Applies To:                   Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
 
Policy: 
 
Diabetic patients will be identified at orientation/initial outpatient assessment and patients will be 
encouraged to check their blood sugar before coming for exercise sessions and report results to the 
cardiopulmonary rehabilitation staff. Reported results will be documented on the back of the patient's 
exercise prescription card. 
 
If a patient has not checked their blood sugar and cannot report the blood sugar level to staff, or if according 
to clinical judgement of the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation staff, staff believes that it is otherwise 
necessary, the staff may check pre -exercise baseline blood sugar by blood glucose monitor. If a patient 
refuses to allow his/her blood sugar to be checked when staff has determined that blood sugar should be 
checked, the patient will not be allowed to exercise. 
 
All diabetic patients will be encouraged to eat a light meal 1 to 2 hours before exercising. 
 
All diabetic patients will be encouraged to take their medicines as scheduled. 
 
 
Procedure: 
 
Diabetic patients who have symptoms of hypoglycemia and whose blood sugar is measured less than 50 
mg/dl will not be exercised that session. 
 
Diabetic patients whose blood sugar is less than 80 mg/dL but >50 mg/dL before exercising will be given 
juice and/or a carbohydrate snack.  Blood sugar will be checked and have risen above 100 mg/dL prior to 
exercise. A post exercise blood sugar also will be performed. 
 Type II diabetic patients, whose blood sugar is higher than 300 mg/dl, may be exercised at a lower workload 
or the session may be canceled, depending on other hyperglycemic symptoms.  
 
Type I diabetic patients whose blood sugar level is higher than 250 mg/dl will be checked for ketosis. If 
ketosis is not present, the patient may be allowed to exercise at a lower level or the session may be canceled, 
depending on other symptoms. If ketosis is present, the patient will not be allowed to exercise . 
 
In case of an emergency hypoglycemic event, the patient will be treated with glucose tablets, sublingual gel 
glucose or other appropriate substitutes. Blood sugars will be monitored and patient stabilized and physician 
notified. If blood sugar does not stabilize, patient will be brought to the Emergency Room for treatment. 
 
Blood glucose monitors, such as Precision-G or Accucheck, will be calibrated daily and calibration recorded 
in the daily record for the monitor. 
 
 
 
 