 
Policy and Procedures Manual 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Subject: Crash Cart 
Date of  Origination:  01/04/93                       
Date of Last Revision: 01/04/93 
Date of Review: 06/09/2018 
 
Manual: Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation  
Chapter: Emergency  
Section:  Emergency 
Supersedes: 
Serial Code: EMCR02 
 
 
Distribution:                Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Department 
 
Formulated By:           Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation, Cardiology Services 
 
Purpose: 
 
To establish guidelines to maintain a mobile cart with the needed supplies to meet the patient's 
medication and resuscitation requirements in the event of an emergency. 
 
Applies To:                   Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Staff 
 
 
Policy: 
 
A Mobile cart with a defibrillator, airway maintenance equipment, suction, I.V. supplies and fluids, and 
emergency medications deemed necessary by the AHA and Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical 
Center Policy shall be immediately available in the Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation facility during all 
operational hours and during all exercise testing. 
 
Minimum supplies and equipment include:  
 
  Defibrillator with electrode paste 
 Airway 
 Oxygen 
 Intravenous sets including fluids 
 Intravenous cannulas 
 Intravenous stand 
 Syringes and needles in multiple sizes 
 Adhesive tape 
 Ambu bag with pressure release valve 
 Suction equipment 
 
Minimum medications include: 
 
 Aromatic ammonia 
 Metaraminol (Aramine) 
 Furosemide (Lasix) 
 Epinephrine 
 Atropine 
 Isoproterenol (Isuprel) 
 Calcium chloride 
 Sodium bicarbonate 
 Lidocaine 
 Amyl nitrate ampule 
 Dioxin - I.V. and tablets 
 Nitroglycerin tablets 
 Verapamil (Isoptin) 
 Propranolol (Inderal) I.V. 
 Diazepam (Valium) I.V. 
 Dopamine 
 Nitroglycerine I.V. 
 Equipment will be tested daily by the scheduled staff.  Documentation of the testing will be noted on the 
crash cart record with the appropriate initials/ signature. After each use (partial or full), all equipment 
must be tested. Medications will be checked monthly and maintained by the Pharmacy Department. 
 
 
Procedure: 
If portions of the crash cart are found to be outdated, missing, and/or malfunctioning, the 
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Program Manager shall be made aware of the discrepancy and proper 
protocol followed to replace or repair the medication, supplies, or equipment immediately. 
 
After equipment has been used, the defibrillator, airway maintenance equipment and suction are 
removed from the cart and sent to Central Service for immediate replacement and cleaning. 
 
Medications used are immediately replaced from Pharmacy. It is the ultimate responsibility of the 
Pharmacy Department to ensure that the restocking of the crash cart is immediately and completely 
accomplished. 
 