ECLS-012  
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: PPOD RMC Emergency 
Department Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for PPOD RMC 
Emergency Department,102-10314-2453 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 PPOD RMC 
ER 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 1/1/18 Review Date:  
Revision Date: 1/25/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) to guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
•  Location of Exits (illuminated EXIT sign) 
o In front of exit door leading to PPOD check in area and PPOD hospital entrance 
o In front of Nurse’s Station A leading to front exit door 
o Next to CSR desk heading out to Trauma Bay area 
o Outside room 7 
o Next to room 9 
o Outside room 11 leading to back PPOD ER hallway by break room ECLS-012  
Page 2 of 3 
o In front of exit door by back hallway leading to break room area 
o In front of room 18 & 19 headed to back hall by resident work room 
o In front of exit door by fish tank in waiting room A 
• Location of Adjacent Smoke Compartment(s)  
o  Primary adjacent smoke compartment 
▪ Trauma Area 
o Secondary adjacent smoke compartment 
▪ Radiology CT Department 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• All staff   are responsible to clear the hallway of any carts or equipment closest to them by 
moving them to closes nurse’s station, triage rooms or tech work room  
• All staff are responsible for assuring all doors and windows are closed 
• Nurse Leader/Supervisor will confirm automatic fire doors closed. This role will be assumed by 
charge nurse or delegated by charge nurse in the absence of Nurse Leader or Supervisor 
• Nurses, Nurse Techs and Emergency Room Technicians are responsible to  move patients and 
visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your 
safety” 
• CSR will locate him/herself at back elevator and  prevent people from using elevator 
• Triage RN and Triage Flow RN will assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and 
those with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Nurse Leader/Supervisor will ensures all employees are accounted for, this role will be assumed 
by charge nurse or delegated by charge nurse in the absence of Nurse Leader or Supervisor 
• Charge Nurse will work with all patient nursing staff to ensures all patients are accounted for 
• Nurse Leader/Supervisor will confirm each room is empty.  This role will be assumed by charge 
nurse or delegated by charge nurse in the absence of Nurse Leader or Supervisor. 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
The medical gas shut off valves in the PPOD are located outside “A” nurse’s station exit to trauma area 
a. The Nurse Leader /Supervisor or delegated charge nurse will notify either Plant Services or 
Respiratory to turn off the medical gas or has authority to turn off themselves. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Staff will assist with all non-ambulatory patients. 
• Wheelchairs and stretchers will be utilized to transport non-ambulatory patients during 
evacuations.   
• Wheelchairs may be located in the Emergency Department entrance areas. 
• All patient rooms have stretchers that can be used to mobilize patients during evacuation 
. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire Pull Station Locations 
o Entrance vestibule to the PPOD ER Triage area ECLS-012  
Page 3 of 3 
o Adjacent to the exit door in waiting Room A  
o On the wall between the CSR desk and the clean utility room in PPOD area next to 
nurse’s station A 
o On wall across from B nurse’s station between rooms 9 & 10 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• No identified special equipment that would need to be turned off 
• Oxygen canisters full (PSI 2000) and partial (PSI greater than 500) are located in clean utility 
room , one oxygen tank is located on crash cart in room 17, and empty canisters (O2 PSI less 
than 500) are stored in soiled utility room  
• Special patient populations to consider are any physically disabled patient population visiting the 
department. We must also consider safety and monitoring during evacuation of the Mental 
Behavioral Health Population  
• Code Red Access Team can enter all locked doors to PPOD by utilizing their employee name 
badges. Doors are 15second delay push release for any patient or family needing immediate 
exit from unit 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is to the trauma area. Staff may enter this area via 
three routes directly from PPOD by using the exit doors by room 1 next to “A” nurses station , 
the exit doors outside of rooms 18 & 19 headed to hall by PPOD radiology room , and the 
doors next to PPOD Waiting Room B 
• The primary vertical evacuation route is out the back of the unit through exist doors located 
by room 12 and room 18 & 19 to back hall stairwells, there is one on each end of the hall, 
once reach first floor turn right and head out back door by linen department directly to garage 
4 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is to the radiology CT department. Staff may enter 
through the trauma area double doors leading to CT area or from the back hall where 
breakroom is located 
• The secondary vertical evacuation route is out of CT via main hallway across from Core ER 
turn right and proceed toward Garage 2 and exit down garage stairwell. 
 