ECLS-012  
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: RMC Emergency Department, 
A-Pod and C-Pod Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for RMC Emergency 
Department, 102-10314-2453 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 RMC 
Emergency Department 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 06/01/2018 Review Date:  
Revision Date: 1/25/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) to guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated EXIT signs are located near radiology area, C-Pod Bed 17, C-Pod Bed CC1, 
between A-Pod Beds 3 and 4, phlebotomy/triage area.  
• Adjacent Smoke Compartments for the A-Pod are located towards the C-Pod and OR. Adjacent 
Smoke Compartments for the C-Pod are located towards the A-Pod, OR, and radiology.  
o Other smoke compartments for the A-Pod and C-Pod are located near A-Pod Bed 2 and 
C-Pod Bed 16. 
 ECLS-012  
Page 2 of 3 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• The ED tech, nurse, or designee will clear the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving them 
to any available non-patient room. 
• The ED tech, nurse, or designee closes doors. 
• The ED tech, nurse, or designee confirms automatic fire doors are closed. 
• The ED tech, nurse, or designee moves patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety.” 
• Available staff or designee prevents people from using elevator. 
• The ED tech, nurse, or designee assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities. 
• The ED charge nurse, nurse supervisor, or delegated staff member ensures all employees are 
accounted for. 
• The ED charge nurse, nurse supervisor, or delegated staff member ensures all patients are 
accounted for. 
• The ED tech, nurse, or designee ensures each room is empty.   
 
Location of Med Gas Valves 
• Medical gas shut off valves are located near the hall by the medication room, across the C-Pod 
nurse’s station between C-Pod Bed 27 and Bed 28, near ED radiology and near the visitor 
entrance in the A-Pod.  
• The ED charge nurse and nurse supervisor have been trained to shut off the gas valves. The ED 
staff are trained to know who has authority to shut off the gas valves.  
 
Use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments (horizontal and vertical 
evacuations): 
• Stretchers available in the clean equipment room and designated hallway can be used to transport 
non-ambulatory patients.  Also wheelchairs located in the ED ambulatory entrance may be used 
for non-ambulatory patients transporting during emergencies.   
• Patients in the ED may either be ambulatory, partial, or non-ambulatory. Assistance needed to 
evacuate includes stretchers and wheelchairs listed above.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguishers are located across the hall from A-Pod Bed 2, across the hall from C-Pod Bed 
CC1, across the hall from B-Holding near ED radiology area and near the bathroom on the 
back hallway near A-Pod Bed 9 and A-Pod Bed 10. 
• Manual fire pulls are located across the hall from the A-Pod refrigerator, near the exit door by C-
Pod Bed 17 and on the back hallway near the exit door by the nurse’s lounge.   
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• All ventilators, BiPAP machines, light sources and monitors need to be turned off.  
• Combustible/flammable/oxidizing products used and stored include (1) hydrogen peroxide, (2) 
O2 tanks, (3) Sani Cloth Bleach, (4) Super Sani Cloths  
• Any patient located in the ED can be a special patient population including non-ambulatory.  
• Badge access is required to enter department’s medication room and respiratory room. Security ECLS-012  
Page 3 of 3 
has access and would need to assist the Code Red Team.  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is to exit the A-Pod to the C-Pod.  
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is to exit the A-Pod located by C-Pod Bed 16 into the 
back hall and take an immediate left towards the cath lab.  
• The primary horizontal evacuation route is to exit the C-Pod to the A-Pod.  
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route is to exit the C-Pod located by phlebotomy and Bed 
CC1 into the back hall taking an immediate left towards radiology.  
• A-Pod and C-Pod will only have horizontal evacuation. 
 