FRANCISCAN MISSIONARIES OF OUR LADY

HEALTH SYSTEM

RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: SUBJECT:

Patient Access Patient Access Dress Code

PAGES: 2 REPLACES POLICY DATED: NA
EFFECTIVE DATE: July 1, 2019 SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:
REVISION DATE: FIN.04.44

REVIEW DATE:

APPROVED BY: gm o C%» DATE:

SCOPE

This policy applies to all Patient Access staff in FMOL-HS who report to the VP of Revenue Cycle Services,
including patient access representatives, financial counselors, financial advisors, schedulers, cashiers, and
supervisors.

PURPOSE:

To ensure a consistent, professional image is presented by Patient Access throughout the health system.

DEFINITIONS:

“On stage” refers to any situation in which an employee is representing the FMOL-HS brand to customers,
whether that be in person or on the telephone.

ED = emergency department

POLICY:
All Patient Access staff will abide by the dress code set forth in this policy.

1. Name tags: Hospital issued nametags are to be worn by all employees while on duty. The entire nametag
should be visible at all times and should be worn no more than 10 inches below the collar bone.

2. Uniform for Patient Access Employees:

RPatient-facing staff

o Black pants or skirt. Scrub pants are not allowed.

* Black blazer, cardigan or vest must be worn at all times when on stage. Fleece jackets,

scrub jackets, hoodies, and outerwear designed for outdoor sportswear are not allowed.
Blazer/cardigan/vest must be a pre-approved style and purchased through the hospital-
approved uniform store. Blazer/cardigan/vest will be monogrammed with the FMOL-HS Tau
logo alone (i.e., no hospital name).

e  Shirts:

o Patient Access Reps (non-ED), Financial Counselors, Financial Adyvisors, and
Cashiers will wear pre-approved, unmonogrammed teal or royal blue shirts (ordered
through the hospital-approved uniform store). Coordinating scarves are optional but must
be the same pattern for all.


*  Female/Male Long-Sleeve Button Down may be worn under the blazer, cardigan, or
vest.

= Female 3/4 -Sleeve Button Down may be worn under the blazer, cardigan, or vest.

*  Female/Male Short-Sleeve Button Down may be worn only under the blazer or
cardigan.

* Female/Male Polo may be worn only under the blazer.

*  Each hospital’s Patient Access Department may choose whether to wear one of the
shirt colors or both. If both colors are chosen, they will be rotated on a pre-defined
schedule to ensure uniformity of dress and ease of recognition by patients.

o Patient Access Reps (ED) will wear pre-approved, teal or royal blue shirts (ordered
through the hospital-approved uniform store). Due to the rigorous environment of the ED,
wearing of a blazer, cardigan, or vest will be optional. If none of the outerwear is worn,
then the teal/royal blue shirt must be monogrammed with the FMOL-HS Tau.

o Supervisors (in patient-facing areas) will wear pre-approved, unmonogrammed maroon
or white shirts, with a monogrammed black blazer, cardigan, or vest. Shirt color will be
rotated on a pre-defined schedule to ensure uniformity of dress and ease of recognition by
patients. Note: Polo shirts are only allowed if worn with a black blazer.

* Black shoes: Should complement the uniform and be of standard business attire. Tennis shoes
are permitted for ED Admissions staff only and must be completely black on all surfaces.

e T-shirts: Hospitals may elect to have a t-shirt day from time to time. Patient-facing Patient
Access staff may participate, but the black blazer must be worn with the t-shirt.

:MlNon patient-facing staff and non PLITS 11 BT S wa i Business or business casual attire
as specified in each hospital’s policy. NOTE: Scrub pants, scrub jackets, 1-shirts, sweatshirts,
hoodies, and tennis shoes are not allowed.

3. Eating (including gum and candy) and drinking are prohibited on stage.

4. Clothing should fit appropriately to maintain a professional appearance. Wrinkled, torn, or stained
uniforms are not permitted to be worn at work.

ATTACHMENTS/APPENDIX: none


