FRANCISCAN MISSIONARIES OF OUR LADY

HEALTH SYSTEM

RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: SUBJECT:
Patient Access

Registration Error Policy

PAGES: 2

REPLACES POLICY DATED:
Registration Error Policy dated 11/15

EFFECTIVE DATE: October 3, 2017 I—;_YSTEM POLICY NUMBER:
REVISED: 4/13/15; 6/1/15; 10/3/17; 1/25/19 FIN.04.17

APPROVED BY: ,{Zm pra. *'7\5;6 DATE: /- 95— /%
SCOPE: Applies to all staff reporting to Patient Access leaders in FMOLHS.

PURPOSE:
| The purpose of this policy is to ensure the quality of the patient account at the time of registration, to
| ensure patient safety, to meet regulatory requirements, and to ensure that proper billing can occur.

.

DEFINITIONS:

Crucial Errors (can result in patient harm and are subject to strict disciplinary measures)

Failure to select correct MRN

Failure to use (3) ID process

Failure to place correct armband on patient

An error that may cause a Sentinel Event

Any EMTALA (Emergency Medical Treatment Active Labor Act) violations

Changing Trauma patient information before prior notification (see hospital-specific rules on
trauma patient identification)

Loss-of-Revenue Errors

Failure to obtain a precertification / authorization for services

Failure to verify and update insurance information based on eligibility response
Failure to notify an insurance company timely of an inpatient admission
Failure to follow policy related to point-of-service collections

Privacy (HIPAA) Violations

Failure to update and verify demographic information, resulting in possible HIPAA violation
Inappropriate disclosure of information which may lead to a HIPAA breach

General Registration Quality Errors

Failure to update and verify demographic information

Failure to ask for and document patient out-of-pocket responsibility

Failure to scan and document required information to account

Failure to complete Registration in a timely manner

Failure to follow proper process/policy for Admission type (e.g. trauma, emergency,
observation, inpatient, ambulatory)

Demographic and other errors identified in EPIC workqueues


POLICY:

Patient Access Reps will provide accurate and complete registrations meeting all Federal, State, and
JCAHO requirements. Access Reps will obtain accurate and complete demographic, clinical,
insurance, and financial information from patients in an efficient and courteous manner during the
registration process. Patient Access Reps will use (3) identifiers to ensure the correct patient is
selected and given the correct armband before services are rendered. The patient’s driver’s license
and insurance card will be obtained and scanned at the time of registration. Benefits verification that
can be processed through Passport, Medicaid website or various insurance providers websites, will be
done and documented at or before the time of registration (for all patient types). Errors will be
tracked and appropriate disciplinary measures taken.

* Crucial errors and loss-of-revenue errors will result in stricter disciplinary measures than general
registration quality errors.

¢ Privacy violations will be subject to System policy PRI.08.014 —~ HIPAA Privacy and Security
Breach Disciplinary Sanctions and Mitigation. Patient Access leaders will consult with Human
Resources and the facility Privacy Officer when such matters occur.

¢ Supervisors and managers will perform monthly quality audits, through which a quality score will
be derived. Accounts selected for audit will include: randomly-selected accounts that the registrar
worked, accounts identified by other departments as having potential errors, and accounts listed in
EPIC ADT/Registration WQ’s. A quality score will be calculated by dividing the number of
correct data points by the total number of data points reviewed. Example: 94 data points correct
out of 100 data points reviewed = 94/100 = 94%.

¢ Disciplinary actions will be taken as described below.

o Verbal Warning
®  The 1* occurrence of a loss-of-revenue error.
*  The 1* month the employee’s quality score falls below 85%.

o Written Warning
*  The 2™ occurrence of a loss-of-revenue error.
»  The 2" month the employee’s quality score falls below 85%.

o Final Written Warning with Performance Improvement Plan (consult HR)
= The 1st occurrence of a crucial error.
® The 3rd occurrence of a loss-of-revenue.
*  The 3" month the employee’s quality score falls below 85%.

o Administrative Review (Termination) (consult HR)
= The 2nd occurrence of a crucial error
*  The 4th occurrence of a loss-of-revenue error.
* The 4™ month the employee’s quality score falls below 85%, with no improvement
shown. If scores remain below 85% but improvement is noted, the Performance
Improvement Plan may be extended for 30-60 days; HR will be consulted in this case.

NOTE: With the exception of crucial errors, this policy does not apply to new hires within their I
20 days of employment.

| S—


