  
[Type text] 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Patient Access / Compliance 
SUBJECT:  
Medical Necessity and Notice of Non-
coverage of Outpatient Services (ABN) 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: N/A Pages 2 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
July 1, 2013 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER: 
FIN.04.012 
Revised date:  October 22, 2015; Jan 2018  
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Patient Access associates across FMOL Health System and its wholly owned 
subsidiaries (“Entity”) licensed as hospitals.  
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to establish a standardized process for medical necessity screening 
of all outpatient tests or services when Medicare is the primary payer for purposes of providing 
an Advance Beneficiary Notice to the patient when necessary. 
DEFINITIONS:  
•  “Medical necessity” for ordering and providing services means that the tests, drugs, 
items or services are necessary; 
POLICY: 
Prior to furnishing outpatient services ordered by a physician for a Medicare beneficiary, FMOL 
Hospitals must screen for M edical Necessity (MN).  When a test or service does not meet MN, 
the Medicare beneficiary shall be given an ABN before receiving the service. 
 
PROCEDURE:  
• Hospital Implementation 
o All orders for outpatient services, drugs, or diagnostic tests, shall be accompanied 
and supported by a physician-documented diagnosis prior to the services being 
furnished.   
o FMOL Hospital personnel shall screen all outpatient tests or services ordered for 
Medicare patients using the FMOLHS-approved medical necessity screening 
software prior to providing the tests, drugs, or services. 
o When services fail MN, staff should notify the physician and ask if there is 
another diagnosis code that would justify the test.  If there is another valid 
diagnosis, the staff will request a revised order from the physician, and the staff 
  
[Type text] 
 
will rerun the medical necessity check.  If there is not another valid diagnosis (or 
if the revised diagnosis fails medical necessity), the staff member will issue an 
Advance Beneficiary Notice (ABN) to the patient. 
▪ The ABN form shall not be modified or customized except as permitted in 
the Medicare Claims Processing Manual, CMS Pub. 100-4, Chapter 30, 
50.6.2.  
▪ The ABN shall be given in advance of provision of the potentially non-
covered services to allow the beneficiary to consider available options. 
▪ An ABN shall not be given when a beneficiary is in a medical emergency 
or under duress, or otherwise could not be expected to make a reasonably 
informed consumer decision regarding the services and resulting financial 
responsibility. 
▪  FMOL Hospitals shall not provide ABNs unless there is a reasonable 
expectation the test, service, or drug will be provided and that the 
Medicare program will not cover the items or service. 
▪ FMOL Hospitals shall scan the signed ABN into the hospital-approved 
archiving/ scanning software. 
▪ If a patient refuses to sign an ABN that has been presented pursuant to 
this policy or refuses to select an option on the ABN, FMOL personnel 
shall document the refusal on the form and scan to the patient record. 
o The Hospital is responsible for auditing and monitoring compliance with this 
policy, as well as implementing action plans. 
 
REFERENCES:  
• Medicare Claims Processing Manual, CMS Pub. 100-4, Chapter 30, 50.6.2.  
•  Form CMS-R-131 (03/11) - Attached 
 
 