\

FRANCISCAN MISSIONARIES OF OUR LADY

HEALTH SYSTEM
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: SUBJECT:
Patient Access Registration Error Policy
PAGES: 3 REPLACES POLICY DATED:
Registration Error Policy dated 11/15
EFFECTIVE DATE: October 3, 2017 SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:
REVISED: 4/13/15, 6/1/15; 10/3/17 FIN.04.17
APPROVED BY: iﬁa DATE: /0~ 4._
(0} B - é]/v ATE: /0-4_/7
SCOPE:
Applies to all staff reporting to Patient Access leaders in FMOLHS.
PURPOSE:

The purpose of this policy is to ensure the quality of the patient account at the time of registration, to
ensure patient safety, to meet regulatory requirements, and to ensure that proper billing can occur.

POLICY:

Patient Access Reps will provide accurate and complete registrations meeting all Federal, State, and
JCAHO requirements. Access Reps will obtain accurate and complete demographic, clinical,
insurance, and financial information from patients in an efficient and courteous manner during the
registration process. Patient Access Reps will use (3) identifiers to ensure the correct patient is
selected and given the correct armband before services are rendered. The patient’s driver’s license
and insurance card will be obtained and scanned at the time of registration. Benefits verification that
can be processed through Passport, Medicaid website or various insurance providers websites, will be
done and documented at or before the time of registration (for all patient types). Errors will be
tracked and appropriate disciplinary measures taken.


DEFINITIONS:

Crucial Errors (can result in patient harm and are subject to strict disciplinary measures)
e Failure to select correct MRN
e Failure to use (3) ID process
e Failure to place correct armband on patient
e An error that may cause a Sentinel Event
° Any EMTALA (Emergency Medical Treatment Active Labor Act) violations
¢ Changing Trauma patient information before prior notification (see hospital-specific
rules on trauma patient identification)

Loss-of-Revenue Errors
e Failure to obtain a precertification / authorization for services
e Failure to verify and update insurance information based on eligibility response
e Failure to notify an insurance company timely of an inpatient admission
e Failure to follow policy related to point-of-service collections

Privacy (HIPAA) Violations

¢ Failure to update and verify demographic information, resulting in possible HIPAA
violation
¢ Inappropriate disclosure of information which may lead to a HIPAA breach

General Registration Quality Errors

® Failure to update and verify demographic information

Failure to ask for and document patient out-of-pocket responsibility

Failure to scan and document required information to account

Failure to complete Registration in a timely manner

Failure to follow proper process/policy for Admission type (e.g. trauma, emergency,
observation, inpatient, ambulatory)

*  Demographic and other errors identified in EPIC workqueues

PROCEDURE:

e Errors may be detected in a number of ways: via EPIC edits and placement in Registration
Workqueues; via data received from Case Management, Business Office, and other
departments; and via internal quality audits performed by Patient Access management staff.

o will provide registration staff with real-time demographic and insurance error
alerts, as well as alerts in EPIC Registration Workqueues. Supervisors and managers will
track the volume of alerts. When trends appear for individual registrars, those accounts
will be included that person’s quality audits for the month and will affect the overall
quality score. (See next paragraph.)

©  Supervisors and managers will maintain a tracking log of g identified by other
departments and from internal quality fTRRE. A KB ESIE will be calculated by
dividing the number of correct data points by the total number of data points reviewed,
Example: 94 data points correct out of 100 data points reviewed = 94/100 = 94%.

[§8]


o Crucial errors and loss-of-revenue errors will result in stricter disciplinary measures than general
registration quality errors.

e Privacy violations will be subject to System policy PRI.08.014 — HIPAA Privacy and
Security Breach Disciplinary Sanctions and Mitigation. Patient Access leaders will
consult with Human Resources and the facility Privacy Officer when such matters oceur.

®  Supervisors will review the registration process daily and coach Access Reps on correct
procedure.

e Disciplinary actions will be taken as described below.

o Verbal Warning
*  The I* occurrence of a loss-of-revenue error.
® The I* month the employee’s quality score falls below 85%. (As defined above, the
quality score is derived from account audits and errors identified by other
departments.)

o Written Warning
= The Ist occurrence of a erucial error.
= The 2" occurrence of a loss-of-revenue error.
*  The 2" month the employee’s quality score falls below 85%.

©  Probation or Suspension with Performance Improvement Plan (consult HR)
* The 2nd occurrence of a erucial error.
*  The 3rd occurrence of a loss-of-revenue.
*  The 3" month the employee’s quality score falls below §5%.

© Administrative Review (Termination) (consult HR)
= The 3rd occurrence of a crucial error
®  The 4th occurrence of a loss-of-revenue error.
= The 4" month the employee’s quality score falls below 85%, with no improvement
shown. If scores remain below 85% but improvement is noted, the Performance
Improvement Plan may be extended for 30-60 days; HR will be consulted in this case.

NOTE: This policy does not apply 1o new hires within their I 90 days of employment.


