POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   Manual: Business Office 
        Chapter:  
Subject:  Marybird Perkins Unposted Cash   Section:  
Date of Origination:  May 1, 2014    Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: December 22, 2015   Serial Code:  
 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
To post to the receiving account and identify payments for Marybird Perkins  (MBP) that are 
billed with the OLOL tax ID; these payments are sent to OLOL. 
 
POLICY; 
 
It is the policy of FMOL to maintain Marybird Perkins Unlocated payments. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1) Establish each calendar year a new patient account to post all MBP insurance payments.  
a) Use CPI#004988168 always. 
b) Add visit #9615 for 2015, 9616 for 2016. 
2) When cash posters key remits, the payments for MBP are keyed to the unlocated MBP 
account. Process is as follows: 
a) Run a report for the previous business day in Rumba for Oncology. 
b) Gather all remits that are placed in the tray from the prior business day 
including the electronic postings and check off all remits available 
c) Calculate all the totals from the remits to be placed on the spreadsheet. 
d) Enter each insurance carrier, the amount posted to oncology, Rumba and the 
recon for each remit. 
e) If any errors were posted in Oncology/Rumba list them at the bottom of the 
spreadsheet and give an explanation of the error and what was corrected.  (i.e. 
poster entered the incorrect amount and payment was reversed to enter the 
correct payment amount). 
f) Add all the remit totals on a cashier receipt and attach the receipt to the 
spreadsheet to show each remit total. 
g) Place the spread sheet on top of the report from Rumba and then the remits 
following. 
3) The copy of payments by posting date are emailed to Patsy Guitreau and their staff at 
MBP to pquitreau@marybird.com and jdesoto@marybird.com. 
4) Every Friday and at month end the open recurring account is adjusted to balance to zero.  
Example: $21,567.30 credit showing is reversed with CDM 123042 for cash clearing. 
5) The 123042 adjustment notifies accounting that this amount is for MBP. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Approval:    Date:    
 
Approval:    Date:    
 
Approval:    Date:     
 
 
 