HVI / CVL CODE RED PLAN 
ECLS-012 CVL 2309 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Cardiovascular Laboratory 
(CVL) Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Cardiovascular 
Laboratory, Cost Center 2309 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 2309 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 02/10/2018 Review Date: 05/27/2019 
Revision Date: 10.31.2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated EXIT signs are located between the OR desk and double doors entering HVAU, 
across from CVL 3 procedure room scrub sink and at the end of the hallway leading to ER. 
• HVAU and hallway to ER are adjacent smoke compartments.  
 
 
 HVI / CVL CODE RED PLAN 
ECLS-012 CVL 2309 
Page 2 of 3 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• Radiology tech assistant’s and Scheduler are responsible for clearing the hallways of any carts or 
equipment by moving them to the clean equipment room and into CVL hallway alcoves. 
• Radiology technologists will confirm that ALL doors are closed and assist those with Limited 
English Proficiency (LEP) and those with sensory or mobility disabilities. 
• Registered Nurses will move patients and visitors to safety explaining: “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency drill/or actual fire response and will ensure your safety.” 
• Scrub personnel will assist nurses moving patients while maintaining sterility as much as 
possible. 
• Purchasing Clerk will prevent people from using elevators. 
• CVL Supervisor or designee will ensure that all patients are accounted for and mark each door 
with an “X” to indicate the room is empty. 
• CVL Director will ensure that all team members are accounted for and call or designate call to     
5-3333.   
 
 
 
• CVL medical gas shut off valves are located outside of each procedural room:  EP labs 1 and 2 
and CVL labs 3 through 6.  All valves are labeled with the corresponding room number.  Shut off 
oxygen valves, ONLY if instructed by Director, Supervisor, House Manager, Respiratory 
Therapy or designee. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Patients will transferred from the procedure room table to their hospital bed or stretcher.  Slide 
boards are available if necessary. 
• Patient’s bed or stretcher is located in CVL hallway outside of procedure room.  There is a slide 
board located in each procedural room. 
• Patients are not ambulatory once the procedure has started due to nature of procedure and 
administration of sedation.  Assistance evacuating patients will be necessary. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguishers are located in the Supply Room next to supply room door across from CVL 6, 
across from the scrub sink for CVL 4, just outside of entrance to EP control rooms and in each 
EP lab. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Medical gas valves will need to be shut off. 
• Oxygen and Nitrous Oxide are stored inside of the clean equipment room. 
• All patients with femoral arterial access, general anesthesia, or deep sedation are not ambulatory. 
• All areas entering into Cardiovascular area require OLOL badge access. 
• Smoke compartments are noted with red tags on top of doors.   
 
 HVI / CVL CODE RED PLAN 
ECLS-012 CVL 2309 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
Location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• HVAU and/or ER are the primary horizontal evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Heart and Vascular Institute waiting room and the ER Helipad are the secondary horizontal 
evacuation routes and destinations. 
• 1st floor of parking garage 1 is the primary vertical evacuation route and destination  
• Stairwell located next to ER entrance to first floor is the secondary vertical evacuation route and 
destination 
• The Cardiovascular Labs are located on the second floor of the HVI tower. 
 