 
 
  
 
 
Restraints 
Surgical Procedures: Plastic restraints as opposed to metal 
handcuffs may be required for surgical procedures.  Other special 
procedures may be required in the operative/invasive areas as 
needed.  These instructions will be communicated by surgery staff 
and items will be stocked by Surgery.   
Clinical Restraints are the use of restraints by clinical staff to 
combat a patient’s disruptive behavior when all other courses of 
action have failed. Clinical restraints are ordered by the Physician 
based on the clinical needs of the patient. OLOLRMC staff is then 
responsible for the care and removal of the restraints.  
Mental Behavioral: Behavior which will cause injury to one’s self or 
others.  Examples: biting or hitting caregivers. 
Medical Surgical: Behavior which interferes with the medical 
treatment of a patient.  Examples: pulling out IV lines, kicking or 
pushing medical equipment away from the bed, removing the 
medical equipment that is monitoring them. 
Administrative: Use of restraints such as handcuffs to ensure a 
forensic patient is unable to harm others.  A guard must always be 
present with a key in case of an emergency. 
 
 
 
Discharge Planning 
Coordination of discharge plans for continuity of care needs post 
hospitalization will be referred to the Case Management 
Department. 
 
 
 
 
 
Interacting with Patients 
Officers are required to adhere to OLOLRMC policy unless such 
presents a definite threat to the security of the inmates.   
While force may be necessary in some situations, patients 
should be controlled with the least amount of force necessary 
to ensure safety for the officer/custodian, patient, staff and 
visitors.  
Whenever possible the patient’s privacy must be maintained. 
When obtaining statements, collecting evidence, or 
interviewing a patient, collaborate with the physician or nurse 
before approaching the patient.  We understand the 
importance of the law enforcement procedures, however 
medical care takes precedence over forensic issues. OLOL staff 
will work with you to fulfill your obligations. 
Officers should be professional when interacting with 
OLOLRMC staff and the general public.   
 
OFFICERS WILL NOT ALLOW SUPERVISED INMATES OUT OF 
THEIR SIGHT OR CONTROL. 
 
Officers may not leave their assigned post until properly 
relieved.  Custody of an inmate can only be relinquished to 
another authorized representative.  
Officers are not permitted to eat or drink in the room of an 
inmate. Officers assigned to these units must be relieved by an 
authorized representative for meal breaks.  
Officers must remain alert.  Sleeping, reading watching 
television or engaging in any activity which may cause 
distraction from monitoring the inmates’ behavior is 
forbidden.  
Officers are not permitted to make personal telephone calls on 
the patient’s room phones while on duty. 
Plastic and disposable trays are used for meals. The 
officer is responsible for ensuring return of plastic 
utensils. 
Please ensure prisoner patents do not operate the 
Getwell Keyboard or Pillow Speaker.  Move these items 
from patient’s reach 
Officer is responsible for ensuring immediate 
surrounding is free of objects that can potentially cause 
harm to clinicians and/or the patient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised 11/2020cat 
WEAPONS 
You are entering a patient care area.  You will be in close 
proximity with patients, visitors and staff.   
SECURE YOUR WEAPON AT ALL TIMES. 
.  
OLOL FORENSIC STAFF GUIDE 
SECURITY (Main) EMERGENCIES DIAL: 765-8825 
LIVINGSTON EMERGENCIES DIAL: 271-6050 
Children Hospital: 374-1400 
FIRE EMERGENCIES: CLOSEST RED PULL STATION 
IMPORTANT TELEPHONE NUMBERS: When dialed from a 
hospital telephone, simply dial 5 plus the last four digits 
of the number (Ex. 5-8825) 
OLOLRMC – Safety Management 765-5978 
OLOLRMC – Quality/Patient Safety 765-8232 
OLOLRMC – House Keeping 765-8722 
OLOLRMC – Guest Services 765-8850 
Note: The operator will NOT provide any information 
concerning custodial patients. 
 
FIRE RESPONSE _ RESPOND ACCORDING TO FIRE 
PREVENTION/CONTROL 
R –Remove/rescue person 
in immediate danger 
P – Pull the pin between the 
handles 
A – Activate the Alarm by 
pulling the fire pull station 
and calling 911 
A – Aim the nozzle at the 
base of the fire 
C – Confine the fire by 
closing all doors 
S – Squeeze the handles 
together 
E – Evacuate to a safe area 
or Extinguish the fire if you         
can safely do so 
S–Sweep the fire 
extinguisher from side to 
side  
   
 
Over-head Page Alerts 
In case of an emergency announcement of any type, please seek 
out the closest staff person for clarification on procedure or 
report to the nursing station for the area specific location. 
 
Emergency Codes 
Blue Medical Emergency/ Cardiac Arrest 
Red Fire Emergency/ Evacuation 
White Behavioral Emergency 
Black Bomb Threat/Explosion 
Yellow Mass Casualty 
Gray Severe Weather 
Green Radiation Exposure 
Orange Chemical Exposure 
Silver Active Shooter 
Pink Infant Abduction 
Purple System Telecommunication Failure 
 
 
Evacuation Procedure 
 
The Officer maintains responsibility for the custodial forensic 
patient assigned to them at all times. This includes evacuation 
of the custodial forensic patient in the event of a fire, security 
threat, or other emergencies. Officers must maintain control of 
the custodial forensics patient during an evacuation. It will be 
up to each officer whether or not the custodial forensic patient 
will remain in restraints during the evacuation. The officer will 
escort the custodial forensic patient to the nearest exit away 
from danger.  The officer will secure the custodial forensic 
patient by moving the patient 35 to 50 feet from the rest of the 
hospital population. The officer must maintain control of the 
custodial forensic patient at all times during and after the 
evacuation  
 
General Information 
SECURE YOUR WEAPONS AT ALL TIMES. 
Parking- Law Enforcement Forensic Parking should be directed 
to Mary Bird Perkins 1st floor Parking Garage/ER Ramp Attendee 
 
Patient Transportation Forensic patients arriving in shackles 
are to be transported /escorted by OLOLRMC Security/ G4S 
Security in a wheelchair, with a blanket covering any/all 
shackles. The IS Hallway leading to Mary Bird Perkins Garage 
Area is the designated path. 
 
 
 
 
 
Ethics, Patients’ Rights and Responsibilities 
 
Patients have a right to report a complaint regarding their 
care/service; report signs of abuse, neglect or harm. 
 
Patient Confidentiality 
 
All information regarding a patient’s medical condition must be kept 
confidential.  Confidential information may only be discussed with 
those that have a “need to know.” 
 
Communication Channels 
Clinical Issues or Concerns should be addressed directly with the 
nursing staff.  If the need arises, the Charge nurse may be summoned 
to resolve any issues or concerns. 
Administrative or Security Issues should be reviewed with the 
OLOLRMC Security Supervisor on duty.  The Security Department 
may be contacted 24 hours 765-8825.  
 
 
Procedure for Responding to Unusual Clinical Events 
or Incidents and Patient Safety 
Notify OLOL staff IMMEDIATELY of any unusual clinical events. 
Examples include but are not limited to: patient who stops breathing, 
patient that falls, patient becomes unresponsive. 
Events are reported to maintain a safe environment for patients, 
team members and visitors.  A safety event report should be 
completed on patients, team member or visitors that sustain injury, 
property damage, loss or occupational illness. An OLOL team 
member can assist with entering a safety event report if one is 
needed.  
 
Officers are required to call OLOLRMC Security (765-8825) and their 
immediate supervisor in the event of an unusual situation or an 
emergency. 
Safety 
All patient prisoners are to use disposable trays and plastic utensils 
only when eating.  The Correction Officer is responsible for ensuring 
only plastic or disposable trays are used and returned after meals are 
complete. 
Patients who are at risk for fall wear arm bands and have door labels 
and must be aided by nursing/clinical staff for all out of bed 
activities.  Rounds are conducted every hour by nursing staff in the 
patient care areas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Infection Control and Hand Hygiene 
Hands should be washed:   
a) Before and after contact with the forensic patient. 
b) After contact with contaminated material. 
c) After using the restroom, eating, smoking, sneezing, or 
coughing. 
d) If gloves are used, before putting them on and after 
removing them. 
e) When leaving the patient room. 
 
Hands should be vigorously washed with hospital-supplied 
antimicrobial soap for a minimum of 15 seconds.  Alcohol 
hand rubs may be used to decontaminate hands at other 
times if hands are not visibly soiled.  
 
Please follow the instruction of any Isolation precautions 
signs. Wash your hand upon entering a room and exiting a 
room and with any contact with a patient. For patients 
with air-borne precautions, a respiratory fit test is 
required (N95 mask).  
 
Isolation Precautions: If the inmate requires isolation, the 
Officer will be given specific instruction on how to carry 
out and maintain isolation by the nursing staff.  It is the 
expectation that the Officer complies with hospital policy 
to avoid transmission of disease.  Please see nursing staff 
for instruction regarding posted precautions. 
 
Hazardous Materials 
Know the location of Safety Data Sheets for materials that 
you handle. SDS sheets for all chemicals are readily 
accessible by calling through Safety Management 765-
5978. Information will be provided on toxicity, personal 
protective equipment requirements, health effects and 
first aid measures.  
 
 