Reference: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.12 
GME/RES/02 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME Section: Resident 
 
Title: 
 
Resident Impairment Policy 
Policy 
Reference #: GME/RES/02 
Supersedes #:  
Date of 
Origination: 4/16/2010 Review Date: 2/5/2024 
Revision Date: 2/5/2024 GMEC 
Approval: 3/25/24 
 
 
A capitalized word has the meaning as first defined in the policy. Unless otherwise defined, all other capitalized words have the same 
meaning as ascribed to them by the ACGME Glossary of Terms. 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure that residents within OLOL sponsored residency programs are physically, mentally and morally 
competent to meet their designated responsibilities to patients, medical staff, residents and the community- 
at-large. 
DEFINITIONS: 
When used in this policy, these terms have the following meaning: 
Impairment: The inability of a resident to meet his/her responsibilities because of mental illness or 
deficiency; physical illness, including but not limited to, deterioration through the aging process or loss 
of motor skills; and/or excessive use of, abuse of, and/or a dependency on alcohol and/or drugs. 
 
POLICY: 
In cases of suspected impairment, the Program Director, or designated member of the program’s faculty 
shall follow the policy below: 
 
A. Residents are encouraged to self-report in the event they suspect they are impaired. 
 
B. A discreet investigation shall be conducted of any complaint, allegation or concern expressed by other 
residents, program faculty, medical staff, patients, hospital employees, or the resident’s family 
members. 
 
C. Residents are encouraged to voluntarily relinquish clinical responsibilities during the pendency of the 
investigation, until such time as the resident’s health status is determined. In the event that the resident 
chooses to not voluntarily relinquish their clinical responsibilities, the Program Director may require 
the Resident to take a leave of absence until the investigation is complete. 
 
D. If there is sufficient evidence of impairment, as determined by the Program Director, the Program 
Director will intervene with the resident, present the concerns and evidence reported, and determine 
if additional diagnostic testing is indicated. Reference: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.12 
GME/RES/02 
 
E. If the resident accepts the results of the investigation, the Program Director will work with the resident 
to develop a plan of action for appropriate counseling, treatment, and/or rehabilitation. If applicable 
to the resident’s impairment, the resident will be encouraged to self -report immediately to the 
Physicians’ Health Foundation of Louisiana. 
 
F. The Program Director shall facilitate referral of the resident in accordance with the plan of action 
developed. The Program Director should work with the resident to monitor the rehabilitation process. 
 
G. If a resident does not accept the determination of impairment and accept the plan of action the Program 
Director shall have authority to take Adverse Action, as more fully described in GME-ADM-04 – Due 
Process Policy, against the resident including, by way of example, Suspension, Non -Renewal of 
appointment or Dismissal. 
 
H. Not all interventions require a leave of absence of the resident but if one is necessary all paid and 
unpaid leave taken by the resident will be in accordance with the Resident Leave of Absence Policy. 
 
I. If the resident is receiving therapy of any sort, the Program Director should receive confidential reports 
from the treating physician, social worker, etc. including progress reports on whether the resident is 
compliance with the plan of action. 
 
J. The Program Director must in turn notify the Designated Institutional Official (DIO) of all cases of 
resident impairment and provide the DIO with reports on the information in Section I above, as well as 
the inclusive dates of the leave of absence. 
K. All records concerning impairment of a resident will be treated with strict confidentiality with the 
following exceptions: 
1. If reporting is required by state or federal laws or regulations, or professional ethical 
standards; or 
 
2. If maintaining confidentiality threatens the safety of a patient or patients. 