Source: Common Program Requirements (Resident), VI.A.2, 
ACGME Program Requirements for GME in Pediatrics, VI.A.2 
GME/RES/03 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME Section: Resident 
Title: Pediatric Residency Program: Resident 
Supervision 
Policy 
Reference #: GME/RES/10 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 7/1/2023 Review Date:  
Revision Date:  
 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to establish supervision standards, roles, responsibilities and patient care 
activities of residents in the OLOL Pediatric Residency Program.  
 
DEFINITIONS:  
A. Conditional Independence: Graded, progressive responsibility for patient care with defined 
oversight.  
 
POLICY: 
A. The Pediatric Residency Program Directors has the responsibility, authority and accountability 
to ensure adequate supervision of residents at all times.   
 
B. Supervision in the setting of graduate medical education provides safe and effective care to 
patients; ensures each resident’s development of the skills, knowledge, and attitudes required 
to enter the unsupervised practice of medicine; and establishes a foundation for continued 
professional growth. 
 Within the scope of the residency program, all r esidents will function under the 
supervision of appropriately credentialed, qualified faculty and/or medical staff at all 
clinical sites utilized for the education of residents. Each patient must have an 
identifiable, appropriately credentialed and privile ged attending physician (or licensed 
independent practitioner as approved by the specialty spe cific ACGME Review 
Committee) who is ultimately responsible for that patient’s care.  
 Residents and faculty members must inform patients of their respective roles in each 
patient’s care when providing direct patient care.  
 This information must be available to residents, faculty members, other members of 
the health care team, and patients.  
 
C. The program must demonstrate that the appropriate level of supervision in place for all 
residents is based on each resident’s level of training and ability, as well as patient complexity 
and acuity. Supervision may be exercised through a variety of methods, as appropriate to the 
situation. 
 
D. Levels of Supervision: to promote appropriate resident supervision while providing for graded 
authority and responsibility, the program must use the following classification of supervision: 
1. Direct Supervision:  Source: Common Program Requirements (Resident), VI.A.2, 
ACGME Program Requirements for GME in Pediatrics, VI.A.2 
GME/RES/03 
i. The supervising physician is physically present with the resident during key 
portions of the patient interaction; or, 
ii. The supervising physician and/or patient is not physically present with the resident 
and the supervising physician is concurrently monitoring the patient care through 
appropriate telecommunication technology.   
iii. PGY-1 residents must initially be supervised directly  with the supervising 
physician physically present with the resident during key portions of the patient 
interaction.  
iv. PGY-1 residents may not take “parent concern calls” from home but may 
make/take “parent concern calls” during their clinical and educational work hours 
in the hospital or from another clinical site where supervision is either direct or 
indirect with direct supervision immediately available. 
2. Indirect Supervision: 
i. The supervising physician is not providing physical or concurrent visual or audio 
supervision but is immediately available to the resident for guidance and is 
available to provide appropriate direct supervision. 
3. Oversight 
i. The supervising physician is available to provide review of procedures/encounters 
with feedback provided after care is delivered.  
 
E. Appropriate supervision is essential for patient safety and high- quality teaching. Supervision 
is also contextual. There is tremendous diversity of resident-patient interactions, education and 
training locations, and resident skills and abilities, even at the same level of the educational 
program. The degree of supervision for a resident is expected to evolve progressively as th 
resident gains more experience, even with the same patient condition or procedure. The level 
of supervision for each resident is commensurate with that resident’s level of independence in 
practice; this level of supervision may be enhanced based on factors such as patient safety, 
complexity, acuity, urgency, risk of serious safety events, or other pertinent variables. 
 
F. The privilege of progressive authority and responsibility, conditional independence, and a 
 supervisory role in patient care delegated to each resident must be assigned by the program 
 director and faculty members.  
 
1.  The program director must evaluate each resident’s abilities based on specific 
 criteria, guided by the ACGME Milestones.  
 
2.  Faculty members functioning as supervising physicians must delegate portions of  care 
to residents based on the needs of the patient and the skills of each resident.  
 
3. Senior residents or fellows should serve in a supervisory role to junior residents in 
 recognition of their progress toward independence, based on the needs of each patient 
 and the skills of the individual resident or fellow. 
 
4. Each residents must know the limits  of their scope of authority, and the circumstances 
under which the resident is permitted to act with conditional independence.  
 Source: Common Program Requirements (Resident), VI.A.2, 
ACGME Program Requirements for GME in Pediatrics, VI.A.2 
GME/RES/03 
G. Programs must set guidelines for circumstances and events in which residents must 
communicate with the supervising faculty member(s), such as the transfer of a patient to an 
intensive care unit, or end-of-life decisions.   
 
H. Faculty supervision assignments must be of sufficient duration to assess the knowledge and 
skills of each resident and to delegate to the resident the appropriate level of patient care 
authority and responsibility.  
 
I. Programs must educate all residents and faculty members in recognition of the signs of fatigue 
and sleep deprivation, alertness management and fatigue mitigation processes. 
 
 