Source: Common Program Requirements (Residency), VI.F.  
GME/RES/04 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME  Section: Resident 
Title: Resident Clinical and Education Work Hours 
Policy 
Policy Reference 
#: GME/RES/04 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 2/22/2008 Last Review Date: 6/23/23 
Last Revision Date: 6/23/23 
 
 
 
PURPOSE:  
The purpose of this policy is to outline Our Lady of the Lake clinical and educational work hour 
requirements that are to be enforced and monitored by each GME program.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
When used in this policy, these terms have the following meaning: 
 
Clinical and Educational Work Hours: All clinical and academic activities related to the residency 
program: patient care (inpatient and outpatient), administrative duties related to patient care, the 
provision for transfer of patient care, time spent on in-house call, time spent on clinical work done from 
home, and other scheduled activities such as conferences. These hours do not include reading, studying, 
research done from home, and preparation for future cases.  
 
In-House Call: Clinical and educational work hours, beyond the scheduled workday, when residents are 
required to be immediately available within an  assigned institution , as needed, for clinical 
responsibilities. In-house call does not include night float, being on call from home, or regularly 
scheduled overnight duties. 
 
At-Home Call: Call taken from outside the assigned site.  
 
Work from Home: Types of work from home that must be counted toward clinical and educational work 
hours include using an electronic health record and taking calls from home. Reading done in preparation 
for the following day’s cases, studying, and research done from home do not count toward the 80 hours. 
Resident decisions to leave the hospital before their clinical work has been completed and to finish that 
work later from home should be made in consultation wit h the resident’s supervisor . In such 
circumstances, residents should be mindful of their professional responsibility to complete work in a 
timely manner and to maintain patient confidentiality.  
 
POLICY: 
A. Programs, in partnership with their Sponsoring Institutions, must design an effective program 
structure that is configured to provide residents with educational and clinical experience 
opportunities, as well as reasonable opportunities for rest and personal activities.   
 Source: Common Program Requirements (Residency), VI.F.  
GME/RES/04 
B. Maximum Hours of Work per Week 
 
a. Clinical and educational work hours must be limited to no more than 80 hours per 
week, averaged over a four -week period, inclusive of all in- house clinical and 
educational activities, clinical work done from home, and all moonlighting.  
 
C. Moonlighting  
a. Moonlighting must not interfere with the ability of the resident to achieve the goals 
and objectives of the educational program and must not interfere with the resident’s 
fitness for work nor compromise patient safety. 
b. Time spent by residents in internal and external moonlighting must be counted 
towards the 80-hour maximum weekly hour limit.  
c. PGY-1 residents are not permitted to moonlight. 
D. Mandatory Time Free of Clinical Work and Education 
a. Residents should have eight hours off between scheduled clinical work and education 
periods. 
b. There may be circumstances when residents choose to stay to care for their patients or 
return to the hospital with fewer than eight hours free of clinical experience and 
education. This must occur within the context of the 80-hour and the one-day-off-in-
seven requirements. 
c. Residents must have at least 14 hours free of clinical work and education after 24 
hours of in-house call. 
d. Residents must be scheduled for a minimum of one day in seven free of clinical work 
and required education (when averaged over four weeks). At-home call cannot be 
assigned on these free days. 
E. Maximum Clinical Work and Education Period Length 
a. Clinical and educational work periods for residents must not exceed 24 hours of 
continuous scheduled clinical assignments. 
b. Up to four hours of additional time may be used for activities related to patient safety, 
such as providing effective transitions of care, and/or resident education.  
c. Additional patient care responsibilities must not be assigned to a resident during this 
time. 
F.      Clinical and Educational Work Hour Exceptions Source: Common Program Requirements (Residency), VI.F.  
GME/RES/04 
a. In rare circumstances, after handing off all other responsibilities, a resident, on their 
own initiative, may elect to remain or return to the clinical site in the following 
circumstances:  
i. to continue to provide care to a single severely ill or unstable patient; 
ii. to give humanistic attention to the needs of a patient or family; or,  
iii. to attend unique educational events.  
b. These additional hours of care or education will be counted toward the 80-hour weekly 
limit.  
c. A Review Committee may grant rotation-specific exceptions for up to 10 percent or a 
maximum of 88 clinical and educational work hours to individual programs based on 
a sound educational rationale Prior to submitting the request to the Review Committee, 
the program director must obtain approval of the institution’s GMEC and DIO. 
 
G. In-House Night Float 
a. Night float must occur within the context of the 80- hour and one -day-off-in-seven 
requirements. 
b. The maximum number of consecutive weeks of night float, and maximum number of 
months of night float per year may be further specified by the Review Committee. 
H. Maximum in-House On-Call Frequency 
a. Residents must be scheduled for in- house call no more frequently than every third 
night (when averaged over a four-week period). 
I. At-Home Call: 
a. Time spent in the hospital by residents on at -home call must count towards the 80-
hour maximum weekly hour limit. The frequency of at-home call is not subject to the 
every-third-night limitation, but must satisfy the requirement for on e-day-in-seven 
free of duty, when averaged over four weeks. 
b. At-home call must not be so frequent or taxing as to preclude rest or reasonable 
personal time for each resident.  
c. Residents are permitted to return to the hospital while on at-home call to provide direct 
patient care for new or established patients. These hours of patient care must be 
included in the 80-hour maximum weekly limit. 
 
J. Monitoring and tracking of clinical and educational work hours 
a. Programs and residents have a shared responsibility to ensure that the 80- hour 
maximum weekly limit is not exceeded.  Source: Common Program Requirements (Residency), VI.F.  
GME/RES/04 
b. Residents are required to track the time they spend on clinical and educational work 
in New Innovations (Work Hours > My Work Hours > Log Hours).  
c. Work hours will be monitored on a regular basis by the program director. If there is 
danger of a resident being in violation of the policy, the program director will notify 
the resident and his/her supervising faculty. If necessary, the resident will be relieved 
of his/her responsibilities in order to remain in compliance.  
 
K. Non-compliance with clinical and education work hour requirements  
a. If a resident is found to be in non- compliance, he/she will receive notification from 
the program director. The Resident Clinical and Education Work Hours Policy will be 
reviewed again with the resident and supervising faculty. The resident rotation and 
call schedule will be reviewed and revised as necessary. If a resident is in non-
compliance on more than one oc casion per academic year, he/she will be subject to 
disciplinary action.  
b. Failure by residents to log work hours in a timely manner may result in remediation 
in accordance with the graduate medical education policy on due process.  
 
L. Reporting Clinical and Educational Work Hour Violations 
a. The program will report any confirmed clinical and educational work hour violations 
to the Academic Affairs Office as soon as reasonably possible, but no later than 30 
days from when the violation was validated. Reported work hour violations should 
include a description of the violation and the specific date/time/rotation when the 
violation occurred. 
b. Residents may report violations of the 80- hour weekly limit through procedures 
established by each program and/or by calling the Designated Institutional Official 
(DIO or OLOLRMC’s Compliance Hotline (1-888-400-4517). Concerns may also be 
submitted online at www.fmolhsintegritylink.ethicspoint.com.   
 