GME/RES/07 
   
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
 
Policy Manual: 
 
GME 
 
Section: 
 
Resident 
 
 
Title: 
 
 
House Staff Scope of Practice 
Policy Reference 
#: 
 
GME/RES/07 
 
Supersedes #:  
 
Date of Origination: 
 
7/19/2007 
 
 Last Review Date: 
 
10/7/2024 
 
Last Revision Date: 
 
  10/7/2024  GMEC  
 Approval:  
 
 
  10/7/2024 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To outline scope of practice for house staff and ensure appropriate supervision by an active member 
of the medical staff. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
When used in this policy, these terms have the following meaning: 
 
House staff: Residents and fellows. 
 
Resident: A physician in an accredited graduate medical education specialty program. 
 
Fellow:  A  physician  in  a  program  of  graduate  medical  education  who  has  completed  
the requirements for eligibility for first board certification in the specialty. 
 
Supervising Physician: A member of the hospital’s active medical staff who will direct, 
supervise and evaluate house staff. 
 
Direct Supervision: The supervising physician is physically present with the resident and patient. 
 
Indirect Supervision with Direct Supervision Immediately Available: The supervising physician 
is physically within the hospital or other site of patient care, and is immediately available to 
provide direct supervision. 
 
Indirect Supervision with Direct Available : The supervising physician is not physically present 
within the hospital or other site of patient care, but is immediately available by means of telephonic 
and/or electronic modalities, and is available to provide direct supervision. 
 
Oversight: The supervising physician is available to provide review of procedures/encounters with 
feedback provided after care is delivered. 
 
Resident Supervisor: Instructs, and assists as needed, a more junior resident during a procedure in GME/RES/07 
   
 
 
which the more junior resident performs greater than or equal to 50% of the procedure including the 
key portion(s) of the procedure. The attending physician functions as assistant or observer. The 
resident supervisor will be a more senior participant in the program. 
 
Junior Surgeon (or Resident Surgeon): Performs greater than or equal to 50% of the procedure with 
the attending physician (and resident supervisor if applicable), including the key portion(s) of the 
procedure. 
 
Assistant Surgeon: Performs less than 50% of the procedure, or greater than or equal to 50% of the 
procedure but not the key portion(s) of the procedure. 
 
Affiliation Agreement: The affiliation agreement provides the basic framework within which 
graduate medical education is conducted by the teaching program/institution and OLOL, and 
delineates the respective responsibilities of the teaching program/institution, OLOL, and the 
resident or fellow. 
 
POLICY: 
A. Within  the  scope  of  the  residency  training  program,  house  staff  shall  be  subject  to 
supervision  by  an  active  member  of  the  medical  staff  who  will  direct,  supervise  
and evaluate them. 
 
B. House staff may exercise independent judgment and participate in patient management within 
their professional competence and licensure, subject to the roles, responsibilities, and patient 
care activities stipulated in training program specific curriculum. Additionally, house staff who 
are training at OLOL under the auspices of an affiliated teaching program are subject to those 
responsibilities outlined within the affiliation agreement between OLOL and their respective 
teaching program/institution. 
 
C. The responsibility given to house staff in patient care should depend upon each resident’s or 
fellow’s knowledge, problem-solving ability, manual skills, experience, and the severity and 
complexity of each patient’s status. 
 
D. Based on the prerequisites for appointment to a residency and fellowship program, all house 
staff, regardless of their level of training, are allowed to perform the following activities 
without direct supervision: 
 
▪ Perform a history and physical examination including the history and physical 
examination as a part of a consultation. Supervision must be documented by 
supervising physician countersignature with 24 hours. The supervising physician must 
also adhere to CMS documentation guidelines to support any claims submitted for 
payment for services rendered 
▪ Perform venipuncture (no separate documentation of supervision required); 
▪ Place a cannula for intravenous infusion in a peripheral vein of the upper extremity of 
adult patients not receiving hemodialysis (no separate documentation of supervision 
required); 
▪ Perform basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation; GME/RES/07 
   
 
 
▪ Write or dictate progress notes including the final progress note or discharge summary. 
Supervision must be documented by supervising physician countersignature within 24 
hours. Supervising physician must also adhere to CMS documentation guidelines to 
support any claims submitted for payment for services rendered 
▪ Write diagnostic and therapeutic orders (no separate documentation of supervision 
required). With respect to chemotherapy and radiation therapy, the appropriately 
credentialed supervising physician is responsible for writing the order and must be 
present during the treatment planning (i.e. choice of modality and regimen) and dosage 
or dosimetry determinations. 
▪ Request consultations by members of the medical staff (supervision must be 
documented by attending/supervising countersignature of the order within 24 hours). 
 
E. The following applies to house staff who are participants in accredited surgical training 
programs: The supervising physician has the ultimate discretion as to the level of involvement 
of house staff. Surgical procedures must be performed either under direct supervision or under 
indirect supervision with direct supervision immediately available by active members of the 
medical staff credentialed in the procedure being supervised. The following guidelines reflect 
the philosophy of progressive responsibility and are general guidelines appropriate to the level 
of training. 
 
▪ PGY-1: Under the supervision of more senior house staff (resident supervisor) and 
medical staff surgeons, the resident will assist with both minor and major surgical 
procedures in the role of assistant surgeon or junior surgeon. PGY-1 residents will 
assist with initial history and physical examinations and pre and post-operative 
examinations in surgery clinics. 
▪ PGY-2: Under the supervision of resident supervisor and medical staff surgeons, the 
resident will assist with both minor and major surgical procedures in the role of 
junior surgeon for less technically demanding cases and in the role of assistant 
surgeon in more technically demanding cases under supervision by the supervising 
physician. The resident will also assist in the pre- and postoperative care of more 
challenging patients. 
▪ PGY-3: Under the supervision of resident supervisor and medical staff surgeons, the 
resident will assist with both minor and major surgical procedures in the role of 
junior surgeon. The resident will also assist in the pre- and postoperative care of 
more challenging patients. They will assume more technical responsibility in more 
technically demanding cases under direct sponsoring physician supervision. 
▪ PGY-4: Under the supervision of medical staff surgeons and resident supervisor (as 
needed), the resident will assist with major surgical procedures in the role of junior 
surgeon and will assume more technical responsibili ty in more technically 
demanding cases. 
▪ PGY-5: Under the supervisions of medical staff surgeons, the resident will perform 
major and minor surgical procedures in the role of resident supervisor. 
 
F. Employees of the medical center who are to carry out a prescribed medication or treatment order 
communicated by a member of the house staff may, at their own discretion or at the dictate of 
their supervisor, require order confirmation from the supervising physician on administering the GME/RES/07 
   
 
 
medication or treatment in question. 
 
G. It is stipulated that this policy will be superseded by emergency situations where all physicians 
are expected to do their utmost to render life-saving treatment. In such an event, the house staff 
member shall document in the medical record that such a situation existed and prompted the 
policy change. The supervising physician and GME Office will be notified of the situation as 
soon as possible. 
 
H. House staff may not participate in patient management if the involved patient objects to their 
presence. 
 
I. House staff are encouraged to participate in departmental activities, but may not vote or 
hold office. They will not be assessed dues. 
 
J. Disciplinary action and/or other corrective measures may be taken against the individual 
providing service and/or the supervising physician when services provided exceed the scope of 
privileges granted to the supervising physician. 
 
K. Residents: 
▪ Residents shall be subject to supervision by an active member of the medical staff. As 
the resident gains clinical skills, the intensity of the supervision will decrease. The final 
responsibility for the supervision of residents lies with the supervising physician. The 
supervising physician shall document that supervision by making timely and pertinent 
entries in the medical record. 
 
▪ Residents will not be granted membership into the medical staff. 
 
L. Fellows: 
▪ Fellows who have not been granted Hospital privileges by the Board shall be subject 
to supervision by an active member of the medical staff. As the fellow gains clinical 
skills, the intensity of the supervision will decrease. The final responsibility for the 
supervision of fellows who have not been granted Hospital privileges lies with the 
supervising physician. The supervising physician shall document that supervision by 
making timely and pertinent entries in the medical record. 
 
▪ Clinical fellows in certain training programs may apply for Hospital privileges as 
members of the medical staff. Clinical fellows granted membership to the medical staff 
shall have their clinical privileges defined and granted by the medical staff Board as 
described in the Medical Staff Bylaws. Clinical fellows granted Hospital privileges 
may be excluded from the Emergency Call Panel at the discretion of the applicable 
section All procedures that the fellow is authorized to perform without direct 
supervision will be so indicated by the fellowship program director or designee in the 
fellow’s procedure log or electronically. The fellowship program will retain 
documentation of such authorization. GME/RES/07 
   
 
 
 
▪ If there is a procedure that the fellow is privileged to perform without the presence of 
the supervising/attending physician, the attending/supervising physician will not be 
responsible for signatures required for chart completion. 
 
M. Questions or concerns that arise regarding house staff should be directed to the GME office. 