 GME/ADM/15 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME Section: Administrative 
Title: GME Vendor Interaction Policy Reference #: GME/ADM/15 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 2/3/2011 Last Date Reviewed: 7/8/20141/30/2018 
Last Date Revised: 7/8/2014 
 
PURPOSE: 
This policy covers all residents and fellows participating in ACGME-accredited postgraduate medical 
education programs sponsored by the Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC). 
References in this policy to “residents” also apply to “fellows” unless specifically stated otherwise.  
 
POLICY: 
The purpose of the policy is to ensure that graduate medical education activities at Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center and affiliated training are not compromised through vendor influence, either 
collectively or through interactions with individual residents and fellows. This policy addresses 
resident/fellow behavior and relationships with vendors in educational contexts, which may include 
clinical training sites. The goal of this policy is to further the professional accountability in trainees to 
their patients and colleagues. Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center and the primary clinical 
training sites, including the Lake Physician Group clinics, support policies governing vendor practices 
and conflicts of interest, and all residents and fellows are expected to observe local policies.  
 
While partnerships between industry and physicians may further mutual interests to improve clinical 
management of diseases, improve patient care and support educational opportunities for resident 
education through grants, some relationships with vendors create potential conflicts of interest for health 
care providers. A conflict of interest occurs when reasonable observers could conclude that professional 
requirements of a physician’s roles are or will be compromised due to the influence by a vendor through 
gifts or services unrelated to the benefit of patients. At times, the appearance of influence, even when 
not connected to a specific benefit to the physician, can create an atmosphere of doubt about the 
physician’s motivations.  
 
The following descriptions of allowable and prohibited practices is not intended to be exhaustive, and 
any other interactions between residents and fellows and vendor representatives that have the 
appearance of compromising impartiality in clinical or academic practices are likewise discouraged.  
Because residents train in many different venues within and outside Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center, it is possible that they will encounter conflicting policy statements on various aspects of 
vendor interactions and conflict of interest. Where a conflict exists between this policy and that of 
another organization, it is the policy of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center GME department 
that the stricter policy will apply to a given situation within that organization.  
 
Pharmaceutical Samples  
The acceptance by a resident or fellow of free pharmaceutical samples for delivery to patients is not 
allowed except when approved explicitly by the medical director and Pharmacy and Therapeutics  GME/ADM/15 
Page 2 of 4 
committee or equivalent at a clinical site and when reviewed with a supervising faculty physician. One 
example of an acceptable use would be in an OLOLRMC clinical trial. Acceptance of pharmaceutical 
samples for self-use is strictly prohibited for all residents and fellows.  
 
 
Vendor Gifts  
“Gifts” refers to items of value given without explicit expectation of something in return. Gifts may also 
include outside meals at restaurants, promotional items, services such as transportation, invitations to 
participate in social events, promotional items, business courtesies, meals and beverages,  
and “ghost-writing” of scholarly works on behalf of the resident or fellow. OLOLRMC residents and 
fellows may not accept gifts or services valued at more than $50.00, for themselves or on behalf of 
OLOLRMC, individually or as a group, from any vendor or manufacturer of a health care product or 
from the representative of any such vendor or manufacturer. This includes food supplied at educational 
conferences as well as meals provided off-site. 
   
Vendor Sponsorship of Educational Activities  
Vendor sponsorship of GME educational activities shall take place under unrestricted grants and gifts 
only. An unrestricted grant or gift is one that is given to an OLOLRMC department or program in which 
the donor(s) have specifically identified their intent to support certain activities (such as education for 
residents). In instances where the grant is for GME educational use, the donor may not specify content, 
topic, or speaker. However, the grant may specify whether or not the purchase of food for a conference 
is allowed. Industry sponsorship for educational activities is permitted if and only if all of the following 
conditions are met:  
 
1. The donation is limited to direct support of the educational activity (e.g. a/v, honoraria, printing 
costs, space rental, etc.)  
2. The donation is made to divisions or departments for general educational purposes.  
3. No individual is designated by the vendor as the recipient of funds for travel, meeting 
registration, or housing.  
4. No industry representative may participate in or market at on- or off-site educational events.  
5. Sponsorship is in compliance with  ACGME standards.  
6. No food or other refreshments, gifts, free samples, books, or promotional materials with the 
manufacturer, drug, or device name imprinted are available at educational events.  
7. Vendors may be acknowledged in a sign at the event, website acknowledgement, or in the 
written program.  
 
 
Vendor Training  
Vendors may orient, train, and advise residents and fellows on the proper use or calibration of a product 
that has already been acquired by a particular institution. In such cases, the vendor is present as a  GME/ADM/15 
Page 3 of 4 
consultant and must solely advise on the specific device and should not be allowed to market other 
products. Supervising faculty physicians must ensure that vendor involvement in any clinical activities is 
disclosed to patients/surrogates verbally and in writing and patients/surrogates must assent.  Vendors 
must be identified as such so that they are not mistaken for clinicians.  
Vendors may sponsor resident and fellow training on equipment already in use at OLOLRMC or 
affiliated sites. In situations where the training is to take place at a site distant to OLOLRMC, the vendor 
may not contribute to a specific resident’s travel, housing, or per diem expenses incurred as part of this 
training, but may contribute to an unrestricted grant that could be used by the program to reimburse 
residents for travel costs and per diem according to OLOLRMC travel policy. Vendor contribution to 
individuals is limited to waiver of any tuition or fees, and instruction manuals specifically related to the 
operation of the equipment. 
  
Participation in Industry-Sponsored Programs  
Residents and fellows may not participate as paid presenters or speakers in industry-sponsored programs 
such as lectures and panels without express written permission of the program director. Residents and 
fellows participating in such activity must report for duty hour purposes the actual time spent in the 
activity, and must also disclose to the program director the amount of any compensation offered, 
including non-monetary items. 
  
Industry-Sponsored Scholarships  
Vendor-provided funds for resident and fellow scholarships must be directed to a central fund within the 
academic department of the residency and should not designate an individual resident or fellow as 
recipient. Corporate contributions to underwrite resident and fellow positions are likewise prohibited 
unless directed to a central fund and not designated for the use of any individual resident or fellow.  
  
Purchase Decisions  
While residents and fellows do not typically participate in institution-level purchase decisions, more 
senior trainees may be appointed to committees with responsibility for supply or equipment choices. For 
residents and fellows involved with vendor decisions, the following conditions apply:  
 
1. Residents and fellows who sit on purchasing committees must disclose to the committee chair 
the following in writing prior to influencing purchasing/joining the committee AND each year 
while making/influencing purchasing decisions on behalf of any unit of OLOLRMC. Disclosures 
should be made to the chair of the standing or ad hoc committee charged with purchasing, and 
the chair of the person’s department/supervisor:  
a. The names of vendors with whom the resident or fellow has at any time accepted gifts or 
funding including: Research funding, speaker fees, visiting professorships, advisory 
board compensations, travel funds, etc. AND  
b. The amount of compensation received per year for each discrete financial relationship 
with each vendor.  
2.  When a resident or fellow member of the committee or individual purchaser has had financial 
ties with a manufacturer within the past two years whose products are being considered for 
purchase or lease, that person must:  
a. Recues him/herself from the committee’s discussion of that vendor’s product and 
competing products being considered, which means at minimum to leave the room during 
deliberations.   GME/ADM/15 
Page 4 of 4 
b. The resident or fellow should not vote on the product in question or its competitors NOR 
attempt to persuade or dissuade fellow members of the committee from voting for the 
product.  
c. In instances where there is no standing committee, such as when an individual is charged 
with making a decision, that individual should convene an ad hoc committee which will 
be governed by this policy.  
 
Program Monitoring of Resident-Vendor Representative Interactions  
Program leadership should be aware of and discuss with residents any interaction with representatives 
from vendors to ensure that any contacts are within the scope and spirit of this policy. Interactions that 
appear to place the resident in a position of obligation to or influence by, the vendor, should be explicitly 
discouraged.  
 
Programs should provide training to residents and fellows on vendor relations and conflicts of interest, 
including reference to this policy and other relevant institutional policies. Program directors are 
encouraged to include assessment of vendor interactions as part of the semi-annual review process, and 
require documentation of vendor interactions in resident/fellow portfolios. Programs should correct 
actions as needed to ensure that the policies described here are observed.  
 
Program directors must communicate this policy to their trainees as part of the program orientation, and 
reinforce it through inclusion in program handbooks and other information sites for resident reference.  
 