 
GME/RES/05 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME  Section/Chapter: Resident 
Title: Resident Moonlighting 
Policy Reference 
#: GME/RES/05 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 4/11/2008 Last Review Date: 02/15/23 
Last Revision Date: 02/15/23 
 
A capitalized word has the meaning as first defined in the policy.  Unless otherwise defined, all other capitalized words have the 
same meaning as ascribed to them by the ACGME Glossary of Terms. 
 
PURPOSE:  
To establish criteria for OLOL sponsored residents participating in Moonlighting activities  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
When used in this policy, these terms have the following meaning: 
 
Moonlighting:  Professional activities outside of the scope of the residency program, which includes 
volunteer work or service in a clinical setting, or  employment that is not required by the residency 
program. 
 
External moonlighting: any moonlighting outside of FMOLHS.  
 
Internal moonlighting: any moonlighting within FMOLHS. 
 
POLICY: 
A. Residency training is a full-time  educational endeavor . It will be the re sponsibility of the 
Program Director to ensure that the resident’s moonlighting activities do not interfere with the 
ability of the reside nt to achieve the goals and objectives of  the program, the resident’s 
educational performance, nor the resident’s opportunities for rest, relaxation, and independent 
study. It is the sole discretion of each Pr ogram Director to dete rmine whether outside 
activities interfere with the responsibiliti es, duties and assignments of the residency 
program. Should adverse effects be noted, the Pr ogram Director may withdraw approval for 
and/or restrict the resident’s moonlighting activities. 
 
B. Each residency program will  develop written policies a nd procedures concerning 
moonlighting and other profes sional activities outside the program. These policies and 
procedures will comply with ACGME Institu tional Requirements and RC requirements for 
the specialty. These will be submitted to the GMEC for review and approval.  
 
C. Residents cannot be required to engage in moonlighting activities.   
GME/RES/05 
D. Moonlighting is not permitted for residents in their first year of training. 
 
 
E. Residents requesting approval for moonlighting must: 
 
1) Complete and submit to the Program Director an OLOL Resident Moonlighting Request 
form indicating the nature, duration and lo cation of the outside activity. Approved 
requests must be signed by the Program Dir ector and maintained as a part of the 
resident’s permanent record. 
 
F. Internal and external moonli ghting activities will be counted  toward the 80-hour weekly 
limit on duty hours. 
 
G. Documentation of resident moon lighting is part of all annual program evaluations and the 
annual institutional review.  
 
H. In the instance of external moonlighting: 
 
1) It is the responsibility of the resident to  obtain and provide professional liability 
insurance (malpractice) cove rage for all external moon lighting/other professional 
activities which are not an official part of the resident’s training program.  
2) Residents must use their in dividual DEA numbers for m oonlighting activities. The 
institutional number cannot be used for moonlighting activities. 
3) It is the responsibility of the resident w ho plans to moonlight to obtain licensure for 
unsupervised medical practice in the state where moonlighting will be done.  
 