 GME/ADM/03 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME Section: Administrative 
Title: Resident Evaluation and Promotion 
Policy 
Reference #: GME/ADM/03 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 4/11/2008 Review Date: 6/23/23 
Revision Date: 6/23/23 
 
 
A capitalized word has the meaning as first defined in the policy.  Unless otherwise defined, all other capitalized words have the same 
meaning as ascribed to them by the ACGME Glossary of Terms. 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to de fine the overall process for resident evaluation and promotion from 
one postgraduate level to anothe r in an OLOL sponsored gradua te medical education program 
following satisfactory completion of each 12-month period in the program. 
 
POLICY: 
A. Each program will have written guidelines and procedures regarding evaluation and 
promotion that are specific to it s residents and its specialty’s requirements. It is expected that 
program-specific guidelines will conform at a mi nimum with these guidelines from Academic 
Affairs.  
 
B.   Each resident will meet with an assign ed faculty advisor, Prog ram Director, Associate 
Program Director, or Chief Resident periodica lly, at least twice each  academic year for a 
Semi-Annual meeting. Information to be presen ted and reviewed at the Semi-Annual meeting 
will include all evaluation and performance material availabl e since the last Semi-Annual 
meeting, along with input from the program’s Clinical Comp etency Committee (CCC), in 
which the program’s faculty have reviewed, discussed and offer insight about each individual 
resident’s performance. The summary will be  submitted electronically and signed by the 
faculty advisor via the residency management system (RMS), shared with the resident 
electronically, saved to the resident’s RMS file, and copied to the Program Director. 
 
C.  The program’s Clinical Competency Committe e (CCC) will evaluate each resident at least 
twice each academic year. Pediat ric Milestone data will be reported to the ACGME bi-
annually as required. 
 
D.  CCC reviews will be summarized for the reside nt’s file and for review  at the time of Semi-
Annual meeting. Each resident will have th e opportunity to provide written additions or 
comments in response to the summary. The summa ry will be submitted electronically and 
signed by the faculty advi sor via the residency management system (RMS), shared with the 
resident electronically, saved to the resident’s RMS file and copied to the Program Director.  
  GME/ADM/03 
 
E. CCC recommendations regarding pr omotion to the next program ye ar level will be made by 
April/May of each academic year.  
 
F. The Program Director will incorpor ate CCC recommendations in making the final 
determination regarding advancement to the next program level. Deficiencies will be 
addressed in accordance with the Resident Due Process Policy. 
 
G. In instances where a resident’s agreement will not be renewed, or when a resident will not be 
promoted to the next level of training, the program will provide the resident with written 
notice of intent 4 months prior to the end of the resident’s current agreement or as soon as 
reasonably possible, except in the case when the cause for non-promotion/non-reappointment 
occurred within the final 4 months.  In such cases house officers will be notified in writing 
with as much notice as possible. 
 
H. In instances where a resident’s agreement will not be renewed, or when a resident will not be 
promoted to the next level of tr aining, residents have the right to request formal review of the 
reportable action under the Resident Due Process Policy. 
 