Reference: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.D.1b 
GME/ADM/04 
Page 1 of 7 
4839231.v1 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME Section: Administrative 
 
Title: 
 
Resident Due Process 
Policy 
Reference #: GME/ADM/04 
Supersedes 
#: 
 
Date of Origination: 11/13/2007 Last Review 
Date: 2/5/24 
Last Revision Date: 2/5/24 GMEC 
Approval: 2/26/24 
 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To detail the due process procedure(s) that is available to OLOL sponsored residents/fellows in 
addressing actions which could result in Probation, Suspension, Dismissal, Non-Renewal of a 
resident’s agreement, Non-Promotion or other actions that could significantly threaten a resident’s 
intended career development. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
When used in this policy, these terms have the following meaning: 
 
Adverse Action: An action taken with respect to a resident which is to be accorded due process 
consistent with ACGME Requirements or this Policy. Adverse Actions include Suspension, 
Dismissal, Non-Renewal and Non-Promotion. 
 
Dismissal: The act of ending a resident’s participation in a residency program prior to the resident’s 
successful completion of the course of training. 
 
Grievance & Fair Hearing Committee: A subcommittee of the GMEC as described by the OLOL 
Resident Grievance & Fair Hearing Policy. 
Letter of Deficiency : This letter provides the resident with (a) a notice of the deficiency, (b) an 
opportunity to alleviate the deficiency and (c) a clearly defined time frame and action plan for 
resolving the deficiency. 
 
Clinical Competency Committee: A required body comprising three or more members of the program 
faculty that is advisory to the Program Director and assesses the clinical competency and reviews the 
progress of all residents in the residency program. 
 
Probation: An intermediate level of discipline in which the resident is permitted to continue engaging 
in the residency program within the confines of a Probationary Action Plan. 
 
Non-Promotion: A decision to not promote the resident to the next post-graduate year of training. Reference: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.D.1b 
GME/ADM/04 
Page 2 of 7 
4839231.v1 
 
Non-Renewal: A decision not to renew a resident’s contract for the next post -graduate year of 
training. 
 
Remediation: The process of improving resident performance to meet applicable academic 
standards, requirements, policies and procedures. 
 
Suspension: A formal level of discipline in which the resident is temporarily restricted from 
participating in clinical, didactic or research activities associated with the resident’s residency 
program. 
 
POLICY: 
A. Residents are expected to meet and adhere to the academic, clinical and professional 
standards set forth by the ACGME’s Institutional and Program Requirements, as well as 
the requirements of the sponsoring institution and the residency program. During 
orientation, residents will be provided with a Residency Manual, containing all rules and 
policies relating to due process procedures. Additionally, access to such rules and policies 
and other pertinent information is available through the residency webpage which can be 
accessed at www.brpedsresidency.com and OLOL’s intranet site, TeamLink. 
 
B. A resident may be placed on Probation, Dismissed, or other Adverse Action may be taken 
for cause, including but not limited to: 
▪ Unsatisfactory academic or clinical performance (failure of in-service exams, 
failure of content board review quizzes, specific rotation evaluations, etc.) 
▪ Failure to comply with the policies, rules and regulations of the resident’s program, 
OLOLRMC and other training facilities 
▪ Violation of federal and/or state laws, regulations, or ordinances 
▪ Acts of moral turpitude 
▪ Insubordination 
▪ Conduct that is detrimental to patient care 
▪ Unprofessional conduct 
▪ Failure to abide by the Resident Responsibilities set forth in Section 3 of the 
Resident Agreement of Appointment 
▪ Demonstration of Resident impairment following which the Resident does not 
accept the result of investigation of impairment and/or cooperate in developing and 
participating in an appropriate plan of action as contemplated by the Resident 
Impairment Policy. 
C. The following are grounds for immediate Dismissal: 
▪ Failure to maintain medical licensure 
▪ Conviction of a felony 
▪ Failure to satisfy the Section 4. B. “ Resident Representations and Warranties” of 
the Resident Agreement of Appointment Reference: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.D.1b 
GME/ADM/04 
Page 3 of 7 
4839231.v1 
 
 
D. Remediation 
 
1. Structured feedback: All residents will be provided routine feedback that is consistent 
with the educational program. Feedback techniques include verbal feedback, written 
rotational evaluations and written summative evaluations. 
 
2. Letter of Deficiency: When a resident has been identified as deficient, it is expected 
that he/she will receive routine structured feedback in order to identify and correct the 
issue. A Letter of Deficiency will be issued to a resident when an area of improvement 
or deficiency has become evident, and the Program Director deems that routine 
feedback is not effecting the necessary improvement or that the deficiency is significant 
enough to warrant something more than routine feedback. Issuance of a Letter of 
Deficiency is intended to put the resident on notice that an area of improvement or 
deficiency has become evident, and that the resident should take appropriate corrective 
action. 
 
Letters of Deficiency must be co -signed by the resident, the program director (or 
designee) and the program coordinator. The Letter of Deficiency will contain the 
following components: 
▪ A description of the deficiency(ies); 
▪ Written feedback from the Program Director on the resident’s deficiencies; 
▪ A corrective action plan with performance requirements that the resident must 
satisfy; and 
▪ A time period not to exceed the greater of ninety (90) days or the time period listed 
in the Letter of Deficiency for the resident to implement such corrective action; 
however, the Letter of Deficiency may be renewed or otherwise extended. 
 
This action step does not trigger a report to any outside agencies. If the resident is not 
in agreement with the terms of the Letter of Deficiency, he or she has the right to file 
an appeal to the Clinical Competency Committee (“CCC”). The CCC will review an 
appeal submitted by a resident pertaining to the Letter of Deficiency and may meet 
with the resident regarding the Letter of Deficiency prior to making a recommendation 
to the Program Director affirming or modifying the Letter of Deficiency. Unless 
connected to an Adverse Action (e.g. Dismissal, Non -Promotion, etc.), receipt of a 
Letter of Deficiency does not constitute grounds for an Institution Level Hearing 
outlined in the Resident Grievance & Fair Hearing Policy. 
 
If the resident satisfactorily resolves the deficiency(ies) noted in the Letter of 
Deficiency and continues to perform acceptably thereafter, the period of unacceptable 
academic performance does not affect the resident’s intended career development. If 
the Program Director (with input from the CCC or other faculty) determines that the 
resident has failed to satisfactorily alleviate the deficiency and/or improve his/her 
overall performance to an acceptable level, the Program Director may elect to take Reference: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.D.1b 
GME/ADM/04 
Page 4 of 7 
4839231.v1 
 
further action, including but not limited to placing the resident on Probation or taking 
Adverse Actions. 
 
E. Probation. The Program Director, after receiving input from the CCC or other faculty, may 
place a resident on Probation. Probation may, but need not, be preceded by Remediation. 
Probation is designed to address academic deficits, including, but not limited to, deficits in 
medical knowledge, time management, organizational abilities, communication skills, 
procedural skills, or professionalism. Probation may also be used to help address 
professional deficits. Probation decisions may involve consulting with the DIO and 
institutional resources, as necessary. Except in extenuating circumstances, Probation 
should not be invoked for an isolated incident, including isolated underperformance on in- 
service examinations. A pattern of deficiencies should generally be documented in the 
resident’s file. 
 
1. Notice of Probation: A resident shall be notified of their Probationary status in writing, 
and the resident shall acknowledge receipt of the Notice of Probation in writing. The 
Notice of Probation will contain the following components: 
▪ A statement of the reason(s) for the Probation; 
▪ A Probationary Action Plan; 
▪ A time period  not to exceed ninety (90) days for the implementation of the 
Probationary Action Plan. 
 
a. Probationary Action Plan: The purpose of the Probationary Action Plan is to protect 
the patient population, help the resident improve their performance, and end the 
Probation. The Probationary Action Plan will contain the following components: 
▪ A description of the reason(s) for the Probation; 
▪ Performance requirements the resident must satisfy to end Probation without 
further escalation; performance requirements must be achievable within the 
time period provided; 
▪ Any limitation imposed upon the resident’s engagement with the program; and 
▪ Consequences for failing to successfully complete the Probationary Action 
Plan, including the administration of Adverse Actions. 
 
If the resident is not in agreement with the terms of the Probationary Action Plan, they 
have the right to appeal to the CCC. The CCC will review an appeal submitted by a 
resident pertaining to the Probationary Action Plan and may meet with the resident 
regarding the Probationary Action Plan prior to making a recommendation to the 
Program Director affirming or modifying the Probationary Action Plan. Being placed 
on Probation is not an Adverse Action which entitles a resident to appeals under the 
Resident Grievance & Fair Hearing Policy. 
 
2. Monitoring. Where a resident is permitted to continue engaging with the program, his 
or her performance should be monitored during the period of his or her Probation. The 
resident’s performance against the Probationary Action Plan should be documented, 
and at least one evaluation of his or her progress should occur at the halfway point of 
the time period of the Probation. Reference: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.D.1b 
GME/ADM/04 
Page 5 of 7 
4839231.v1 
 
3. Termination of Probation.  If the resident satisfactorily resolves the reason(s) for 
Probation noted in the Notice of Probation and Probationary Action Plan and continues 
to perform acceptably thereafter, the resident will be removed from Probation. 
However, documentation regarding the resident’s Probation will remain a part of the 
resident’s file. If the Program Director (with input from the CCC) determines that the 
resident has failed to satisfactorily resolve the reason(s) for Probation, the Program 
Director will administer the consequences listed in the Probationary Action Plan, 
including, for example, taking Adverse Actions. 
 
F. Adverse Actions. The following actions may be taken by the Program Director or the DIO 
where warranted. 
 
1. Suspension: The Program Director or his/her designee may temporarily suspend the 
trainee from part or all of the resident’s usual and regular assignments in the training 
program, including, but not limited to, clinical and/or didactic duties, when the removal 
of the resident from the clinical service is required for the best interests of patients, 
staff and/or trainee due to seriously deficient performance or seriously inappropriate 
conduct. Suspension may be coupled with or followed by other academic actions. 
 
A resident who is Suspended shall receive written notice of the Suspension as soon as 
reasonably possible following any verbal notice provided to the resident. Such written 
notice will also provide notice of opportunity to appeal this decision in accordance with 
the procedures found in Resident Grievance & Fair Hearings Policy, Section B, Step 
II. Formal Resolution – Institutional Level Hearing. The resident shall acknowledge 
receipt of the notice of intent in writing. A resident may be Suspended from a residency 
program pending appeal of a Dismissal. 
2. Dismissal: Dismissal of a resident can arise, but is not limited to, the following 
circumstances: 
a. Academic and/or professional deficits (including gross negligence, inability to 
develop competency within the field, misconduct, unprofessional behavior, 
and/or prior Non -Promotion) that, in the discretion of the Program Director 
and/or DIO, are significant, repeated or severe; 
b. Abandonment of patient care or training demonstrated by a failure to show to 
training or work for a series of days without notice or request for leave, pending 
appropriate consideration of any extenuating circumstances; 
c. Failure to participate in, or successfully complete, a Probationary Action Plan; 
d. Failure to participate in, or successfully complete, the corrective action plan set 
forth in a Letter of Deficiency; and/or 
e. Failure to maintain the requirements of employment, as outlined in the resident 
contract. 
 
If a resident is Dismissed, the resident must be given written notice of the Dismissal as 
soon as reasonably possible following any verbal notice provided to the resident. The 
resident shall acknowledge receipt of the notice in writing. The resident has a right to Reference: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.D.1b 
GME/ADM/04 
Page 6 of 7 
4839231.v1 
 
appeal the decision and request review in accordance with the procedures found in 
Resident Grievance & Fair Hearings Policy, Section B, Step II. Formal Resolution – 
Institutional Level Hearing. 
 
3. Non-Renewal: If the decision is made to not renew a trainee’s contract for the next 
academic year, the program director must notify the trainee in writing that his/her 
appointment will not be renewed.  If a resident’s contract will not be renewed, the 
resident must be given written notice of intent not to renew the resident’s contract with 
notice of the opportunity to appeal this decision in accordance with the procedures 
found in Resident Grievance & Fair Hearings Policy, Section B, Step II. Formal 
Resolution – Institutional Level Hearing. 
 
When a decision has been made not to renew a trainee’s contract, whether the reason 
for non-renewal of the contract is the resident’s performance, conduct or other similar 
cause or for other reasons unrelated to performance, e.g. loss of financial support, the 
Program Director must give written notice of nonrenewal of the contract no later than 
four (4) months prior to the end of the resident’s current contract period.  However, if 
the primary reason for the nonrenewal occurs during that four (4) month period, as 
much notice as is reasonably possible under the circumstances should be provided. The 
resident shall acknowledge receipt of the notice of intent in writing. 
 
4. Non-Promotion: The decision not to promote a resident to the next post graduate year 
of training is based upon a resident’s competency as demonstrated through evaluations 
and achievement of applicable Milestones in compliance with the Resident Evaluation 
and Promotion policy, and rests with the Program Director. If a review of a resident’s 
evaluations and an assessment of the resident’s overall progress in the program 
indicates that a trainee has not demonstrated the necessary criteria for promotion to the 
next level, the program director may elect to not promote the trainee to the next level. 
If a resident will not be Promoted, the resident must be given written notice of intent 
not to promote the resident with notice of opportunity to appeal this decision in 
accordance with the procedures found in Resident Grievance & Fair Hearings Policy, 
Section B, Step II. Formal Resolution – Institutional Level Hearing. When a decision 
has been made not to promote a resident to the next post -graduate year of training, 
whether the reason for non -promotion of the contract is the resident’s performance, 
conduct or other similar cause or for other reasons unrelated to performance, e.g. loss 
of financial support, the Program Director must give written notice of non -promotion 
no later than four (4) months prior to the end of the resident’s current contract period. 
However, if the primary reason for the non-promotion occurs during that four (4) month 
period, as much notice as is reasonably possible under the circumstances should be 
provided. The resident shall acknowledge receipt of the notice of intent in writing. 
 
G. Appeal of Institutional Level Hearing 
 
Following the decision of the Grievance & Fair Hearing Committee resulting from an 
Institutional Level Hearing requested by a resident in connection with an Adverse Action, Reference: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.D.1b 
GME/ADM/04 
Page 7 of 7 
4839231.v1 
 
any party to such Institutional Level Hearing may appeal this decision in accordance with 
the procedures found in Resident Grievance & Fair Hearings Policy, Section C, Step III. 
Formal Resolution – Chief Medical Officer (CMO) Level. 
 
H. Reporting Actions. 
 
1. The Program Director is responsible for reporting any of the Adverse Actions included 
in this Policy to the DIO and the DIO is responsible for reporting Adverse Actions to 
the Louisiana State Board of Medical Examiners (LSBME) and other agencies or 
organizations as required by applicable law or regulations. Adverse Actions must be 
reported to the LSBME within thirty (30) days of the Adverse Action. 