Source: Common Program Requirements (Residency), VI.A.2 
GME/RES/03 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME Section: Resident 
Title: Resident Supervision 
Policy 
Reference #: GME/RES/03 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 4/11/2008 Review Date: 6/23/23 
Revision Date: 6/23/23 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to establish supervision standards, roles, responsibilities and patient care 
activities of residents in OLOL sponsored graduate medical education programs.  
 
DEFINITIONS:  
A. Conditional Independence: Graded, progressive responsibility for patient care with defined 
oversight.  
 
POLICY: 
A. Program Directors have the responsibility, authority and accountability to ensure adequate 
supervision of residents at all times.   
 
B. Each OLOL sponsored program will establish a written program -specific supervision policy 
consistent with the institutional policy and its respective ACGME Common and specialty/sub-
specialty specific Program Requirements.  
 
C. Supervision in the setting of graduate medical education provides safe and effective care to 
patients; ensures each resident’s development of the skills, knowledge, and attitudes required 
to enter the unsupervised practice of medicine; and establishes a foundation for continued 
professional growth. 
 Within the scope of the residency program, all r esidents will function under the 
supervision of appropriately credentialed, qualified faculty and/or medical staff at all 
clinical sites utilized for the education of residents. Each patient must have an 
identifiable, appropriately credentialed and privileged attending physician (or licensed 
independent practitioner as approved by the specialty specific ACGME Review 
Committee) who is ultimately responsible for that patient’s care.  
 Residents and faculty members must inform patients of their respective roles in each 
patient’s care when providing direct patient care.  
 This information must be available to residents, faculty members, other members of the 
health care team, and patients.  
  
 
D. The program must demonstrate that the appropriate level of supervision in place for all residents 
is based on each resident’s level of training and ability, as well as patient complexity and acuity. 
Supervision may be exercised through a variety of methods, as appropriate to the situation. Source: Common Program Requirements (Residency), VI.A.2 
GME/RES/03 
 
E. Levels of Supervision: to promote appropriate resident supervision while providing for graded 
authority and responsibility, the program must use the following classification of supervision: 
1. Direct Supervision:  
i. The supervising physician is physically present with the resident during key portions 
of the patient interaction; or, 
ii. The supervising physician and/or patient is not physically present with the resident 
and the supervising physician is concurrently monitoring the patient care through 
appropriate telecommunication technology.   
2. Indirect Supervision: 
i. The supervising physici an is not providing physical or concurrent visual or audio 
supervision but is immediately available to the resident for guidance and is available 
to provide appropriate direct supervision. 
3. Oversight 
i. The supervising physician is available to provide review of procedures/encounters 
with feedback provided after care is delivered.  
 
F. Appropriate supervision is essential for patient safety and high-quality teaching. Supervision is 
also contextual. There is tremendous diversity of resident -patient interactions, ed ucation and 
training locations, and resident skills and abilities, even at the same level of the educational 
program. The degree of supervision for a resident is expected to evolve progressively as the 
resident gains more experience, even with the same patient condition or procedure. The level of 
supervision for each resident is commensurate with that resident’s level of independence in 
practice; this level of supervision may be enhanced based on factors such as patient safety, 
complexity, acuity, urgency, risk of serious safety events, or other pertinent variables. 
 
G. The privilege of progressive authority and responsibility, conditional independence, and a 
 supervisory role in patient care delegated to each resident must be assigned by the program 
 director and faculty members.  
 
1.  The program director must evaluate each resident’s abilities based on specific 
 criteria, guided by the ACGME Milestones.  
 
2.  Faculty members functioning as supervising physicians must delegate portions of  care 
to residents based on the needs of the patient and the skills of each resident.  
 
3. Senior residents or fellows should serve in a supervisory role to junior residents in 
 recognition of their progress toward independence, based on the needs of each patient 
 and the skills of the individual resident or fellow. 
 
4. Each resident must know t he limits of their scope of authority, and the circumstances 
under which the resident is permitted to act with conditional independence.  
 
H. Programs must set guidelines for circumstances and events in which residents must 
communicate with the supervising faculty member(s), such as the transfer of a patient to an 
intensive care unit, or end-of-life decisions.   Source: Common Program Requirements (Residency), VI.A.2 
GME/RES/03 
 
I. Faculty supervision assignments must be of sufficient duration to assess the knowledge and 
skills of each resident and to delegate to the resident the appropriate level of patient care 
authority and responsibility.  
 
J. Programs must educate all residents and faculty members in recognition of the signs of fatigue 
and sleep deprivation, alertness management and fatigue mitigation processes. 
 
 