Reference: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.E 
GME/ADM/09 
Page 1 of 5 
4839240.v1 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME Section: Administrative 
 
Title: 
 
Resident Grievance & Fair Hearing Policy 
Policy 
Reference #: GME/ADM/09 
Supersedes #:  
Date of 
Origination: April 14, 2010 Review Date: 2/5/2024 
Revision Date: 3/19/2024 GMEC 
Approval: 
3/25/2024 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to establish a mechanism for submitting and processing 
resident/fellow grievances within OLOL sponsored graduate medical education programs and 
minimizing conflicts of interest. 
 
DEFINITION: 
When used in this policy, these terms have the following meaning: 
Grievance: An expression of dissatisfaction regarding the policies and procedures of the residency 
training program (including the perceived unfair or improper application thereof), the resident or 
fellow’s working environment, academic concerns, or any unresolved dispute or complaint with 
his or her Program Director, faculty member, or house staff colleague. 
 
 
POLICY: 
A. Grievances will be addressed in a confidential manner to the extent practical and without 
fear of retaliation. A good faith effort will be made by an aggrieved resident/fellow and the 
Program Director to resolve a grievance at an informal level. If a resident or fellow is 
unable to resolve his/her grievance directly with the person(s) involved and/or the Program 
Director, the aggrieved resident/fellow can report a Grievance using the Grievance 
procedure set forth in this policy. 
 
B. This policy does not apply where the resident/fellow believes he/she has been harassed or 
discriminated against on the basis of his/her race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, 
disability, pregnancy, age, handicap, veteran status, or any other legally protected 
classification. In such case(s), the resident/fellow shall follow the procedures set forth in 
the FMOLHS Harassment Free Workplace policy (HR.06.007). 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Step I. Informal Resolution – Program Level: 
 
1. The aggrieved resident/fellow must submit a written statement of Grievance to the 
Program Director. This notification must occur within fourteen (14) calendar days 
of the event precipitating the Grievance and should include the following Reference: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.E 
GME/ADM/09 
Page 2 of 5 
4839240.v1 
 
information: (1) factual description of the Grievance; (2) the hospital and/or program 
policy that may have been violated, if applicable; (3) the date on which the event 
precipitating the Grievance occurred, and (4) the remedy sought. The letter should 
include as attachments any documentation relevant to the Grievance. 
 
2. Within a reasonable period of time after notice of the Grievance, the Program 
Director will set a mutually convenient time to discuss the Grievance with the 
resident/ fellow and attempt to reach a solution. 
 
3. The Program Director shall render a decision within 30 days after the necessary 
discussions are held. Step I of the informal process of the Grievance procedure will 
be deemed complete when the Program Director informs the aggrieved 
resident/fellow in writing of the final decision. 
 
4. A copy of the Program Director’s final decision will be sent to the Designated 
Institutional Officer (DIO). 
 
B. Step II. Formal Resolution – Institutional Level Hearing 
 
1. For the purposes of these Sections B and C, a Program Director’s decision to take 
Adverse Action against a resident, as defined and outlined in the Resident Due 
Process Policy, is deemed a Step I decision. The procedures contained herein are 
equally applicable to grievance appeals and appeal of a decision connected to 
Adverse Actions. Any reference to grievance below should be understood to 
include an appeal of an Adverse Action. 
2. If the resident/fellow is not satisfied with the Step I decision, the resident/fellow 
may appeal the Program Director’s decision and pursue formal resolution of the 
grievance at the institutional level. 
 
a. The appeal of the grievance must be in writing and include copies of the final 
written decision from the Program Director. The appeal of grievance must be 
presented to the DIO (or designee) within ten (10) calendar days after receiving 
the program level decision. The grievance will be considered final on the 
basis of the program level decision if such a request is not presented within the 
ten (10) day period. 
b. Upon receiving the grievance appeal, the DIO (or designee) will conduct a 
preliminary investigation as a background for analysis and discussion and meet 
with the resident/fellow within fourteen (14) days after receiving the grievance 
appeal to hear his/her viewpoint. 
 
c. After reviewing the grievance and other information gathered from the DIO’s 
preliminary investigation and meeting with resident/fellow, the DIO will 
confirm the grievance appropriately falls within the scope of the Resident 
Grievance & Fair Hearing Policy, and if so, refer the grievance appeal to the Reference: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.E 
GME/ADM/09 
Page 3 of 5 
4839240.v1 
 
Grievance & Fair Hearing Committee (the “Committee”). The Committee will 
review and carefully consider all material presented by the resident/fellow, 
his/her Program Director and any other party complained of, as applicable, at a 
scheduled meeting, following the protocol outlined below. 
 
i. Composition: The DIO will appoint the Committee which will constitute a 
subcommittee of the GMEC that includes a non -voting Chair, the voting 
individual or designee responsible for monitoring quality improvement or 
patient safety, one voting individual who is actively involved in GME and is 
outside the program, and a voting resident. The DIO will appoint the 
Committee Chair. The DIO will notify the resident/fellow and Program 
Director of the composition of the Committee. The resident/fellow filing the 
grievance may object to the composition of the Committee within five (5) 
days of the date the DIO made such notification. Upon the discovery of a 
conflict of interest between a member of the Committee and the 
resident/fellow filing the grievance, the committee member will be 
substituted with another member of the GMEC for the particular grievance. 
 
ii. Hearing Date: The Chair of the Committee will set the date, time, and place 
for a hearing which is mutually convenient to the Committee members, the 
resident/fellows, and Program Director, as applicable, and will provide 
written notice thereof at least fourteen (14) calendar days before the date of 
the hearing. 
 
iii. Attendance: All Committee members shall be present throughout the 
hearing. The resident/fellow and Program Director (as applicable) must 
personally appear at the Committee meeting and are permitted to designate 
a faculty member or other representative as his/her advocate at the 
Committee hearing. The resident/fellow and Program Director (and his/her 
representative) may be present during the entire hearing, excluding 
deliberations. If the resident/fellow fails to appear and has not provided 
notice to the Committee Chair of good reason/cause (e.g. illness), the hearing 
will proceed without the resident/fellow and the Committee will render a 
decision despite the resident’s absence. 
 
 
A resident/fellow’s failure to appear absent notice of good reason/cause will 
be deemed to have waived their right to contest or appeal the decision of the 
Grievance & Fair Hearing Committee. 
 
The Committee will determine the propriety of attendance at the hearing of 
any other persons. Witnesses other than the resident/fellow, the Program 
Director, and their representatives may remain in the hearing room only 
while giving their testimony unless the Committee, the resident/fellow, and 
the Program Director agree otherwise. Reference: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.E 
GME/ADM/09 
Page 4 of 5 
4839240.v1 
 
iv. Conduct of Hearing: The Chair will preside over the hearing, determine 
procedure, ensure all parties are given a reasonable opportunity to present 
relevant oral or written information, and maintain decorum. The 
resident/fellow and the Program Director, or their representative, will have 
the right to present evidence, call and question witnesses and make 
statements in support or defense of their position. The Chair of the 
Committee will determine if information is relevant to the hearing and 
whether to allow or exclude such information. The Chair of the Committee 
may exclude any person who is disruptive. 
 
v. Decision Making: Upon conclusion of the presentation of oral and written 
information, the hearing is closed. Once the hearing is completed, it may be 
reopened, for good cause, by the Committee at any time prior to the 
rendering of its final written decision. The Committee will deliberate 
outside the presence of the involved parties. At the conclusion of the 
Committee’s deliberation, the Committee will issue a written decision. 
Decisions are determined by a majority of the voting members of the 
Committee and are final. The Committee’s written decision will include 
findings of fact, reasons for the decision, a recommendation to the DIO for 
further action, and any other comments or suggestions the Committee 
deems appropriate under the circumstances. The Committee will 
communicate its decision, in writing, to all parties directly involved with 
the grievance, within fourteen (14) calendar days of its final meeting. A 
copy will also be sent to the DIO. 
vi. All decisions of the Grievance & Fair Hearing Committee are final, unless 
the resident/fellow appeals the decision in writing to the Chief Medical 
Officer (CMO) within seven (7) calendar days of the date of the decision. 
 
C. Step III. Formal Resolution –Chief Medical Officer (CMO) Level 
 
1. If the Step II decision is unsatisfactory to a party, a final appeal may be filed by 
either party to the grievance within 10 days of receipt of the Grievance & Fair 
Hearing Committee decision. This appeal must be in writing and include all letters, 
documentation, and written responses from each level. The CMO or his/her 
designee will issue his/her final decision within fourteen (14) calendar days of the 
receipt of the Committee appeal. The CMO may affirm, reverse, or modify the 
decision of the Committee. The decision of the CMO is a final and binding decision. 
Upon conclusion of the review, a report of the final review will be provided to both 
the resident/fellow and the DIO. 
 
 
D. All time limits specified herein are calendar days. In the interest of prompt resolution, all 
grievances should be processed whenever possible within the prescribed time limits. In Reference: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.E 
GME/ADM/09 
Page 5 of 5 
4839240.v1 
 
the event of extenuating circumstances, a time limit may be extended by mutual agreement 
of both parties at each step within the process. 
 
E. This policy is not intended to, and should not be interpreted to, establish any rights beyond 
those which arise out of the Resident Agreement of Appointment.  The Program reserves 
the right to deviate from this policy when circumstances so warrant, as determined within 
the sole discretion of the Program. 
 
F. All participants in the grievance process are expected to maintain confidentiality by not 
discussing the matter under review with any third party except as may be required for 
purposes of the grievance procedure. 