 Source: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.N 
ACGME Policies and Procedures, Policy 25.00 
GME/ADM/07 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: GME Section: Administrative 
Title: 
Residency Program Support in Event of 
Substantial Disruption in Patient Care or 
Education  
Policy 
Reference #: GME/ADM/07 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 4/14/2010 Review Date: 06/23/2023 
Last Revision Date: 06/23/2023 
 
A capitalized word has the meaning as first defined in the policy.  Unless otherwise defined, all other capitalized words have the same 
meaning as ascribed to them by the ACGME Glossary of Terms. 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to address support for OLOL-sponsored residency programs in the event of 
a disaster or interruption in patient care.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
When used in this policy, these terms have the following meaning: 
 
Disaster:  A n event or set of events causing significant  alteration to the residency experience or 
substantial disruption in patient care or education at one or more residency programs. 
 
Extraordinary Circumstance: A situation or event that significantly alters the ability of a  
Sponsoring Institution and its programs to support resident/fellow education. Examples of extraordinary 
circumstances include an abrupt hospital closure, a natural disaster, or a catastrophic loss of fun ding. 
(See ACGME Policies and Procedures, Policy 25.00) 
 
POLICY: 
A. In the event of a substantial disru ption in patient care or education, Program Directors working 
with the D esignated Institutional Official (DIO  and other leadership will strive to restructure or 
reconstitute the educational experience as quickly as possible. 
 
B. OLOL will make reasonable efforts to provide assis tance for continuatio n of salar y, benefits, 
professional liability coverage, and resident assignment.  
 
C. The DIO in co nsultation with P rogram Directors and organizational leadership may request 
ACGME to invoke the Extraordinary Circumstances policy to formalize the ACGME’s oversight 
and support of OLOL’s efforts to ensure the continuation of residents’ educational experiences in 
compliance with the  applicable ACGME requirements. OLOL and i ts sp onsored re sidency 
programs will follow  the AC GME policy and procedures to address Extraordinary 
Circumstances.  
 
D. If an adequate educational experience cannot be provided for each resident because of a disaster, 
temporary transfers to other programs/institutions will be arranged until the program can provide 
an adequate educational experience for e ach of its residents. Program Directors are responsible  Source: ACGME Institutional Requirements IV.N 
ACGME Policies and Procedures, Policy 25.00 
GME/ADM/07 
for informing residents transferred to other programs  of the estimated duration  of the relocation. 
Should the initial time estimated need to be extended, the resident will be notified by the 
Program Director using written or electronic means identifying the estimated time of extension. 
 
E. If the disaster prevents the re-establishment of  an adequate educational experience within a 
reasonable amount of time following the disaster, permanent transfers  will be arranged  to the 
extent reasonably possible.  
 
F. The DIO is the primary institutional contact with the ACGME and the Institutional Review 
Committee Executive Director regarding disaster plan implementation and needs with the 
program.  
 
 