ECLS-012 (8095) 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Guest Services Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Guest Services/8095 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 (102-10314-
4066) 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 3.10.18 Review Date: 6/17/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Main door is exit door.  
• No adjacent Smoke Compartment 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
(Normal operating hours 7 days a week 24 hours per day.) 
• All available staff will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is ECLS-012 (8095) 
Page 2 of 2 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• All available staff will ensure path to exit is clear. 
• All available staff will assist those with limited English proficiencies and those with disabilities. 
• All available department leaders ensures all employees are accounted for 
• All available department leaders ensures each room is empty.  (This position will mark the 
door/door frame with chalk to indicate the room is empty.) 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguisher located in kitchenette in PBX 
• Closest manual pull station location in stairwell on back hallway 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Code needed to open door.  Staff members will hold door open during emergency as needed.  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary is to exit building near linen to muster at parking garage 4 ground level 
• Secondary is the hallway leading to oasis then muster to parking garage 4 ground level 
• Only horizontal evacuations. 
 