    
Guidelines for Communicating Effectively Through an Interpreter 
When working with an interpreter, you should assess verbal and nonverbal indicators to gauge 
how well the message is being understood and the patient/family/representative’s comfort level.  
• Addressing the Patient – Address the patient directly, using first- and second- person 
terminology (“I” and “you”). In general, it is best to look directly at the patient when 
speaking to the patient. When the patient is responding, you should make eye contact as 
well. It is acceptable to look at the interpreter when he or she is conveying the patient’s 
statements.  
• U se of Language - Avoid slang terminology.  Many local words and phrases may not 
translate accurately into other languages. Avoid the use healthcare jargon. Simple language, 
short, precise questions and sentences work best.  
• Rate of Speech - Speak slowly and clearly rather than more loudly. Gauge the pace at 
which the interpreter can convey messages back and forth. Ask the interpreter at the 
beginning of the interview to inform you at any time if the conversation is proceeding too 
quickly. Provide the interpreter time to convey what has been said.  
• Interpretation – Make and initial request that everything said by the 
patient/family/representative and the healthcare provider is interpreted.  
• Acknowledge Beliefs - Encourage the interpreter to ask questions and to alert the 
healthcare provider about potential cultural misunderstandings that may arise. If the patient 
offers views or ideas counter to best practice, or safe care, acknowledge what is being said 
and attempt to work within the patient’s understanding without jeopardizing the message 
that needs to be conveyed.  
• Avoid patronizing or infantilizing the patient.  A lack of or poor English language skills 
are not a reflection of low cognitive function or a lack of education.   
• Assess Patient Understanding - Ask the patient to repeat back important information 
to ensure it was understood.  At the end of the interaction, review the material with the 
patient to ensure nothing has been missed or misunderstood. Ask the 
patient/family/representative to demonstrate a skill when appropriate.  Ask if the 
patient/family/representative has any questions.  
• Be patient with yourself and the patient/family/representative.  Providing care across a 
language barrier takes time. Communication through an interpreter requires more time than 
a non-interpreted interview.  Plan accordingly.  
Reference: 
Refugee health, (2011.) Best Practices for Communicating Through an Interpreter.  Retrieved 
December 1, 2016 from http://www.refugeehealthta.org/access-to-care/language-
access/best-practices-communicating-through-an-interpreter/  