 
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Health Information Management  
SUBJECT:  
Release of Information 
PAGES: 
15 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
Policy # and date it was last effective 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE:  
June 1990  
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
August 2020 
POLICY NUMBER:  
HIMR22 
 
Purpose: 
The purpose of this policy is to assure the sanctity of the communications between a patient and his/her health 
care provider. 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
2 
 
Policy: 
It is the policy of the Health Information Management Department that all requests for health records 
(excluding outpatient visits) including requests for patients currently under treatment, shall be directed to the 
Health Information Management Department. All information in the medical record is confidential and the 
release of information will be closely controlled. 
 
I. A properly completed and signed authorization is required for release of all health information except: 
 
A. As required by law 
B. For release to another health care provider currently involved in the care of the 
patient 
C. For medical care evaluation 
D. For research and education 
E.  See Tau Center policy and procedure for substance abuse 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
3 
POLICY: 
 
II. In keeping with the tenet of informed consent, a properly completed and signed authorization to release 
patient information shall include at least the following data: 
 
A. Patient name, date of birth and social security number (last 4 digits) to properly identify the 
correct individual. 
 B. Name of the Individual or institution that is to receive the data. 
 C. Purpose of Disclosure 
D. Specific time period to be covered and the extent or nature of information to be  released. 
E. Date that consent is signed (NOTE: date of signature must be later than date of information 
with the exception of short term and long term disability request for no more than 1 year from 
the signature date.) 
F. Signature of the patient or legal representative (original signature and/or only forms of 
electronic signatures accepted if it has a DocuSign or E Sign under signature and dates are 
required from attorneys unless it is stated that the copy serves as the original for releasing 
information). 
1. In the case of treatment given a minor without parental knowledge, the hospital shall 
refrain from releasing the portion of the record relevant to this episode of care when 
responding to a request for information for which the signed authorization is that of the 
parent or the legal representative. An authorization by the minor will be required in this 
instance.  
2. Legal representative is a parent or legal guardian. Proof of legal guardianship must be 
shown. 
  3. If a minor is married, the marriage license must be shown. 
  4. If a minor is emancipated, proof of emancipation must be shown.   
  5. Incapacitated or mentally incompetent. 
Legal guardian must show “power of attorney” or proof of “conservator” status. 
   
  6. Deceased Patients – Rule of Succession 
 
For deceased patients an executor of the estate, informant on death certificate, spouse, 
children, sibling or parent can sign release with appropriate legal documentation. 
  
 
III.  All requests for information shall be referred to a Supervisor or the Director/Manager of Health 
Information Management. The diagnosis or other medical information shall never be released by 
personnel on the nursing units or in ancillary department  
 
IV.  In-house patients requesting to review their records will be referred to Medical Records.  The 
request will be handled by established procedure, including notification of the attending physician. 
(Reference OOHIM001) 
 
V. Information released to authorized individuals/agencies shall be limited to that                        
information to fulfill the purpose stated in the authorization. 
  
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
4 
VI. Identification must be shown for those wishing to inspect/audit the records. Once the list or 
description of records to be inspected has been received, Health Information Management 
personnel will locate the records, provide portions of the record requested by review or entire 
record if so requested and make the records accessible to the inspectors with necessary and 
appropriate authorization.  During an onsite inspection, Health Information Management designee 
will remain with the inspector(s) while the records are being inspected or reviewed electronically. 
They will do so in order to assist in the review process and to ensure the security of the information 
within the records under audit. 
 
VII. Release of Information – Facsimile Transmission   
A. Outgoing patient-related information for continuity of care may be faxed to the physician of 
record without patient authorization when the physician supports the request for expedited 
communication with a reasonable explanation of need.  
B. Protected Health Information (PHI) will only be sent via fax when the request is made for 
patient care purposes.  Any other requests for PHI to be received via fax shall be approved by 
the Release of Information Supervisor or the Director/Manager of Health Information 
Management. 
C. The individual who sends the fax is responsible for documenting receipt of a fax verification 
and placing a follow-up telephone call to the fax recipient to ensure that the fax was properly 
routed.   
D. A fax coversheet will be used when faxing PHI.  The cover sheet will contain a notice alerting 
the recipient that the information is confidential.  The notice will contain instructions on action 
to be taken if the information has been received in error.   
E. In the event that a fax containing PHI has been misrouted, the sender of the fax shall contact the 
unintended recipient and request either the return or destruction of the document.  Steps shall be 
taken to remedy the problem that caused the misdirection.  The sender shall provide written 
notice to the Privacy Officer that a misrouting has occurred.  Each of these steps shall be 
documented in writing by the sender of the fax.   
 
VIII. Release of Information – Telephone 
Define what may be released over the telephone and to whom it may be released without a written 
release of information in accordance with applicable regulations for  release of information. 
 
A. General  
1. Obtain from caller patient identifying information which includes full patient name and 
date of birth; date and type of information requested; the caller’s name and telephone 
number; and physician’s office or organization with which caller is associated. 
2. Telephone release of information is generally restricted to admit or discharge date and 
attending physician without supervisory approval. 
 
B.  Physicians, Physicians’ Offices 
1. Obtain patient identifying information and information requested from the 
physician and the physician’s name and telephone number. 
 
2. Any information released over the telephone should be released only on a call 
back basis after supervisory approval.  
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
5 
 
IX. Release of Information – Information Received from Outside Facility 
A.   Do not copy any portion of information received from an outside facility to  
include with the medical record from Our Lady of the Lake Regional  
Medical Center. 
 
B.   Exception to this policy is: 
If the information received from an outside source has been made a portion of our 
medical record (i.e. the doctor sends copy of the H&P from his office to be included in 
the record as the H&P), the document shall be placed within the appropriate portion of 
the Our Lady of the Lake medical record and released according to policy. 
 
X. Charges 
A. Charges for copying will be limited to insurance companies, attorneys, patients, state 
and federal agencies, and workmen’s compensation cases. 
 
  B. Hospital employees will not be charged for their own chart copies. 
 
XI. Following the authorized release of patient information, the signed authorization will be retained in 
the health record with the notation of the information released, the date of release, and the 
individual who released the information.   
 
The facility may refuse to honor an authorization (faxed or hand-written) if there is reasonable 
doubt as to the validity of the authorization. 
 
Any questions or reservations that may arise should be referred to the Director/Manager of Health 
Information Management. 
 
X. Alcohol and Drug Abuse Records 
A. Special care must be exercised in the release of information from alcohol and drug abuse 
records. (Include drug overdoses.) Consent from the patient is necessary before releasing 
any information. 
 
  1. The consent must include the following eight points: 
 
   a. Name of the program. 
   b. Name of the organization to which disclosure is to be made. 
   c. Name of the patient, date of birth and social security number. 
   d. Reason for disclosure. 
   e. Extent of information to be disclosed. 
f. Statement that consent is revocable at any time up to what statement has already 
been disclosed. 
   g. Date consent signed. 
   h. Signature of the patient or his legitimate agent. 
  
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
6 
2. The regulations specify categories of persons to who limited disclosure of necessary 
information may be made with consent. 
  
   a. Medical personnel to enable furnishing of services. 
b. Central registries concerning types of drugs and dosages in order to prevent 
multiple enrollments in drug therapy program (i.e., Methadone). 
c. Patient’s family unless disclosure would be harmful to the patient. 
d. Third party payers and funding sources only to the extent necessary to the 
patient. 
e. Employers and employment agencies for verification of status and treatment or 
where the information is necessary to evaluate hazards to the patient or others. 
f. Certain personnel in the criminal justice system where participation in a 
treatment program is condition of the individual’s release from confinement, 
suspension of sentence, etc.; with the patient’s consent, the scope of information 
released my be unrestricted.  
g. Other persons where it is certain that the patient’s consent was voluntary, 
granting the request will not harm the patient-program relationship and granting 
the request will not harm the patient. 
   
3. Approval/Denials of all requests for information will be handled by the Release of 
Information contracted vendor staff or the Director/Manager of Health Information 
Management. 
   
  4. Exceptions where no consent is required: 
 
a. Release for consulting physicians. 
b. Release to medical personnel in an emergency. 
c. Qualified personnel for studies and research (without disclosure of identity). 
d. Order by the court of competent jurisdiction which shows good cause. (Only 
disclose information necessary for the purpose). 
e. Release for continuity of care of the patient. 
f. If there are any questions, consult the Director/Manager of Health Information 
Management. 
 
  5. When to require an authorization from the patient in a Nursing home: 
 
a. If no mention is made in the Nurses note that the patient was transferred. 
b. If the patient is no longer a resident of the home. 
c. If the patient is sated as being a resident in the home but has been discharged 
from the hospital more than 1 week. (Try to acquire proof that the patient went 
directly to the home). 
d. If the patient is transferred to a psychiatric facility, send only the 
discharge/transfer form or information only as directed by the attending 
physician. 
  
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
7 
6. Limited information, which a physician and counselor determines, in writing, to be 
harmful to the patient or another person, may be classified as confidential; therefore, 
will not be accessible to the patient. 
 
a. A patient may make a request to review his record to his counselor and 
physician.  
b. If a discussion of what is contained in the record is sufficient, that discussion 
shall be documented in the patient record including: 
  1. Type of request. 
  2. Cause for request. 
  3. Some detail about the extent of the discussion. 
 
c. A written request, by the patient, is required when the patient request literal view 
or obtained copies of his record. The patient’s counselor shall document, in the 
patient record, what was done concerning the request. The attending physician 
shall be notified of any request for medical records. 
  
d. The counselor may actually review with the patient the counselors section of the 
record, while maintaining supervision since some information may need further 
explanation. The medical portion of the record may be reviewed by the patient 
under the supervision of the attending physician. Should the record contain 
information classified as confidential, this part of the record will be removed 
before the record is handed to the patient. 
 
e. Specific data in the records may be released to others with written permission of 
the patient. This permission will be in the form of consent for release of 
information. The release of information shall contain the eight (8) points listed 
under VIII a.1. 
 
NOTE: Any questions which arise concerning release of information on TAU 
Center patients are to be referred to the Supervisor of Release of Information, the 
Director/Manager of Health Information Management. 
 
Information is released by written authorization of the patient as defined by CFR 
42 only. See Release of Information policy and procedure section for TAU 
patients. 
 
IX.  Access to electronic Records by Research or Monitoring Companies 
 
1. Initial Setup 
A. Research or Monitoring Companies should contact the Health Information Management department five 
business days prior to research /study patients’ record review. 
B. Notification can be given by telephone to the manager of the Health Information Management Department 
at 765-6333. Information will be offered to include on company letterhead:   
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
8 
a) The monitoring company 
b) The reviewer's name/identifying information 
c) The date(s) of the review 
d) Study/research patient's name, date of birth, social security number, specific date of service for 
research, and signed patient informed consent with date informed consent was signed that coincides 
with date of service in hospital (if not already on the medical record). 
C. HIM will review the notification inclusions for appropriateness regarding authorization to release medical 
information on the consent or other release of medical information document. If the aforementioned 
criterion is not appropriate, a Health Information Management staff member will notify the requestor and 
a signed authorization by the patient will need to be obtained before the record will be queued to the 
requestor. If the latter has to be initiated the records will be available five business days a fter receipt of 
the additional information. 
2. Chart Access 
A. Specific records requiring review will be in a special ChartMaxx grouping or made available through 
Power Chart.  
B. Special ChartMaxx or Power Chart in -service for utilization of system will be given the day of review 
visit. 
3. Review  
A. HIM Manager will contact IS Security Department to request user ids and passwords for the reviewers. 
B. The reviewers will be required to provide a driver's license or other picture identification and sign a 
confidentiality statement before the code will be released. 
C. The user ids and passwords will only be utilized by specific research or monitoring staff for the specific 
day, or days of chart review. If the specific chart review is not completed in 5 business days, the HIM 
director will be notified verbally with a status.  
4. Maintaining Records 
A. Research and Monitoring companies requesting to print or copy specific medical record will specify in 
writing prior to patient discharge from hospital. (Specific requested information from the medical record 
will be identified, exp. Labs, radiology reports, history/physicals, etc.). 
B. Fees will be assessed for copying specific medical records, ONLY HIM staff can make copies of medical 
records. 
C. Fees will be assessed for storage of medical records if research need is different from HIM standards for 
length of storage.   
 
 
 
 
IX. General Guidelines: 
 
 A. Ownership of the Medical Record  
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
9 
The medical record documents the cause of the patient’s illness and treatment during a 
particular period and during any subsequent periods as an inpatient or outpatient. It is the 
property of the hospital and the information in the record belongs to the patient. The medical 
record is kept for the benefit of the patient, physician, and hospital. The medical record contains 
information that is restricted by the confidential relationship that exists between the patient and 
physician. That confidentiality is necessary so that the patient will feel free in giving the 
physician all pertinent information required in order to treat the patient. 
 
  The physical record belongs to the Medical Center. 
 
  The content of the record belongs to the Patient. 
 
  The medical record is a legal document. 
 
 
 B. Release to Specific Agencies or Individuals 
 
  1. Army, Navy and Air Force Bases: 
Requests from branches of the Armed Forces must be placed in two categories: 
 
a. Medical information requests for hospital or physician, when patient is being 
treated, require no authorization. 
 
b. Requests for medical information for personnel files, induction, discharge, or 
any non-medical purpose requires proper authorization. 
 
  2. Coroner 
A death becomes a coroner’s case if death occurred “without medical attendance”, if the 
decedent was not seen by his physician at anytime during the 36 hours preceding death. 
However, the law gives the coroner full discretion in deciding what constitutes a 
coroner’s case, and in order to investigate deaths involving violence or suspicious 
circumstance, the coroner has the given authority to examine medical records of a 
deceased person regardless of whether or not the death occurred in the hospital.  
 
1. Obtain patient identifying information and information requested from the 
coroner and the coroner’s name, parish, and telephone number. No information 
should be released over the telephone except admit and/or discharge dates and 
attending physician. 
The team member is to request a fax number or mailing address and fax or mail 
the requested information to the coroner. 
 
2. If other information is requested refer the coroner to the Release of Information 
contracted vendor staff for release. 
  
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
10 
3. If a request is received after business hours, ER nursing service personnel (RNs 
only) will print a copy of the requested record for the coroner.  The information 
is only to be printed out of EPIC (coroner template) by designated staff 
members. 
 
Louisiana state law authorizes the coroner to receive any information from the medical 
records which he/she deems necessary for the fulfilling of the coroner’s duties and 
honored without consent requirements. 
 
 
  3. Federal Bureau of Investigation (F.B.I.) 
No specific medical data should be given to the police or F.B.I. other than the type of 
accident, such as the automobile, industrial, etc., which needs no authorization. 
However, do not give information regarding the condition of the patient or extent of 
injuries. 
  
 The hospital is required to report only the information that the statute requires. 
 
 If the statute does not specifically outline the information to be reported in a specific 
case, the following may be released: 
 
 a. The fact of the event 
 b. The name of the patient involved 
 c. The place where the event occurred, if applicable. 
 
 
4. Food and Drug Administration Agents: 
 The hospital may honor requests from Food and Drug Administration agents who are 
discharging statutory duties in investigating either food contamination or adverse 
reaction to drugs or patient medicines. Information from drug abuse patients may be 
given to F.D.A. agents without patient authorization in such cases. Regulatory powers in 
the investigation of drug abuse may well carry subpoena power. 
 
5. Internal Revenue Department: 
 A request for medical information from the Internal Revenue Department cannot be 
honored without proper authorization from the patient. 
 
6. Social Security, Welfare, Vocational Rehabilitation, Crippled Children 
Association: 
 Patient authorization is required to release medical information to the above 
governmental agencies. 
 
7. Veterans Administration Hospitals: 
 For medical purposes, the procedure of releasing information is the same as to other 
hospitals.  
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
11 
 
8. Public and private Health and Welfare Agencies: 
 Both public and private health and welfare agencies may, with proper authorization, 
request information on a patient’s present condition and on any plans for immediate or 
future treatment to aid them in planning their client’s services. In such a case, the 
responsible physician, or the Medical Social Services representative who is involved in 
the case, should be consulted and asked to enter the appropriate information in the 
medical record for release to a recognized agency. This information then becomes 
available to other members of the professional staff concerned with the patient’s care 
and treatment. 
 
9. Family of Patient: 
 Medical, privileged information may not be released to any member of the patient’s 
family. Requests of this nature should be referred to the patient’s attending physician. 
 
 
10. Workmen’s Compensation cases: 
 Under Louisiana law, neither the patients employer nor an insurance company covering 
the patient require an authorization if the case is stated to be for workmen’s 
compensation. Exception: TAU Center patients. 
 (See policy HIMR21) 
 
11. Health Maintenance Organizations (HMO) and Insurance Companies 
 The requested portions of the record may be copied and released if the HMO or 
insurance company was identified at admission as the patient’s primary payer and 
consent to release was signed upon admission. (Signed Inpatient Admission form 
includes authorization to release information to the payer on claim benefits assigned to 
the medical center.)  Special consent is required for substance abuse records and HIV 
test results. 
 
Telephone Request:  The only information which may be released to insurance company 
inquiries per telephone are the admit or discharge date and the attending physician. Any 
other request for information requires patient authorization. 
 
11. Nursing Homes or Extended Care Facilities: 
When a patient is transferred directly from the hospital to a nursing home or extended 
care facility, information may be released without signed authorization. 
 
 Information may not be released without signed authorization when the patient is 
admitted to a nursing home or extended care facility directly from the patient’s home. 
 
12.   Videotapes: 
 
 Videotapes of patient care procedures are educational in nature and belong to the 
physician.  Retention of videotapes are not the responsibility of the hospital, therefore, 
videotapes are not considered an official part of the legal medical record.    
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
12 
 
 Videotapes arriving in the Health Information Management Department will be 
forwarded to the physician performing the procedure. 
 
 
 
13. Other Hospitals: 
a. If a patient is transferred directly to another hospital, a summary of the hospital 
Medical Record shall accompany the patient at the time of discharge. 
 
1a. ER nursing service personnel (RNs only) will print a copy of the 
emergency room record for the facility receiving the transferred patient.  The 
information is only to be printed out of  EPIC (ER template) by designated 
staff members. 
  
b. When the patient is not transferred directly to anther hospital, we require the 
patient’s written authorization before releasing medical information to other 
hospitals. However, in an emergency situation, it is necessary to release medical 
information to authorized personnel on a “CALL BACK” basis. The hospital 
requesting this information will be asked to mail or fax the patient’s authorization 
immediately. 
 
Emergency transmittal of patient related material to another facility may be released 
with specific instructions from the Medical Record Director, Medical Records 
Supervisors, Administrator on call, House Manager or Risk Manager. 
   
c. If it becomes necessary to go to a patient’s room to obtain an authorization, identify 
yourself when entering the room and explain the need for obtaining the 
authorization. 
 
d. Health Information Management personnel should refrain from giving 
interpretation, definitions, and opinions as to quality of care recorded in the 
documents. 
 
 
  14. Subpoenas for release of Medical Records 
   (See policy HIMR28 – Subpoenas-Civil/Criminal) 
The purpose is to respond appropriately to subpoenas in accordance with the Louisiana 
Revised Statue 13:3715.1 (See Legal Manual) and/or CFR 42 for substance abuse 
records and/or HIV test results. 
 
15. Subpoenas requesting appearance of Medical Records Custodian 
a. Federal district and circuit courts may themselves issue subpoenas for court 
appearance or they may be issued through the U.S. Attorney’s office. Federal 
subpoenas are valid if for appearance within 100 miles of the hospital. 
  
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
13 
b. State circuit court may issue subpoenas for record to court or for discovery 
proceedings. Circuit court subpoenas are valid for anywhere in the State of 
Louisiana for court appearance but only for appearances within East Baton 
Rouge Parish for discovery proceedings. 
 
c. Probate and District courts may issue subpoenas for court appearance, but 
generally not for discovery proceedings. If a probate or district court subpoena 
for discovery proceedings is received the Director/Manager should contact the 
hospital’s legal counsel to check the validity of the matter. Probate and district 
court subpoenas are valid for appearances at courts anywhere in the State of 
Louisiana. 
 
d. For the protection of the hospital and its personnel, the physician, and the 
patient, the medical record administrator is not obliged to present the record in 
court or before any commission except upon a court order or a subpoena. In the 
absence of a court order issued by the judge hearing the case in writing or 
spoken form the bench, the consent of the patient must be given to release the 
medical record. To secure the attendance of a witness, a properly issued 
subpoena is served upon the witness demanding him to appear at a trial or other 
proceeding and to give testimony. Medical records form hospitals are secured by 
a subpoena duces tecum, which is served on the person having actual custody or 
possession of the records and commands the witness to bring with him the 
documents, paper, or books noted in the subpoena. 
  
e.  The subpoena will direct the custodian to appear with the record at certain 
location, such as court, attorney’s office, physician’s office, or Health 
Information Management Department. 
 
f. Upon appearing in answer to subpoena, the witness will be required to testify as 
to the identity, mode of preparation and whether the records were made in the 
regular course of business, at or near a certain time, condition or event. Health 
Information Management personnel may testify only to the identification of the 
record. 
 
    1. Case file number. 
    2. Date of issuance. 
    3. Designated signature of clerk. 
    4. Originating in Louisiana. 
5. Name of the person requesting subpoena and on whose behalf. 
   
17. Emergency Transport Services 
 
a. If a patient is delivered via an emergency transport service, copies of the 
patient’s record may be obtained by the emergency transport service for 
billing purposes were rendered to that patient. A copy of the face sheet  
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
14 
will suffice for all billing information required by the emergency 
transport services. 
b. The authorization signed on admit by the patient shall suffice for 
authorization to release records for billing purposes to the emergency 
transport services. 
18.      After Hours 
 
1.  A verbal request for release of information outside of normal HIM Business hours shall be referred 
to House Manager/Nursing Supervisor, as defined by each organization. 
 
2. For non-emergent request, the requestor shall be instructed that release of information is handled 
from 8:00AM to 4:00PM Monday – Friday and that any questions concerning the release of 
information should be addressed to the ROI contracted vendor staff or a Supervisor or manager in 
the HIM Department.  
 
3. For emergency requests (i.e. Coroner, LOPA, Transfers, Reqests for other healthcare facilities, 
PEC), the house manager/nurse supervisor shall release requested information through the HER 
ROI workflow. 
4. In extenuating circumstances, HIM Management will be contacted before releasing 
Information. 
 
          
 
 
X. Administrative and Medical Staff Guidelines: 
 
A. Release to Physicians  
The following procedure will be followed when processing a request for medical record 
information for members of the medical staff: 
 
 1.  The physician requests a copy of all or part of the patient’s medical record either 
through verbal or written request. 
 
 2.  The HIM staff will review the patient’s medical record to determine the following: 
 
a. The requesting physician was the attending or consulting  
physician. 
 
b.   The requesting physician is currently in partnership with the  
attending or a consulting physician and assists the attending or consulting 
physician in coordination of the patient’s care. 
   
 d. The requesting physician was a consulting or attending physician during a 
prior or subsequent episode of care. 
  
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
15 
e. The patient has been referred to the requesting physician, was cared for by 
another member of their group, or the patient is now the requesting physician’s 
patient. 
 
3.  If the request meets one of the above criteria, the requested portions of the medical 
record are faxed or mailed to the requesting physician’s office.  No authorization is 
required. 
 
 4.  If the request does not meet the criteria stated above, the requesting physician’s 
office is informed that a signed authorization for release of information is required from 
the patient prior to releasing the medical records.   
 
 In emergency situations, the information requested may, after verification of the identity 
of the requestor, be released with a request that the patient’s authorization be forwarded 
when available. 
 
If a hospital or doctor’s office calls and requests information in a medical 
emergency, obtain patient identifying information, requested medical 
information needed, and the name, organization, telephone number and fax 
number of the caller. 
 
Any release, even in an emergency, should be on a call back basis only. If you 
have any doubt about the legitimacy of the caller you may verify local telephone 
numbers in the telephone directory and numbers of hospitals in the Louisiana 
Hospitals manual and physicians in the Manual of Physicians. 
 
5. A doctor is not allowed to examine the chart of a member of his family without 
the patient’s attending physician’s approval. 
 
6. Former members of the Medical Staff may be permitted free access to records of 
cases in which they were involved whether as an attending physician or consulting 
physician. 
 
 C. Legal action against hospital, hospital employees or medical staff members: 
 
The Medical Legal Secretary will report any legal action being taken against the hospital or any 
of its employees to the Risk Manager. 
 
D. Possession of the record should not be given to anyone unless the custodian of the medical 
record is instructed to do so by the court or other official. The attorney initiating the subpoena 
has no right to see the record until examination is ordered by the court. 
 
E. Lawsuit – Hospital or Physician: 
  
PolicyROL HIMR22mber_Policy Name 
16 
 If it appears that litigation is intended against the hospital, medical information should not be 
released until the Risk Manager has been notified. When a specific physician is involved, he 
should be informed of the nature of the inquiry by Administration. 
 
   
 _____________________________________   ________________ 
Ramona Fryer                                                                                        DateVP of Revenue 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
TITLE  
 