Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:    HIM 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:   VIII 
Subject: Subpoenas – Civil/Criminal/MR Custodian    Section:   R 
Date of Origination:  June 1991 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision:  July 2012 
Date of Last Review:  March 2015, June 2021 Serial Code:   HIMR28 
 
Purpose: 
The purpose of this policy is to define the procedure for accepting and fulfilling 
subpoenas. 
 
Policy: 
It is the policy of the Health  Information Management Department of Our Lady of the 
Lake Regional Medical Center to respond appropriately to subpoenas in accordance with 
the Louisiana Revised Statue 13:3715.1 (See Legal Manual) and/or CFR 42 for substance 
abuse records and/or HIV test results. 
 
Procedure: 
 
I. General Procedure for Receipt and Processing of Subpoena 
 
A.   Subpoena’s are now served to the Legal Department and ROI picks up 
from Legal after inspected.   
 
B. Upon receipt, subpoena duces tecum should be inspected to insure that the 
following required elements are present: 
  
 1.  Method of service 
 
 2.  Expected date, time, and place of appearance or delivery of records 
 
 3.  Description of materials to be produced. 
 
 4.  An affidavit by the requesting party that the patient or his attorney has 
been notified that the subpoena has been served at least seven days prior to 
the date on which the records are to be disclosed.  If the requesting party is 
the patient or his attorney, the affidavit shall state that the patient 
authorizes the release of the records pursuant to the subpoena. 
 
 B. The date of receipt is stamped on the subpoena. The time received is hand- 
written under the date and the individual receiving the subpoena initials 
this. 
   C. The subpoena is delivered to Risk Management for inspection. 
 
D.  Risk Management coordinates with Health Information Management 
release of information contracted vendor for record production. 
  
II. Health Information Process – Civil Subpoenas 
 
 Once subpoena is received by Health Information Management release of 
information contracted vendor, the following shall occur: 
 
A. The patient’s name, date of birth and social security number are entered in 
the Release of Information Log Computer database with due date of the 
subpoena. 
 
 B. One week before the subpoena is due, the chart is retrieved and copied. 
 
C. Copies of the subpoena are sent to various departments as appropriate. 
(Example:  If a bill is requested, the Business Office receives a copy. If 
outpatient visits (lab work, x-rays, etc.) were requested, then the 
Laboratory or Radiology receives a copy.) This information is kept with 
the subpoena file until all information is copied. 
 
E. The Release of information contracted vendor staff checks all documents 
before release to appropriate party and signed certification letter is 
obtained from ROI Vendor.    
 
F. The copies of the record and the miscellaneous documents requested are 
sealed in the mailing envelope in accordance to LA R.S.: 12:3715.1 (See 
Legal Manual). 
 
G. The envelope is sent “certified mail’ or the attorney may pick it up. 
 
H. Records for Subpoenas are delivered via vendor’s delivery system through 
FedEx or electronically delivery depending on how requester is set up.  
 
NOTE: Federal subpoenas supersede the Louisiana law and do not have to   
              be served five (5) days in advance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II. Substance Abuse Records (TAU) and/or HIV Test Results 
  All subpoenas received for TAU Center records and/or HIV test results are to be 
served in the Health Information Management Department. 
 
A. The Release of Information (ROI) contracted vendor staff or Director of 
Health Information Management will be given the subpoena.  
 
B. The ROI contracted vendor staff will make certain that the patient 
involved was actually admitted to the TAU Center and/or HIV tests. 
 
C. The ROI contracted vendor staff will examine the subpoena and determine 
whether the subpoena can be answered or whether further documentation, 
such as a court order or patient consent, will be required before answering. 
 
D. If further documentation is required, the requesting attorney, etc. will be 
notified that the authorization provided allowed a search of the patient’s 
treatment at Our Lady of the Lake with the exception of the treatment of 
sensitive areas as specified in CFR 42.  Should requester require search to 
include sensitive material files, requestor shall provide us: 
 
 1. Subpoena with a court order, or 
 
2. Patient authorization specifically stating “Permission” to search 
files protected by CFR 42 and/or HIV Release. 
 
E. The subpoena is logged into the computer data base maintained for this 
purpose. 
 
F. The original subpoena is kept in the record as a part of the correspondence 
section. 
  
III. Health Information Process – Criminal Subpoenas. 
  
 1. After inspection of the subpoena for the above elements, the patient visit 
history will be queried.  The record will be reviewed by the Release of 
information contract vendor supervisor. 
 
2. The ROI Supervisor will review the record for blood-alcohol levels, HIV test 
results and/or drug screen. If there is a blood-alcohol level, HIV test result and/or 
drug screen, the record will be referred to Risk Management 
  
  
. 
 
3. The Risk Manager will then contact the Health Information Management 
Department with instructions on whether to copy the record, to provide the copies of the records or to hold them until further instructions are 
provided. 
 
  Copies of records requested by Risk Management shall be provided. 
 
IV. Health Information Process – Custodian Subpoenas 
 
1.  Subpoenas requesting appearance of Medical Records Custodian 
 
a.  Federal, district and circuit courts may issue subpoenas for court 
appearance or subpoena may be issued through the U.S. Attorney’s office.   
 
b.  State circuit court may issue subpoenas for record to be delivered in court 
or for discovery processing.   
 
c. Probate and District courts may issue subpoenas for court appearance.  
Director of Health Information Management should contact Risk 
Management regarding subpoenas requesting appearance of record 
custodian. 
 
d. Upon appearing in court to answer a subpoena, the witness (records 
custodian) will be required to testify as to the identity, mode of 
preparation, whether records were kept in the regular course of business, 
at or near the time, condition or event.  No other information regarding the 
content of the medical record may be presented by the record custodian.   
 
 
___________________________________    __________________ 
Jeff Limbocker                                                                                        Date 
VP Finance 
 