Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:   HIM 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  VIII 
Subject:  Copying Records for Transfer to Other  Section:  R 
                 Facilities  
Date of Origination:  October 1984  Supersedes:   
Date of Last Revision:  August 31, 2017, August 2021 Serial Code:  HIMRO2 
 
Purpose: 
The purpose of this policy is to explain the process for copying charts of transferred patients to 
other health care facilities.  
 
Policy: 
It is the responsibility of the Health Information Management Department of Our Lady of the 
Lake Regional Medical to copy medical records of transferred patients. This policy excludes our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center’s Rehab  
 
See policy HIMR22- Release of Medical Information- for transfers from Our Lady of the Lake 
ER and Lake Livingston.  
 
For transfers from LSU Health Baton Rouge, a Division of Our Lady of the Lake, it is the 
responsibility of the nurse assigned to the patient to copy pertinent documents and send with the 
patient. 
 
Procedure: 
 
A. The entire medical record will be brought to the Release of Information Office 
(Monday through Friday between the hours of 8AM and 4:30PM) or to the Health 
Information Management Department (between 4:30PM and 11PM and on 
weekends-6a to 6p) by Nursing Service personnel when a patient has been 
scheduled to transfer to an acute care facility or a long term care facility. Nursing 
Service personnel will provide the necessary information to be copied and 
indicate where the patient is being transferred. 
 
B. The name of the patient, the date, floor, and reason for copying are documented 
by nursing unit personnel delivering record in the Transferred Charts Copied log. 
(Attachment A).   
 
 Health Information Management Department personnel will be promptly notified 
by the nursing unit if the attending physician has dictated a transfer summary to 
be sent with the patient for continuity of care. 
 C.                   The Health Information Management Department personnel or ROI Contracted 
Vendor staff will then immediately copy the portions of the medical 
record which have been requested. 
  
      1. If the ROI contracted vendor staff is available the staff employed by the 
contract service will make the copies. 
 
      2. If the copy service is not available (Evenings, and Weekends), the Health 
Information staff will copy the records. 
 
       
D.  The ROI Contracted Vendor or HIM staff member making the copies shall enter  
  Their initials on the Transferred Charts Copies log. 
 
E. The Nursing Service Unit is then called and notified that the chart is copied and 
ready to be picked up.  
 
F. When chart is picked up by nursing service unit from HIM, the Transferred Charts 
Copied log is initialed by the staff retrieving the record. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  TRANSFERRED PATIENTS CHART COPIES LOG 
 
PATIENT’S NAME DATE FLOOR TIME 
REC’D. 
REASON FOR COPYING TIME 
PICKED 
UP 
PICKED UP 
BY WHOM 
TIME 
COMPL. 
PAGES 
COPIED 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
         