ECLS-012 6282 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: HVOR Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for HVOR 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 6282 HVI 
Surgery 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 03/19/2020 Review Date: 06/03/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated EXIT signs are located in the following by locations: Cath Lab 3, HVOR Front 
Desk, HV01, HV02, HV03, HV04, HV05, HV06, Anesthesia workroom, and TOR 11  
• Adjacent smoke compartments are located beyond the automatic doors in the following 
locations: CVL 6, HV05, HV01, TOR 11  
 
 ECLS-012 6282 
Page 2 of 2 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• The following staff members will clear the Hallways of any carts or equipment: Case Tech, 
Surgical Tech, or Designee  
• The following staff members will close doors and confirm that the fire doors closed: Case Tech, 
Surgical Tech, or Designee  
• The following staff members will assist in moving patients and visitors to safety: All available 
staff.  
• The following staff members will prevent people from using the elevators: Case Tech or Surgical 
Tech, or Designee  
• The following staff members will assist those with Limited English Proficiency and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities: Registered Nurse or Designee 
• The following staff members will ensure all employees are accounted for: Registered Nurse or 
Designee  
• The following staff members will ensure each room is empty.  Case tech or Surgical tech or 
Designee (This position will mark the door/door frame with chalk to indicate the room is empty.) 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
The Medical gas shut off valves are located outside of each Operating Room.  The Anesthesia provider 
will direct the staff members in the OR room. Any staff member once directed by the Anesthesia 
provider may shut off the gases.  
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Stretchers and beds located outside of each Operating Room while a case is in progress will be 
used during emergencies.   
• During a surgical procedure patients will require full assistance, none will be ambulatory.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguishers are located in each operating room and additionally in the HVOR Core by 
EP 1, Cath lab supply room, and Cath Lab Housekeeping closet. 
• Manual Fire Pull station are located at the HVOR Front desk and HV06.  
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Medical gases supplied to each OR would need to be turned off 
• The following areas contain used/stored combustible products. Tanks of gases are stored in 
HVOR Core near sterile elevator and HVOR storage area across from HV02. 
• Surgical patients will be non-ambulatory  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary Horizontal evacuation will be to the next smoke compartment in TOR area.  
• Secondary Horizontal evacuation will be to the next smoke compartment in HVOR Waiting 
room. 
• Vertical evacuation out of building would be ER exit and the Garage walk over entrance.  