 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Imaging Services Section: Administrative 
Title: Imaging Exam/Supply Charge Capture 
Policy 
Reference #: IAD 032 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 10/05/2009 Review Date: 01/2015, 5/19 
Revision Date: 01/2015,1/2017, 12/2017, 
1/21, 3/23, 2/24 
 
PURPOSE:   
To establish accurate charge capture for imaging exams, define the time frame in which charges are 
entered, reviewed or reconciled and corrected if necessary. 
 
POLICY:   
• The Epic system is the mechanism for patient charging in the Imaging division. 
 
• Each technologist is responsible for ensuring accuracy of the diagnostic exam or procedure 
ordered by the physician.  Exam modification, cancellation and re-ordering of the correct exam 
within the Epic system may be necessary for the technologist to ensure the exam/procedure 
ordered by the physician matches the completed exam.  All exams performed by the technologist 
are to be completed within Epic and matched for PACS viewing as soon as they are performed, 
with all work reconciled by the end of the shift. The technologist will document in Epic all 
billable supplies upon procedure/exam completion.   
 
• In the event of a downtime situation, the correct date and time of the exam should be entered in 
Epic upon exam completion. 
 
• Exam/procedure completions (exam/procedure charges) and billable supply charges must be 
entered within 3 days of patient discharge for charges to post to a patient’s account.  
 
• Managers may request a patient account bill hold through Revenue Management when there is a 
charge discrepancy which may not be reconciled within 3 days.  The manager will work with 
revenue management to get the charge issue reconciled as soon as possible. 
 
• The Imaging Charge Champion will ensure daily monitoring of charge/credit activities 
 
 
• Annual review of CPT codes for each department within the Imaging division will be performed 
by the Imaging managers to ensure annual updates for CPT codes changes are placed in effect 
for January 1st of each calendar year.  
 
 
  
     Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 