 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Imaging Services 
Subject:  Imaging Interpretation/Reporting Section:  Administration 
Date of Origination:  02/06/1987 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
5/19 
08/15,1/17, 12/17, 5/19, 6/19, 1/21, 
3/23, 2/24 
Serial Code:  IAD 031 
  
Purpose: 
 To establish guidelines for interpretation and reporting results of Imaging 
Services procedures performed.  
Policy: 
A. In-patients 
1. Following completion of in-patient Imaging Service procedures, the results are 
dictated and transcribed by Radiologist. 
 
2. Reports are reviewed and signed by a radiologist, and distributed 
 via electronic record. 
 3. A copy of the report is distributed to the attending/requesting physician. 
B. Out-patients 
1. Outpatient reports are handled in the same manner as in-patient   reports. 
   2. Copy of results are maintained in patients electronic medical record 
C. Call Results 
1. Exam is ordered indicating "Call Report". 
 
2. Following completion of the procedures, the technologist will document 
“Call Report” in tech comments and inform the Radiologist of the call 
report. 
 
3. The Radiologist interprets the exam, then calls the report using the 2ID or 3ID 
process.(If patient is waiting the radiologist will direct the Technologist as to 
when patient can be released). 
 
4. If images / films are to be released, the patient will be directed to wait in 
   the out patient waiting room and the disc  will be brought to them.  2 
 
D.  ER Patients 
 1.  Emergency Room Physicians perform initial (wet) reads of all ECU 
diagnostic radiographic exams (X-rays) and document their findings in 
Epic. 
           2.  The Radiologist will dictate ECU diagnostic radiographic exams as part 
of normal workflow, in which they will overread the ER Physicians findings.  
 3.  The Radiologist will use the designated workflow in Epic for any 
discrepancies between final read and ER wet read.  If an ER wet read was 
not provided, the final report will suffice as appropriate communication to 
the ER physician, with the exception of critical results which will be called 
per protocol. 
 