 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Imaging Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:   
Subject:  PRN Staff Section:  Administration 
Date of Origination:  Feb 2023 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
2/23, 2/24 Serial Code:  IAD039 
  
PURPOSE: To provide competent staff to assist with the care of the patient during times of peak 
census, full time vacancies, full-time off days, etc. 
 
POLICY:               OLOL may employ PRN staff at premium rate of pay in consideration of their part time 
and flexible relief schedule as long as they meet minimum hour requirements.  
 
PROCEDURE:  
1. To qualify for PRN pay, the individual must meet minimum requirements of the 
approved position, including: 
• Current professional licensure for the State of Louisiana for the specific position 
• A minimum of 1 year experience preferred 
• Current Heart Saver (BLS) and other certifications as required for the department  
 
2. PRN Staff must be available to work a minimum of 1 shift per month or 1 shift 
of “On Call” coverage per month as needed by the department.  Schedules will 
vary based on the specific needs of each location and modality.  Scheduling of 
work time is a mutual responsibility of the team member and the assigned 
Manager.   
 
3. PRN staff must comply with all hospital policies and procedures and are expected to 
perform according to the same standards set for the position. General orientation, 
annual performance evaluation, annual requirements and competency validation for all 
units worked must be completed satisfactorily.  Clinical competency is expected to be 
maintained at the same level as other team members. 
 
4. The base rate is consistent with the salary grade for the position commensurate with 
years of experience. The PRN rate of pay will be calculated as an alternate rate at 15% 
above the base pay.  PRN staff may qualify for annual merit increases based on job 
performance and compliance with all annual mandatory requirements.  Merit increases 
are calculated on the base rate and the alternate rate would be recalculated. 
 
5. The manager and the team member are responsible for compliance with the 
scheduling requirements as indicated above.  Failure to perform within the 
program requirements and to maintain the schedule commitment as agreed may 
result in termination from the program and loss of the PRN rate.   
 
6. In some limited situations, PRN staff may be scheduled for call and eligible for call pay 
and call back premium pay.  The team member must be deemed as competent and 
trained to take call. 
 
7. PRN staff do not qualify for fringe benefits.  
 
8. Current team members who transfer into this program will be paid their earned 
PTO.  Accrued EIT is non-transferable to the PRN program and is forfeited at the 
time of status change. 
 
9. OLOL does not guarantee any hours to PRN staff and reserves the right to cancel 
shifts as deemed appropriate.  
 
10. Any leave of absence is subject to and will be designated according to policy                                   
       HR.03.001. Any non-medical extended absence periods longer than 1 month 
                                          must be requested in writing and approved by the department manager.   