NPD-006 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Imaging Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:   
Subject:  Imaging Uniform Dress Code Section:  Administration 
Date of Origination:  Nov 2021 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
11-21, 3/23, 2/24, 11/24 
 
Serial Code:  IAD038 
  
PURPOSE: 
Each employee of OLOLRMC Imaging Services Department is responsible for presenting a professional 
image at all times. All personnel shall be attired in the proper uniform during working hours.  
 
POLICY: 
1. All personnel are required to wear OLOLRMC issued nametags: 
a. The entire nametag must be always clearly visible. 
b. Nametag is to be worn at chest level in the upright position.  
2. All technologists are required to wear and OLOLRMC issued radiation monitoring badge. 
3. Employees are expected to maintain good personal hygiene and to dress in neat, clean, and 
appropriately fitting clothing while on the job. Clothing must be in good repair. 
4. Each employee is responsible for providing his/her own clothing (except for procedure/ surgical 
areas with specific infection control standards) 
5. Dress Standards: 
a. ALL Imaging Service Personnel should wear Solid Gray scrub attire.  (Colored piping & 
OLOLRMC Logo are optional) 
b. Polo Shirts with white OLOLRMC Logo may be worn with gray scrub pants. 
c. OLOLRMC approved t-shirts are allowed with gray scrub pants.   
d. During football season, Polo style sports team shirts may be worn on Friday, Saturday, and 
Sunday only.  
e. Lab coats may be worn by all staff and may be black, white, or gray. (OLOLRMC Logo 
optional) 
f. Sweatshirts may be worn by all staff and may be black, white Navy, or gray. Sweatshirts 
should have the OLOLRMC Logo on them. 
g. No jackets with Hoods are allowed on hospital grounds.  
h. No baseball caps allowed on hospital grounds.  
i. Foot attire must provide safe, secure footing and offer reasonable protection.  
6. Excessive jewelry not permitted, including dangling earrings, heavy necklaces or chains, noisy 
bracelets, etc. as these can cause a hazard by being grabbed by patients, etc. 
a. Items on teeth that are not required for dental or medical reasons are prohibited.  
7. Tongue and facial piercings are prohibited. (Only a small nose stud is allowed) 
8. Make up should be moderate in amount and tone. 
9. Hair should be neat and fixed as to not interfere with patient care. NPD-006 
Page 2 of 2 
 
a. Extreme styles and coloring are no acceptable. Only hair colors that naturally occur in 
humans may be worn. Hairstyles should be conservative.  
b. Clean and neatly trimmed beards, mustaches, goatees, and sideburns are acceptable. Facial 
Hair must not interfere with respirator mask fittings.  
10. Natural fingernails are to be kept clean, smooth, well-manicured and no longer than ¼ inch long.  
Artificial nails may not be worn by personnel that give direct patient care.  
 