 1 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Infection Control 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: I 
Subject:  The Infection Control Plan Section:  
Date of Origination:  April 1, 1992 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision:  March 31, 2023 Serial Code: IC1002 
Date of Last Review:  March 31, 2024 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
 
Purpose 
The purpose of the infection prevention and control program is to ensure that the organization has a 
functioning coordinated processes in place to reduce the risks of healthcare associated infections in 
patients and healthcare workers, and to optimize the use of resources through a strong surveillance 
and prevention program. 
The Infection Prevention and Control program at OLOL Health incorporates the following in a 
continuing cycle: 
a. Surveillance, prevention, and control of infections throughout the organization. 
b. Develop alternative techniques to address real and potential exposures. 
c. Select and implement the best techniques to minimize adverse outcomes. 
d. Evaluate and monitor the results and revise techniques as needed. 
 
Goals  
1. Provide education and other services to change attitudes and behaviors of employees when 
indicated, in order to facilitate the creation of an environment in which consistent optimal 
standards of care can be achieved. 
2. Recognize and maintain awareness of guidelines and recommendations that affect infection 
control epidemiology that are published by professional organizations and allied health 
services. 
3. Evaluate the occurrence of health care associated infections and make recommendations for 
their reduction that is evidence-based, nonbiased, and statistically sound. 
4. Provide documentation of recognition and compliance with appropriate regulatory and 
accrediting agencies. 
5. Provide sound practice information to those seeking advice in order to prevent disease. 
 
Responsibility Statement:   
1. All health care providers are responsible for the safety, health and well being of all patients, 
visitors, and hospital staff.  This responsibility may be met by working together continuously to 
promote safe infection control practices, observing all rules, regulations, and procedural 
guidelines, continually striving to improve the quality of patient care. For these reasons, OLOL 
has established an Infection Control and Prevention program, which requires the participation, 
support, and cooperation of all personnel. 
  2 
2. The Medical Director for Infection Prevention and Control and the Infection Preventionist(s) 
have the responsibility for infection prevention and control activities throughout the facility.  
 
3. Each department, in partnership with the medical staff, will be responsible and held accountable 
for its role in the Infection Prevention and Control program.  In addition to reporting isolation 
cases, suspected infections, and positive cultures, as well as providing required follow-up 
information, each department will be responsible for full and timely cooperation with the 
Infection Control and Prevention program/Infection Control Practitioner to develop and 
implement remedial/corrective action.  Specific assignments will be made to committees, 
departments, and individual personnel. The completion of these assignments will be expected in 
a timely yet thorough manner. 
 
4. It is the responsibility of hospital administration to oversee and provide resources for the 
Infection Control and Prevention program. 
 
5. Infection Prevention and Control Function  
a. To integrate the Infection Prevention and Control program with overall hospital 
management. Program activities are under the oversight of the Quality Leadership Team 
whose minutes are forwarded to the Medical Staff Executive Committee, hospital 
leadership and onward to Performance Excellence Committee and the Board of 
Directors. 
b. The Infection Prevention and Control Department, as part of the Quality Division 
maintains a close working relationship with the Performance Improvement Department, 
Data and Quality Analyst for performance improvement, quality assessment, patient 
relations functions, and will interface through all departments to achieve goals and 
objectives of the Hospital Infection Prevention and Control  program. 
c. The amount of time spent on infection surveillance, prevention, and control activities by 
the Infection Control Nurses will equal 4.0 FTEs. 
d. The Infection Prevention and Control team will devote time to planning, supervising, 
and insuring a functional and effective Infection Prevention and Control program; 
serving as infection control liaison/consultant to all hospital departments and nursing 
units; assisting with development of policies and procedures; assisting with educational 
classes; notification of new standards/recommendations for specific areas; surveillance 
activities which includes retrieval of data, chart reviews, and clinical consults regarding 
Isolation Precautions and hospital committee work.  The remaining time will be devoted 
to the final evaluation, analysis, reviewing and trending of infection surveillance data, 
and preparing reports. 
e. The Infection Prevention and Control Team, Medical Director for Infection Prevention 
and Control, and appropriate hospital team members meet at a minimum monthly to 
discuss, including but not limited to the following: surveillance results, prevention and 
control efforts as well as policy development.  
 
 
  3 
6. This policy statement has been unanimously adopted this date and becomes effective 
immediately.  The hospital staff and the medical staff are hereby directed to assist the Infection 
Prevention and Control Department wherever possible in the implementation of an effective 
hospital Infection Prevention and Control program. 
 
Scope of Care and Services 
1. Patient Care Services include Medical, Surgical, Specialty Care Units, Emergency 
Departments, Operating Room, Post-Anesthesia, Outpatient Surgery and off campus Provider 
Based Clinics and Outpatient Departments and Clinics.  Please refer to the Provision of Care 
Document for complete listing. 
2. Needs and risk factors of patients include a patient population at high risk of acquiring 
infections who are elderly and who have multiple comorbidities. Case mix, i.e., complexity of 
services, is moderate. 
3. Surveillance will include healthcare associated infections among patients and personnel.  
Targeted studies will be conducted on infections that are high risk and problem prone at this 
medical center.   
 
Program Description / Activities 
Infection Prevention and Control at OLOL allows for a systematic, coordinated, and continuous 
approach. 
1. Monitoring and evaluating the key performance aspects of infection control surveillance, 
prevention and management which include but are not limited to: 
a. Multidrug-resistant organisms (MDROs) such as MRSA, VRE, MDRA, CRE, C. diff, 
etc. 
b. Procedure-specific surgical site infection rates for selected procedures. 
c. Device-related infections: central line associated bloodstream infections and catheter 
associated urinary tract infections. 
d. Employee health trends - Issues will be reviewed and in-service education related to 
infection control practices will be provided. 
e. Periodic observation of nursing units to assure maintenance of Standard Precautions on 
all patients. 
f. Review items related to Infection Prevention/Control as the subject matter expert on the 
Healthcare Acquired Conditions (HAC) report. 
 
2. Continuously collect and/or screen data utilizing the electronic health record in the surveillance 
and investigation of identified isolated incidents or potentially infectious outbreaks. 
a. Review and evaluate confirmed infectious cases to assure correct implementation of 
blood and body fluid barriers as appropriate.  
b. Review positive cultures for noted trends and reportable diseases. All positive cultures 
are investigated and categorized by: 
i. Cluster of pathogens 
ii. Location involved 
iii. Personnel/medical staff involved  
iv. Prior hospitalization 
v. Reportable communicable diseases  4 
c. Bioterrorism plan will be updated as new events unfold or if new diseases erupt.  
Education and training will be provided to employees on an as needed basis. 
 
3. Facilitating a multidisciplinary approach to the prevention and control of infections. 
a. Participation in an organizational proactive education program, in an effort to reduce 
and control the spread of infection. 
b. Personnel health in-service education related to infection control practices, to ensure a 
safe environment for patients and personnel. 
c. Interaction with patient care function: The purpose of interacting with the patient care 
function is to enhance communication and to identify potential infection in patients and 
staff. 
d. Interaction with the Safety Management Team: The Environment of Care Manager shall 
be apprised of possible infectious issues that are potentially hazardous to patients and 
staff. 
e. Interaction with building Facilities Services and Construction Management to perform 
Infection Control Construction Risk Assessments on new construction, renovations, and 
maintenance projects. 
f. In-service education will be provided for all employees with particular emphasis on 
hand hygiene and the use of Standard Precautions in the care of all patients whenever 
there may be contact with body fluids (except sweat), mucous membranes, and non-
intact skin as well as the proper use of personal protective equipment (PPE) for 
personnel at risk of accidental exposure to blood and/or body fluids.  In addition, 
emphasis is placed on educating staff regarding TB and blood borne infectious diseases, 
mode of transmission, and the TB exposure control plan. 
g. The Infection Prevention and Control program endorses and recommends the use of a 
mandatory influenza vaccine program for team members and License Independent 
Practitioner’s. 
 
4. Integrating outcomes from surveillance and control activities into meaningful data to be used 
throughout the facility to allow for internal comparison for trend analysis and comparison with 
CDC NHSN database for benchmarking purposes, i.e., disseminating infection rates to the 
Medical Staff and Nurse Managers/Directors to share with staff. 
 
5. Utilizing sound epidemiologic principles and hospital associated infection research from 
recognized authoritative agencies. 
a. TJC guidelines, OSHA regulations and pertinent federal, state, and local regulations 
including CDC recommendations as well as other evidenced-based research pertaining 
to infection control and prevention are implemented and followed. 
b. Collaborating with all organizational policies and procedures impacting the prevention 
and control of infection. 
c. Departmental policies and procedures for infection control and prevention will be 
reviewed and/or revised as an ongoing practice. 
 
 
 
  5 
6. Interacting with and reporting to governmental agencies. 
▪ Reporting of communicable diseases to the Office of Public Health 
▪ Mandatory reporting of those hospital acquired infections to NHSN in accordance with 
CMS Rules 
 
7. Review of medical hazardous waste management and disposal throughout the facility. 
 
8. Participation in product evaluation. 
 
9. The Infection Prevention and Control program is part of the medical center's goal of providing 
the best possible care to its patients and a safe workplace for personnel. Effective infection 
control and prevention management also assists the medical center to optimize fiscal resources 
by decreasing healthcare associated infections in patients or personnel. 
 
10. Because factors that may present potential infection control risk may be present in any 
component of the medical center, the Infection Preventionist must maintain open 
communication with all departments within the medical center, including general services, 
clinical departments, as well as administration and medical staff. 
 
Program Improvement Activities 
1. The Performance Improvement program is recognized as an integral element in the infection 
control and prevention effort.  The Infection Control and Quality Management Departments 
utilize data to identify risk and potential quality opportunities for improvement. 
 
2. When an area of opportunity is identified, a multidisciplinary team formulates an action plan to 
identify:  
a. What action is appropriate in view of the cause, scope, and severity of the problem? 
b. Who is responsible for implementing the action? 
c. Who or what is expected to change? 
d. When is change expected to occur? 
e. When will follow-up monitoring and evaluation occur? 
 
3. If immediate action is necessary, the Infection Control Medical Director or Preventionist(s), or     
their designee, has the authority to institute any surveillance, prevention, and control measures, 
if there is reason to believe that any patient or personnel is at risk. 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation 
The results of the Infection Prevention and Control Surveillance Plan provides data to 
determine if the current processes are adequate or if processes should be modified due to 
internal or external conditions. Continued surveillance allows for reassessment of the program 
and the identification of new processes or plan goals if applicable. 
 
 