IC2013 
Page 1 of 2 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Infection Control Section: Prevention 
Measures 
Title: Special Communicable Disease 
Management Plan 
Policy Reference #: IC2013 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: October 2, 2014 Last Date Reviewed: March 31, 2024 
Last Date Revised: April 29, 2021  
 
PURPOSE: 
1. To provide guidelines for the screening, isolation, and care of patients with suspected 
or confirmed Special Communicable Diseases, for example the Ebola Virus Disease. 
2. To provide the process for the follow-up of exposed employees or those employees who 
might become ill. 
3. The site manager will be responsible for overseeing the development of policy and the 
implementation of precautions for healthcare workers and patient safety. 
4. This Plan is durable for any Special Communicable disease and disease specifics will be 
addressed on a situational basis.  
5. This Plan will be updated as other emerging pathogens evolve. 
 
HOSPITAL OVERSITE: 
Activation of Incident Command: 
1. The House Manager will be notified immediately of any patient with suspected or 
confirmed Special Communicable Disease, for example, Ebola Virus Disease. The House 
Manager/Supervisor will notify the Infection Prevention and Control Department 
Director and the Administrator on Call (AOC). After hours, the House Manager will 
assume the role of Incident Commander and activate appropriate Hospital Incident 
Command System (HICS) positions to respond to the incident. 
2. The site manager’s sole responsibility is to ensure the safe and effective delivery of 
treatment. These individuals are responsible for all aspects of infection control 
including supply monitoring and evaluation with direct observation of care before, 
during and after staff enter an isolation and treatment area. At least one site manager 
or delegate should be on-site at all times in the location where the patient is being cared 
for. 
 
Notification: 
1. Any patient entry portal (hospital and/or clinics) or treatment areas encountering a 
patient meeting the Person Under Investigation (PUI) or screening criteria will 
immediately notify the House Manager/Supervisor. 
2. House Manager/Supervisor will notify AOC and determine the level of Command 
structure required to respond to the incident. IC2013 
Page 2 of 2 
 
3. The following will be alerted by PBX when instructed by the House Manager, AOC, 
or Incident Command Center: 
 
a. Infection Control Medical Director and Infection Prevention and Control 
Department will coordinate a call to the Office of Public Health at 1-800-
256-2748. 
b. Chief Medical Officer 
c. Chief Nursing Officer 
d. VPs of Support Services and Communications 
e. Security 
f. Safety Manager 
g. Others as directed by ICS Commander 
4. No overhead paging unless directed by ICS Command. 
 
 
Procedure: 
A. EBOLA 
B. COVID-19 
 