OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Infection Control Section: Prevention 
Measures 
Title: Special Communicable Disease 
Management Plan: COVID-19 
Policy Reference #: IC2013b 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: October 2, 2014 Last Date Reviewed: March 31, 2024 
Last Date Revised:  April 29, 2021 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses. Some cause illness in people; numerous other 
coronaviruses circulate among animals, including camels, cats, and bats. Rarely, animal 
coronaviruses can evolve and infect people and then spread between people such as has been 
seen with Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV), Severe Acute 
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV), and now SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19.) 
 
General Information on COVID-19: 
Symptoms of COVID-19 
 
People with COVID-19 have had a wide range of symptoms reported – ranging from mild symptoms to 
severe illness. 
Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus. People with these symptoms may have 
COVID-19: Fever or chills, Cough, Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, Fatigue, Muscle or body 
aches, Headache, New loss of taste or smell, Sore throat, Congestion or runny nose, Nausea or vomiting, 
Diarrhea. 
 
Infection Control Guidance for Healthcare Professionals about Coronavirus (COVID-19) 
Because of the potential for asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic transmission of Sars-CoV-2, source 
control measures may be recommended by the Infection Prevention and Control department during 
periods of high community transmission. Cloth masks, facemasks and respirators should not be placed 
on young children under age 2, anyone who cannot wear one safely, such as someone who has a 
disability or an underlying medical condition that precludes wearing a mask safely, or anyone who is 
unconscious, incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove their cloth mask, facemask or respirator 
without assistance. Patients suspected or confirmed of having COVID-19 should be evaluated in a 
private room with the door closed. Healthcare personnel entering the room should use Enhanced 
Precautions, which means Droplet and Contact Precautions and use a N95 respirator and eye protection.  
 
 
Due to the fluid nature of an emerging pathogen pandemic, the Infection Prevention and 
Control department may elect to follow the Pandemic Standard Operating Procedure during 
periods of high community transmission of SARS-CoV-2. 
 
 
 
 REFERENCES: 
 
1. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Symptoms of COVID-19 | COVID-19 | CDC 
(Page last updated: June 25, 2024) 
2. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Infection Control Guidance: SARS-CoV-2 | 
COVID-19 | CDC (Page last updated: May 8, 2023) 
3. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Interim Guidance for Managing Healthcare 
Personnel with SARS-CoV-2 Infection or Exposure to SARS-CoV-2 | COVID-19 | CDC (Page last 
updated: September 23, 2022) 
 