 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Infection Control Section: Prevention 
Measures 
Title: Special Communicable Disease 
Management Plan: Ebola Virus 
Policy Reference #: IC2013a 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: October 2, 2014 Last Date Reviewed: March 31, 2024 
Last Date Revised: March 31, 2024  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Ebola Virus Disease (EVD): Ebola Virus Disease is a rare viral illness that causes severe bleeding, organ failure, and can lead to 
death. Ebola is reportable to the National Notifiable Disease Surveillance System (NNDSS) in all US states and territories. Early 
recognition of Ebola is critical for infection control. Health care providers should be alert for and evaluate any patients suspected 
of having Ebola. 
 
Suspect Case: A person who has both consistent signs or symptoms and risk factors as follows: 
1. Elevated body temperature or subjective fever or symptoms, including severe headache, fatigue, muscle 
pain, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, or unexplained hemorrhage; AND 
2. An epidemiologic risk factor within the 21 days before the onset of symptoms (for example, direct contact with 
blood or body fluids from a person with suspected or confirmed EVD , contact with bats or wild animals in an 
area with an active Ebola Disease outbreak, or contact with semen from a man who recovered from EVD.)  
 
Confirmed Case: 
Laboratory-confirmed diagnostic evidence of Ebola virus infection. 
Early recognition is critical to controlling the spread of Ebola virus. Healthcare providers should evaluate the patient’s 
epidemiologic risk, including a history of travel to a country with widespread Ebola virus transmission or contact within 
the preceding 21 days with a person with Ebola while the person was symptomatic. If Ebola is suspected, Louisiana Office 
of Public Health (LOPH) should be immediately contacted for consultation and to assess whether testing is indicated and 
the need for initiating identification of contacts. (LOPH Infectious Disease Epidemiologist 1-800-256-2748.) 
 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
Ebola Virus Disease Travel Areas (Subject to Change: Future updates to travel areas will be available at points for registration as 
directed by CDC.) See geographical maps at points of registration. 
Incubation: 
1. Incubation period can be from two (2) to twenty-one (21) days. 
A. The most frequent incubation period has been approximately nine to eleven days. 
Transmission: 
1. Transmission of the Ebola virus is through infectious blood and/or body fluids. 
A. The Ebola virus has not been shown to be transmitted in the air. 
2. Close contact with a person with confirmed or suspected Ebola Virus Disease. 
A. Persons who have cared for an individual with a suspected or confirmed Ebola. 
B. Household contacts of an individual with suspected or confirmed Ebola. 
 
Ebola POLICY: 
1. Patients triaged in the Emergency Department, Inpatient, or Ambulatory entry points including a variety of clinic 
locations will be asked about travel outside of the country within the past 21 days. At registration and triage,  
notices are posted about notifying the nurse if patient has traveled and surgical masks are provided if needed.  
2. Patients presenting (in ED, Hospital, or Clinics) who do not meet the case definition for admission will not be 
admitted to the hospital for purely monitoring purposes. They will be referred to the Office of Public Health by 
immediately calling 1 (800) 256-2748. Discussion between OPH and the healthcare provider will evaluate on a 
case-by-case basis to determine the recommended follow-up for this patient. OPH would assume at-home 
monitoring for these patients. 
 
PROCEDURES for Ebola Virus Disease: 
 
I. TEAM MEMBER CRISIS INTERVENTION 
In the event that a team member requires debriefing or defusing services, the manager/supervisor can contact 
the Administrator on Call to access the Crisis Response Team. (See Policy OO-GN-028) 
 
REFERENCES: 
1. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Clinical Guidance for Ebola Disease | Ebola | CDC . (Page 
last reviewed: September 12, 2024) 
2. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for 
Patients in U.S. Hospitals who are Suspected or Confirmed to have Selected Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers (VHF) | 
Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers (VHFs) | CDC (Page last reviewed: September 13, 2024) 
3. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Health Advisory: Guidelines for Evaluation of US Patients 
Suspected of Having Ebola Virus Disease. Distributed via the CDC Health Alert Network 364 
4. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for 
Patients in U.S. Hospitals who are Suspected or Confirmed to have Selected Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers (VHF) | 
Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers (VHFs) | CDC (Page last reviewed: September 13, 2024)) 
5. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Guidance for Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) | Viral 
Hemorrhagic Fevers (VHFs) | CDC (Page last reviewed: September 13, 2024).) 
6. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Safe Handling of Human Remains of VHF Patients in U.S. 
Hospitals and Mortuaries | Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers (VHFs) | CDC. (Page last reviewed: September 13, 2024).) 
7. Louisiana Administrative Code, Title 51 Public Health Sanitary Code, Part II. The Control of Diseases, 
Section 117 A-G Disease Control Measures including Isolation/Quarantine, November 2023. 
8. United States Department of Transportation: Planning Guidance for Handling Category A Solid Waste | PHMSA 
(dot.gov) (Page last updated: April 1, 2024). 
9. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, The National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health, Mortuary Guidance Job Aid: Postmortem Preparation in a Hospital Room. 
10. OLOL Policy OO-GN-028. Crisis Response Team. February 12, 2024. 
11. OLOL Policy LBA203. Guidance for Specimen Collection, Transport, Testing and Submission for Patients with 
Suspected Infection with Ebola Virus Disease or other Special Communicable Diseases. May 22, 2023. 
 