 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Imaging Services 
Subject:  IV Access and Injection of Contrast Media Section:  CT / MRI 
Date of Origination:   Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
August 2014 
01/15, 01/17, 12/17, 5/19, 1/21/ 3/23, 
2/24 
Serial Code:  ICT 005 
  
PURPOSE: To establish guidelines for evaluating safe IV access and conforming to accepted 
guidelines with regards to the injection of IV contrast material.  
 
POLICY:               Authorized personnel will access and safely administer contrast media according to 
procedure. 
 
PROCEDURE: 1. Contrast media will be stored in a secure area accessible by authorized personnel only 
and stored in an environment suggested by the manufacturer. 
              2. The technologist may inject patients only if the following criteria are met: 
    A. State mandated guidelines are followed.     
 B. The technologist appropriately documents the type and amount of contrast     
injected.   
 C. All incidents must be reported within twenty-four hours to the supervisor.  This 
includes, but is not limited to, reactions, misadministration, and infiltration. 
 D. Injections are to be administered through a 22 gauge or larger IV catheter in 
the mid forearm or higher, with the exception of CT angiograms and pulmonary 
embolism studies which require a 20 gauge or larger in the mid forearm or higher. 
 
Should a patient arrive with a patent IV access in a location or size different than 
listed above, it is to the Radiologist discretion if the current access may be used. 
 
Power PICCS may be injected with the power injector up to a rate of 5ml/sec with 
a psi setting of 300.  No other PICC lines may be used for power injected contrast. 
 
 Mediports may only be used in the event no peripheral line could be obtained and 
with Radiologist approval.  Mediports are to be hand injected except for the 
power ports.  Power ports may be power injected with a rate of 5ml/sec and a 
maximum PSI of 300.   If being used for a power injection, the power port must 
be accessed using a power port access needle that indicates it is power injector 
compatible.  No other access kits are to be power injected through. 
 
Central lines may only be power injected in the event no peripheral line could be obtained and with Radiologist approval unless the catheter is designed for power 
injection and states the acceptable rate on the catheter.  If a routine central line is 
used for power injection, the injector must be lowered to a setting of maximum 50 
psi with a flow rate of 2.5ml/sec or less. Power injectable central lines may be 
used with the flow rate stated on the catheter hub.  
If CT Angio is ordered with a non-power rated central line, CURRENT IV access 
will need to be changed to a power injectable line.  (9 French Cordis sheaths are 
acceptable at a rate of 4ml/sec for CT Angio) 
 
 3. Question patient regarding any history of allergic reactions to medicines or contrast 
media. 
                 4.  Make positive identification of the patient and contrast prior to the injection. 
 
  5.  Ensure all appropriate PPE is available as well as any other needed supplies.  
    
6.  After injection, observe patient for any adverse reactions. The most common, are 
headache, nausea, rash, flushing of face and itching.  
 
7.  In the event of severe reaction, notify radiologist or physician on site immediately. 
 
8.  In the event a repeat procedure is required, the radiologist will determine the 
appropriate interval of time before reinjection as well as the amount of contrast needed.  
   
 
  
 