 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Imaging Services 
Subject:  Patient Care (Inpatient) Receiving Radiation Therapy Section:  Nuclear Medicine 
Date of Origination:  July 2003 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
9/11 
01/16,01/17, 2/19, 1/21, 3/23, 2/24 
Serial Code:  INM 012 
    
POLICY: Patient Care (Inpatient) Receiving Radiation Therapy 
Radiation therapy with unsealed /sealed sources such as I -131 and P -32 will be provided in accordance with 
radiation safety practices. 
PROCEDURE: 
Radiation therapy with unsealed sources constitutes the administration of dosages of radioactive materials 
(radionuclides) into the body. 
1. THERAPY REQUEST 
All therapy requests are to be directed to the Nuclear Medicine department. 
2. RADIATION NOTICES AND ORDERS 
The "Radiation Safety Notice for Patient's Room Door" will be affixed by the Radiation Safety Personnel to the 
door and will identify that radiation therapy is in progress, as well as radiation safety restrictions for visitors and 
nursing staff.  
The written chart orders for these patients will outline the radiation safety practices to be implemented during 
the inpatient radiation therapy. 
3. PATIENT ROOM 
Patients receiving radiation therapy with unsealed sources will be admitted only to the approved rooms. Rooms 
for radiation therapy patients will be identified in accordance with Title 33 Regulations, see LAC 
33:XV.421.A.2. The patient, unless otherwise indicated, is not to be removed from the room until the Radiation 
Safety Officer (RSO), or his/her designee, has established that the patient's radiation level has decreased to 
acceptable limits. The patient's room is not released for cleaning and subsequent reoccupation until approved by 
the RSO and/or residual radiation levels are at or below levels set by the RSO. 
The warning signs and notices posted on the door to any patient's room by the RSO should remain until the 
patient's room has been decontaminated and patient isolation restrictions are released by the Radiation Safety 
personnel. 
Any spills or body fluids excreted by a radioactive patient (i.e., vomits, urine, sputum, etc.) is to be considered 
radioactive and will require decontamination by Radiation Safety Personnel.  Call Nuclear Medicine 
immediately at ext 58995.  2 
No visitors unless approved by the RSO and/or the Nuclear Medicine physician. 
4. NURSING CARE 
The Nursing Staff will follow the direction of the Radiation Safety personnel/Nuclear Medicine Department and 
the RSO and address questions or problems to the Nuclear Medicine Department on a 24 hour basis. Routine 
physician orders should be conducted before administration of radiation therapy. Hamper stands and appropriate 
bags will be used to contain linen and trash in the room. Gloves and shoe covers should be worn when handling 
secretions/excretions. No linen, trash, or other objects/articles are to be removed from the room until inspected 
and released by the Radiation Safety personnel. 
Disposable food trays shall be requested and utilized. The patient will be provided with disposable gloves and 
shoe covers. The patient will remain in the room and not be allowed to ambulate in the hallway. 
Patients should be encouraged to care for themselves and to be as self-sufficient as possible, thus reducing the 
need for close contact with hospital staff. 
All nursing care should be pre-planned to provide maximum care for the patient in a minimum of time. If no 
specific time and distance recommendations are given in the chart, nursing personnel are encouraged to 
maintain a distance of six (6) feet from the patient unless giving direct nursing care. 
Gowns and gloves must be worn when handling the patient's bedpans, soiled bed linen, or any container of 
radioactive material (i.e., urine, vomit, excreta from incontinent patients) from the patient. 
5. NURSING PERSONNEL 
Pregnant or personnel who are lactating should not care for patients receiving this form of radiation therapy.  
Nursing Personnel should be rotated in the care of the patient according to the time limits allowed. 
6. LABORATORY/RADIOLOGY 
Laboratory work (i.e., involving blood or urine samples) and x-rays should be done prior to the radiation 
therapy. Those which become necessary after the patient has been dosed with radiation should be done 48 hours 
following the time the patient received the dose, unless urgent. 
7. EMERGENCY CARE/RESUSCITATION 
In an emergency, such as a Code Blue, the patient should be treated as would any patient. The physician in 
charge and the Radiation Safety personnel should be notified immediately. Care for the patient should not be 
withheld until these individuals arrive. 
Should the patient expire, the physician in charge and the RSO should be notified immediately. Nothing is to be 
removed from the room until released by the RSO. 
8. RELEASE OF A PATIENT CONTAINING RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL 
A patient will not be released from the hospital until it has been determined that the exposure level from the 
patient is at or below 7 mR/hr at 1 meter, at the highest reading from the patient. This procedure is to be 
followed in any instance where the patient is to be discharged with a radioactive source in his/her body (i.e. I-
131, Gold 198 seeds, P-32 intercavitary implant, Palladium implants).  3 
9. RELEASE OF ROOM FOR REUSE 
The room will be monitored and released by the Radiation Safety personnel. Upon the determination by the 
RSO that the room is no longer contaminated and can be reoccupied the Radiation Safety personnel will issue a 
clearance form that will be signed by the Nuclear Medicine Radiation Safety personnel. This form is to indicate 
that the room has been released and is ready for cleaning and re-occupation. A copy of this form will be 
delivered to Housekeeping and the Bed Control office. 