 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Imaging Services 
Subject:  Disposal and Storage of Radioactive Material Section:  Nuclear Medicine 
Date of Origination:  July 2003 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
January 15, 2019 
02/2019, 1/21, 3/23, 2/24 
Serial Code:  INM 004 
    
POLICY:  Disposal and Storage of Radioactive Material    
PROCEDURE:   
Disposal of Radioactive Material 
The following contaminated material will be returned to the supplier for proper disposal, while complying with 
the applicable federal and state regulations in regards to shipping return radioactive items. 
1. Used syringes. 
2. Unused doses of radionuclides. 
3. Bulk dose vials containing radionuclides. 
4. Vials containing radionuclide or trace contamination. 
Any contaminated radioactive material not returned to the supplier, will be held for decay in the "hot lab" in the 
Nuclear Medicine department until monitoring of the container yields background. When the contents have 
reached background, the material may be disposed of in the appropriate manner. 
Prior to the disposal of any radioactive material, all radioactive labels must be defaced or removed from 
containers.  
Storage of Contaminated Material for Decay 
When treating patients with unsealed sources of radionuclides in the hospital setting, it is necessary to store 
certain contaminated material that has been contaminated by the patient's body fluids. These are linens, pillows, 
scrubs worn by the patients, and trash that has been contaminated by the patient. The following procedure 
should be used when dealing with this material. 
After the patient has been discharged from the hospital, the patient room and all contents, including trash and 
linen, are assayed and decontaminated.   The patient room and contents will be monitored periodically. When 
the contents have reached background, the material may be disposed of in the appropriate manner, i.e. linen to 
the laundry, trash to the normal hospital trash etc. 