 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Imaging Services 
Subject:  Ordering & Receiving of Radiopharmaceutical Doses 
& other Radioactive Materials 
Section:  Nuclear Medicine 
Date of Origination:          July 2003 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
January 16, 2019 
02/2020 
02/2019, 1/21, 3/23, 2/24 
Serial Code:  INM 010 
    
POLICY: ORDERING & RECEIVING OF RADIOPHARMACEUTICAL DOSES AND OTHER RADIOACTIVE 
MATERIALS 
PROCEDURE: 
When placing orders for all radioactive materials, the Nuclear Medicine Physician and/or the Nuclear Medicine 
Technologist will ensure that the requested material, and quantities are covered by the terms of the department’s 
Radioactive Materials License and that the following procedures are followed: 
The Nuclear Medicine department orders unit doses and bulk doses of radiopharmaceuticals from one of the 
following Nuclear Pharmacies: 
1. Cardinal Health 
2. Anazao Health Corp 
3. Alpha-Omega Services, Inc. 
4. Pioneer Pharmacy 
There are no Molybdenum/Technetium Generators on the premises.  
 
Upon the receipt of a proper physician's order, the following steps should be used to obtain the dose. 
 
1.  The order for the radiopharmaceutical dose is placed with a registered pharmacist or 
designee, at one of the nuclear pharmacies listed above. 
 
2.  The radiopharmaceutical dose will be prepared and packaged by the pharmacy according 
to their policies and procedures. 
 
3.  The packaged dose will be delivered to the designated, secure area, in the Nuclear 
Medicine/PET CT Department. The pharmacy has been issued a key, so that all carriers 
can enter this secure area during unstaffed hours, when necessary.  
 
4.  The package will be surveyed and inspected by the Nuclear Medicine Technologist, in 
accordance with department policy and procedure. 
 
5. In all cases where a therapeutic dose of a radionuclide must be administered to a patient,  2 
the order must be reviewed by the Nuclear Medicine Physician. After review and 
consultation with a Nuclear Medicine Physician, an order will be placed for the 
prescribed dose, according to the pharmacy’s policies and procedures. 
 
6.  The Nuclear Medicine Physician will directly supervise the administration of all  
Therapeutic doses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 