 IRS 015 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Imaging Services Section: Radiation Safety 
Title: Radiation Monitoring/Badge Program  
Policy 
Reference #: IRS015 
Supersedes #: IRS011 
Date of Origination: 5/11 Last Date 
Reviewed: 
1/17, 12/17,12/18, 5/19, 
1/21, 3/23, 2/24 
Last Date Revised: 1/15 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to minimize health risk and ensure personnel are complying with the occupational 
dose limits and the ALARA principle.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
ALARA - “As Low As Reasonably Achievable” which is the approach to radiation protection to manage and 
control exposures to the workforce and to the general public  
 
Declared pregnant worker - A women who has voluntarily declared to her employer, in writing, her pregnancy 
for the purpose of being subject to the lower occupational dose limits and monitoring to the embryo/fetus.   
 
Deep dose equivalent - The dose equivalent derived from external radiation at a depth of 1 cm in tissue. 
 
mSv (millisievert) - a unit of measurement - International System of Units term for dose equivalent 
 
NRC - Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
 
RSO - Radiation Safety Officer 
 
TLD badge - thermoluminescence dosimeter 
 
POLICY: 
A. Monitoring Radiation Exposure  
Radiation monitoring equipment will be furnished by Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center to 
persons who are at risk for occupational exposure that may exceed 500mr per year (10% of the 
applicable radiation dose limits)1 or persons deemed necessary by the RSO and Radiation Safety 
Committee.  The type and number of badges is under the supervision of the radiation physicist. 
1. A whole body TLD badge to be worn at collar level, outside the apron, will be furnished to 
persons working in areas where ionizing radiation is in use. 
2. At the discretion of the Physicist/Department Manager, a finger TLD badge will be assigned in 
addition to whole body TLD badges by persons performing implant therapy, preparing 
radioisotopes, or injection radioisotopes for imaging or therapeutic purposes. 
3. Personnel are encouraged to notify imaging management in writing as soon as pregnancy is 
known.  Fetal badges will be provided to declared pregnant personnel and are to be worn at waist 
level inside the apron for fetal exposure monitoring. 
 
 
  IRS 015 
Page 2 of 3 
B. Personnel operating and working in a room with fixed ionizing radiographic equipment, personnel 
operating mobile ionizing radiographic equipment and personnel administering radioactive sources will 
be issued and required to wear radiation monitoring equipment. 
 
Personnel who are concerned about their level of radiation exposure can request in writing a radiation 
monitoring badge. Request will be submitted by the imaging manager for consideration to the Radiation 
Safety Committee. 
 
 
C. Rules for Wearing Monitoring Badges.   
The estimate of radiation exposure made from the monitoring devices will be accurate only if badges are 
worn correctly.  The following guidelines shall apply to persons deemed necessary to wear a badge: 
1. The TLD badge shall be worn at all times while working in any radiation area of the medical 
center. 
2. Leave the TLD badge in the designated storage place in you work area when not on duty.  Do not 
take the badge out of the medical center. 
3. The medical center’s TLD badge is not to be worn while on duty at another facility.  The badge 
is the property of OLOLRMC and meant to indicate the effectiveness of this medical center’s 
radiation safety program. 
4. Never wear a TLD badge issued to another person. 
5. Do not tamper with the TLD badge. 
6. Report the loss of a badge immediately to an imaging manager. 
7. Report any other incident relative to the wearing of the badge (such as accidental exposure when 
badge is not worn) to an imaging manager. 
 
D. Distribution / Collection / Processing of Monitoring Badges 
1. New badges will be supplied by the 1st day of the month.  
2. The previous month’s badges must be returned by the 10th day of the month. 
3. The TLD badge shall be processed monthly.   
4. An individual’s TLD badge shall be processed immediately when it is suspected that he or she 
might have received a single exposure > 1mSv (100mRem) or a cumulative exposure > 2 mSv 
(200 mRem) in 1 week. 
5. Personnel may view their exposure report through an imaging manager. 
 
E. Personnel working at other facilities who are at risk for occupational exposure that may exceed 500mr 
per year 
1. Personnel working at other facilities should notify an imaging manager and complete a request for 
additional occupational exposure levels form. 
2. If the alternate employer reports exposure through Landauer, the employee’s cumulative exposure 
levels will be monitored by the Physicist by means of the METER report. 
3. Employees working at other facilities that do not report through Landauer will be sent a “Request for 
Occupational Exposure levels” form for the facility to complete and return to Imaging Services.   
 
F. Acceptable Levels 
1. The Physicist will review and record results of personnel monitoring not less than once in any 
calendar quarter. 
i. Exposures of individuals to less than Investigational Level I – No further action will be 
taken except when deemed appropriate by the Physicist or RSO.  
ii. Exposures of individuals equal to or greater than Investigational Level I, but less than 
Investigational Level II – The Physicist or RSO will review the exposure of each 
individual whose quarterly exposure equal or exceed Investigational Level I and will  IRS 015 
Page 3 of 3 
report the results of the review at the first RSC meeting following the quarter when the 
exposure was reported.  No action related specifically to the exposure is required unless 
deemed appropriate by the RSC. 
iii. Exposures of individuals exceeding Investigation Level II – The Physicist or RSO will 
contact the person with their level and request the completion of an investigational form 
(the cause of the elevated exposures). 
 
 
Department   Group   Level I (mrem) Level II (mrem) 
Nuclear Medicine All 250 500 
Patient Care All 250 500 
Radiology Unit Staff 
Radiologist 
250 
250 
500 
500 
Cath Lab Unit Staff 
Cardiologist 
250 
250 
500 
500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
The Louisiana Medical Radiation Health and Safety Act R.S. 37:3200 through R.S. 37:3219 
 
The Louisiana Medical Radiation Health and Safety Act R.S. 40:2100 through R.S. 40:2118 
 
Environmental Regulatory Code LAC 33:XV 
 