 IRS 014 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Imaging Services Section: Radiation Safety 
Title: Radiation Safety - ALARA 
Policy 
Reference #: IRS 014 
Supersedes #: IRS 003 
Date of Origination: 5/11 Last Date 
Reviewed: 
1/17, 12/17,12/18, 5/19, 
1/21, 2/24 
Last Date Revised: 01/15, 7/21, 10/21, 3/23,  
 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to establish a safe working environment by minimizing radiation 
exposure to patients, physicians, and staff to levels as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA). 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
ARRT - The American Registry of Radiologic Technologist - A credentialing organization that 
seeks to ensure high quality patient care in radiologic technology.   
 
License - a certificate issued by the LSRTBE  authorizing the licensee to use radioactive 
materials or equipment emitting or detecting ionizing radiation on humans for diagnostic 
purposes. 
 
Licensed practitioner - a person licensed to practice medicine, dentistry, podiatry, chiropractic, 
or osteopathy in this state, or an advanced registered nurse licensed to practice in this state. 
 
LSRTBE- The Louisiana State Radiologic Technology Board of Examiners. 
 
Radiologist - a physician certified by the American Board of Radiology or the American 
Osteopathic Board of Radiology, the British Royal College of Radiology, or certified as a 
radiologist by the Canadian College of Physicians and Surgeons. 
 
Radiologic technologist - a person who is a radiographer, a radiation therapy technologist or a 
nuclear medicine technologist licensed under Louisiana Statue 37:3200 - 3219 who under the 
direction and supervision of a licensed practitioner applies radiation to humans upon prescription 
of a licensed practitioner. 
 
Nuclear medicine technologist - a person, other than a licensed practitioner, who under the 
direction and supervision of a licensed practitioner uses radioactive materials on humans for 
diagnostic or therapeutic purposes upon prescription of a licensed practitioner. 
 
 
 
 
 
  IRS 014 
Page 2 of 4 
POLICY: 
All medical imaging personnel should follow these principals to ensure the safety of their 
patients and to minimize their occupational exposure.  Radiation safety should include: 
A. Adhering to the as low as reasonably achievable, or ALARA, principle; the goal of 
this concept is to minimize radiation exposure while obtaining the best quality 
diagnostic image possible. 
B. Minimizing the length of time the patient or others are in the path of the x-ray beam. 
C. Maximizing the distance between the source of ionizing radiation and the person 
exposed to it. 
D. Maximizing shielding of the patient and others from radiation exposure. 
 
PERSONNEL 
A. A qualified full-time, part-time or consulting radiologist must supervise the ionizing 
radiology services and must interpret only those radiologic tests that are determined by 
the medical staff to require a radiologist’s specialized knowledge.  The Radiologist shall 
have clinical privileges delineated by the medical staff.  
B. Only personnel who are registered (ARRT) and/or licensed in the appropriate radiologic 
technology modality or category by the Louisiana State Radiologic Technology Board of 
Examiners and designated as qualified by the medical staff may use the radiologic 
equipment and administer procedures under the direction of a physician. 
C. A student enrolled in and attending a board approved educational program (in training for 
ARRT  certification) or college of radiologic technology who applies ionizing radiation 
to humans while under the supervision of a licensed practitioner or a licensed radiologic 
technologist. 
D.  Fluoroscopic procedures shall be conducted by a physician licensed in the state or by a 
radiology technologist licensed in the state and who is under the direct supervision of a 
radiologist or other physician.  
 
SAFETY 
 
A. All personnel working in areas where radiation monitoring is deemed necessary by the 
Radiation Safety Officer and Radiation Safety Committee must wear their radiation-
monitoring badge at the collar level and outside the apron at all times while on duty. 
 
B. All radiation monitoring badges will be distributed on the last working day of each 
month.  The exposure reports will be accessible for personnel view by contacting a 
radiology manager.   
 
C. Individuals who will be operating the X-ray systems shall be adequately instructed in the 
safe operating procedures and be competent in the safe use of the equipment.  New 
personnel must be oriented to radiation safety practices. 
 
D. Personnel shall follow safe work practices when initiating an exposure whenever 
possible. 
a. When possible stand inside the shielded control booth when initiating an 
exposure. 
b. The radiations field should be no larger than clinically necessary and in no 
situation be larger than the film size or detector size.    IRS 014 
Page 3 of 4 
c. Gonadal shielding of the patient is required in cases where it does not interfere 
with the acquisition of the desired diagnostic information. 
d. Gonadal shielding is not to be used during abdominal and pelvic radiography. 
e. Gonadal shielding is not to be used on NICU patients.   
f. X-ray room doors must be closed when x-rays are being produced.  
g. Never expose any person for demonstration purposes only.   
h. Portable or mobile X-ray equipment should be used only for examinations where 
it is impractical to transfer the patient to a stationary X-ray installation. 
 
E. Never x-ray a pregnant patient or anyone who suspects she is pregnant unless directed to 
do so by a radiologist or attending physician.  A registrant shall report any dose to an 
embryo/fetus in excess of 50 mSv (5 rem) dose equivalent that is a result of a diagnostic 
X-ray procedure. 
a. The medical center will provide additional monitoring for declared pregnant 
women.  The Declaration of Pregnancy form will be kept in the employees 
personnel file. 
 
F. Whenever possible, mechanical devices only (e.g., tape, Velcro straps) shall be utilized to 
immobilize patients during radiology procedures.  In those circumstances when 
mechanical immobilizers are impractical and human intervention is necessary, the 
individual restraining the patient shall do the following: 
a. Wear a 0.5mm lead equivalency protective apron during the x-ray exposure.  If 
the restrainer’s hands might be in the primary x-ray beam, leaded gloves (0.25mm 
thick) shall also be worn. 
b. Wear a personnel radiation monitoring device (e.g., film badge) outside the lead 
apron at collar level. 
c. Maximize the distance separating him / her and the x-ray beam  
 
G. Personnel shall follow safe work practices in fluoroscopy rooms when initiating an 
exposure. 
a. Only persons whose presence is needed should be in the fluoroscopy room during 
exposure. 
b. Utilize lead drapes whenever possible for fluoroscopic exams. 
c. Protective equipment must be worn by all personnel present during a fluoroscopic 
examination 
i. Lead Aprons.  A 0.5mm lead equivalent apron with full front coverage 
shall be worn by all physicians and personnel working in all flouro areas. 
ii. Thyroid Shield.  Thyroid shields shall be worn by all physicians and 
personnel working in extended flouro areas.  Physicians and personnel in 
other flouro areas are not required to wear thyroid shields. 
iii. Eye Protection – Lead goggles or lead glass shields shall be worn by 
physicians and    other personnel working in close proximity to the patient 
during high-output flouro procedures when no lead glass shield is in place 
between the radiation source and the fluoroscopist’s eyes.  Physicians and 
personnel in other flouro areas are not required to wear lead goggles or 
lead glass shields. 
d. Fluoroscopy room door should be closed during fluoroscopic examination 
e. Never expose any person for demonstration purposes only.  IRS 014 
Page 4 of 4 
 
H. Personnel shall report any medical event, except for an event that results from patient 
intervention, in which the administration of radiation involves the wrong patient, a 
procedure different than that which was authorized by the licensed practitioner, or a body 
site different from that which was authorized and intended to be exposed by the 
authorized X-ray procedure.  This shall be reported immediately to your departmental 
manager and through the OLOLRMC safety event reporting system.  For reporting refer 
to the organization Safety Event Reporting Policy Org/Ops/GN/019. 
 
I. Equipment Maintenance – Radiation-producing units and protective equipment shall be 
checked regularly to ensure proper operation. 
a. Radiation-Producing Units.  Each radiation-producing unit shall be surveyed at 
least annually by a radiation physicist and all corrective actions documented.   
b. Lead Aprons.  Fluoroscopic lead aprons shall be inspected annually for integrity 
of lead protection.  Defective aprons are taken out of service. 
J. Documentation.  Proper documentation shall be maintained for each fluoroscopic 
procedure. 
a. Patient Records – The total cumulated flouro time shall be included in the 
patient’s medical record. 
b. Personnel Records – A record of each person’s radiation exposure status is 
available from an imaging manager. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
The Louisiana Medical Radiation Health and Safety Act R.S. 37:3200 through R.S. 37:3219 
 
The Louisiana Medical Radiation Health and Safety Act R.S. 40:2100 through R.S. 40:2118 
 
Environmental Regulatory Code LAC 33:XV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 