 IRS 014 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Imaging Services Section: Radiation Safety 
Title: Standard Operating Procedures for 
Patient Fluoroscopic Exposure  
Policy 
Reference #: IRS 018 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 2/2022 Last Date 
Reviewed: 
3/22; 6/22; 12/22, 3/23, 
2/24 
Last Date Revised: 3/22; 6/22;12/22:5/23 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
The purpose of this policy is to identify radiation exposure and skin dose threshold levels, that if 
exceeded, trigger further review and/or patient evaluation to assess for adverse radiation effects. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Air Kerma-area product (PKA): The integral of the air kerma free-in-air (i.e., in the absence of 
backscatter) over the area of the x-ray beam in a plane perpendicular to the beam axis. In many medical 
publications, the acronym used for this quantity is KAP (measured in mGy cm2). 
 
Fluoroscopically Guided Interventional Procedures (FGI): Procedures comprising guided therapeutic 
and diagnostic interventions, by percutaneous or other access, usually performed under local anesthesia 
and/or sedation, with fluoroscopic imaging used to localize the lesion/treatment site, monitor the 
procedure, and control and document the therapy. 
 
 
Fluoroscopy: Fluoroscopy is a technique for generating x-ray images and presenting them continuously 
as visible images during a diagnostic or interventional procedure. 
 
Fluoroscopy Time: amount of time patient is exposed to an active fluoroscopic beam. Fluoroscopy time 
is measured in seconds and/or minutes. 
 
Gray (Gy): the special name for the SI unit of absorbed dose; 1 Gy = 1 J/kg 
 
Kerma (K): The quotient of the sum of the kinetic energies, dEtr, of all charged particles liberated by 
uncharged particles in a mass dm of material, and the mass dm of that material. K ¼ dEtr dm The unit for 
kerma is joule per kilogram (J kg1 ). This unit’s special name is gray (Gy). ‘Kerma’ is an acronym for 
‘kinetic energy released in a mass’. 
 
 
Reference Air Kerma (RAK): Air kerma of the primary x-ray beam measured under specific conditions 
and expressed as the equivalent value at the patient entrance reference point. It is the air kerma 
accumulated at a specific point in space relative to the fluoroscopic gantry during a procedure. Reference 
air kerma does not include backscatter and is measured in units of Gy.  
 
  IRS 014 
Page 2 of 2 
Substantial Radiation Dose Level (SRDL): An appropriately selected reference value used to trigger 
additional dose management actions during a procedure and medical follow-up for a radiation level that 
might produce a clinically relevant injury in an average patient. There is no implication that radiation 
levels above the SRDL will always cause an injury, or that radiation levels below the SRDL will never 
cause an injury. 
 
Threshold dose for tissue reactions: Dose estimated to result in 1% incidence of tissue reactions  
 
 
POLICY: 
 
1. Principles of ALARA will be always adhered to.  (See OLOL policy IRS-014 “Radiation 
Safety – ALARA”) 
2. For fluoroscopy units that monitor fluoroscopy time, the equipment will emit an audible 
alarm for every five minutes of exposure. 
3. Staff will notify the operator when the total fluoroscopy time has reached 30 minutes, 60 
minutes, and every 10 minutes thereafter. 
4. Substantial Radiation Dose Levels intended to trigger patient follow-up to detect 
clinically relevant tissue reactions are as follows: 
 
 SRDL Values 
Cumulative Air-Kerma (AKA Reference Air-Kerma) 5 GY (5000mGy) 
Fluoro Time 60 min 
 
 
5. The Operating Physician will notify the patient when a Substantial Radiation Dose Level 
was used for their procedure and why it was necessary.  
6. At follow-up visit, the physician should assess patients’ skin to determine if the tissue 
reactions have occurred.  
7. If a tissue reaction is identified or suspected, the patient shall be referred to an 
appropriate provider for management. 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
ICRP, 2013. Radiological protection in cardiology. ICRP Publication 120. Ann. ICRP 42(1). 
 
Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality, 2019. Environmental Regulatory Code 33:XV. 
 
NCPR, 2014. Outline of Administrative Policies for Quality Assurance and Peer Review of Tissue 
Reactions Associated with Fluoroscopically Guided Interventions. NCPR Publication No. 11. 
 
SCAI, 2021.  SCAI Expert Consensus Update on Best Practices in the Cardiac Catheterization 
Laboratory. DOI: 10.1002/ccd.29744 