OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 27 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER  
MAIN AND AFFILIATE LABORATORY SERVICES 
QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN 
     Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 3/8/2021 5/13/2021 5/13/2021 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 4/8/2021 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 4/29/2021 2/1989 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 4/22/2021  
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS: 
SECTION 1: MISSION, CORE VALUES, SCOPE AND GOALS  
SECTION 2: ORGANIZATION, LEADERSHIP 
SECTION 3:  QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM  
SECTION 4: CUSTOMER FOCUS  
SECTION 5: FACILITIES, WORK ENVIRONMENT, AND SAFETY  
SECTION 6:  HUMAN RESOURCES  
SECTION 7:  SUPPLIERS AND SUPPLY MANAGEMENT  
SECTION 8: EQUIPMENT MANAGEMENT  
SECTION 9: PROCESS MANAGEMENT  
SECTION 10:  DOCUMENTS, RECORDS, AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT  
SECTION 11: INDICATORS OF QUALITY 
SECTION 12: INCIDENTS, ERRORS, AND ACCIDENTS 
SECTION 13:  ASSESSMENTS: INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 27 
 
SECTION 1: MISSION, CORE VALUES, SCOPE AND GOALS  
 
  Mission Statement:   
Inspired by the vision of St. Francis of Assisi and in the tradition of the Roman Catholic 
Church, we extend the healing ministry of Jesus Christ to God’s people, especially those 
most in need.  We call forth all those who serve in this healthcare ministry, to share their 
gifts and talents to create a spirit of healing - with reverence and love for all of life, with 
joyfulness of spirit, and with humility and justice for all those entrusted to our care.  We 
are, with God’s help, a healing and spiritual presence for each other and for the 
communities we are privileged to serve. 
 
 Core Values:  
To achieve our mission, our actions must be guided by the following values: 
• Service - The privilege of reaching out to meet the needs of others 
• Reverence and Love for All of Life - Acknowledging that all of life is a gift from 
God 
• Joyfulness of Spirit - An awareness of being blessed by God in all things 
• Humility - Being authentic in serving as an instrument of God 
• Justice - Striving for equity and fairness in all relationships with special concern for 
those most in need 
 
 Scope:  
Our Health System, Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System (FMOLHS), 
encompasses Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) Main 
Laboratory and OLOLRMC Affiliate Laboratories.  The entirety of operations and services 
performed by OLOLRMC Main and Affiliate Laboratories may be referred to as “Lake Lab 
Services (LLS)”. 
 
Quality processes, people, and results are the cornerstones upon which the quality system is 
built.  The quality system supports the ideals set forth in the mission statement of 
FMOLHS.  The quality system is organized to monitor processes and operations of 
OLOLRMC Main Lab and its Affiliate Laboratories through the performance of self-
assessment audits, error management, and customer feedback.  By conforming to regulatory 
standards, we abide by the law.  By conforming to requirements for accreditation, we 
adhere to high standards for quality established by external review organizations.  By 
conforming to our customer’s standards, we practice the philosophy of continuous quality 
improvement. 
 
LLS maintains a quality system that conforms to, at least, the minimum requirements of 
TJC, FDA, CLIA, AABB, CAP, and COLA.  The essentials of our quality system are 
described in further detail in this document.   
 
Quality/Compliance Committees meet routinely with each Lab Medical Director present or 
represented.  All quality activities are brought to this meeting and acted on appropriately.  
The Laboratory Compliance Officer is responsible for communicating directly with anyone OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 27 
 
required for the activities.  All PI data and any abnormal occurrences planned or unplanned 
are reported at a minimum of annually or when appropriate for process reviews. 
 
 Goals:   
To produce high quality test results and services by: 
• detecting and preventing errors in processes 
• completing corrective actions when process failures are discovered 
• reducing process variations that can cause errors 
• improving effectiveness and efficiency of processes  
• responding to customer needs in services 
• developing and maintaining a competent staff 
• complying with all required regulations and accreditation standards 
 
 
 Applicable Documents:  
 LBA001-Mission 
LBA002- Scope of Policies and Protocols 
LBA003-Clinical Services 
LBA005- Departmental Operations 
LBA006- Accreditation 
LBA009-Proficiency Testing 
 
 
SECTION 2: ORGANIZATION, LEADERSHIP 
 
 Organization:  
LLS has an established leadership structure with defined roles and responsibilities to 
ensure the effective implementation and maintenance of quality management and 
operational systems that meet the requirements of customers and applicable accrediting 
organizations.  
 
 Leadership:  
LLS leadership is defined and includes the OLOL RMC Lab Medical Director, Assistant 
Medical Director, Core Lab Director, Blood Donor Services Director, Hematology 
Medical Director, Chemistry Medical Director, Blood Donor Services/Transfusion 
Medical Director, Microbiology Medical Director, OLOL Affiliate Labs’ Medical 
Directors, and administrative leadership where appropriate.  
 
 Leadership Responsibilities:   
LLS leadership shall have ultimate responsibility for quality management and operational 
systems.  
 
 LLS leadership shall:  
• Implement and maintain a quality management system.  
• Plan for the design and delivery of products and services that meet customer and 
quality requirements.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 27 
 
• Ensure that quality management and operational system policies, processes, and 
procedures comply with set standards and applicable laws and requirements.  
• Oversee the quality management and operational systems to ensure that policies, 
processes, and procedures are clearly documented, consistently followed, and 
continuously improved.  
• Define the roles, responsibilities, authority, relationships, and required 
qualifications of personnel who perform or oversee the activities covered by set 
standards of accrediting and governing bodies.   
• Provide the facilities, adequate resources, critical materials, and equipment 
needed for quality management and operational system activities.  
• Provide a safe work environment.  
• Implement systems to effectively communicate relevant information throughout 
the organization, and to suppliers and customers.  
• Ensure that products and services delivered to the customer conform to specified 
requirements.  
• Ensure that process improvements are implemented and reviewed for 
effectiveness. 
• Report QM performance to the Performance Improvement Leadership Committee 
on a periodic basis, or as necessary 
 
 
 Key Leadership Roles: 
 
• Medical Directors: 
 
o The Laboratory Medical Director (duties defined here for 
OLOLRMC Main and Affiliate Laboratories) is responsible for the 
Quality Plan, all medical and Technical policies, processes, and 
procedures, including those that pertain to administrative and supervisory 
personnel, along with consultative and support services that relate to the 
care and safety of patients.  The Medical Director or designee shall have 
authority over and responsibility for ensuring that the Quality 
Management Plan is effectively established and maintained.  
Communicates directly with OLOL Quality Structure Core, Divisional 
Directors, Laboratory Administrative Directors, Lab Compliance Officers 
and other administrative leadership.  Serves on OLOLRMC hospital 
physician committees such as the Medical Executive Committee.  The Lab 
Medical Director has delegated some responsibilities (the review of 
Quality Control, Procedure Manuals or Proficiency Testing Performance) 
to the various Department Medical Directors where applicable. Roles and 
Delegations are defined by Organizational Charts and the Delegation of 
Responsibility Policy.   
 
o The Assistant Medical Director is responsible for active support of the 
goals, objectives and policies of the Lab Medical Director.  The Assistant 
Medical Director is the designee for decisions or information that may OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 5 of 27 
 
affect Lake Lab Services during the Medical Director’s absence.  
Communicates directly with the Lab Medical Director, and when 
appropriate Divisional Directors, Administrative Directors, Lab 
Compliance Officers and other administrative leadership, when necessary. 
 
o Department Medical Directors – OLOLRMC Main Lab only 
 
- Hematology Medical Director and/or a qualified designee (as 
evidenced by the Laboratory Organizational Chart) is responsible 
for the review and documentation of QC data, proficiency testing 
performance, bi-ennial review of policies and procedures, and all 
hematology departmental-related activities.  This Medical Director 
must retain all technical responsibilities for this section. 
Communicates directly with the LLS Medical Director, Core Lab 
Director, Core Lab Manager, Lab Compliance Officer and 
administrative leadership when necessary. 
 
- Chemistry Medical Director and/or a qualified designee (as 
evidenced by the Laboratory Organizational Chart) is responsible 
for the review and documentation of QC data, proficiency testing 
performance, bi-ennial review of policies and procedures, and all 
Chemistry departmental-related activities.  This Medical Director 
must retain all technical responsibilities for this section. 
Communicates directly with the LLS Medical Director, Core Lab 
Director, Core Lab Manager, Lab Compliance Officer and 
administrative leadership when necessary. 
 
- The Blood Donor Services/Transfusion Services Medical 
Director and/or a qualified designee (as evidenced by the 
Laboratory Organizational Chart) is responsible for the review of 
QC data, proficiency testing performance, product acceptability, 
donor and patient safety pertaining to blood and blood products, 
and bi-ennial review of policies and procedures, and all other 
Blood Donor Services, Blood Distribution Center, Transfusion 
Services, and Tissue Bank departmental-related activities.  This 
Medical Director is responsible for all collection, processing, 
transfusing and transplanting activities related to blood, blood 
products and human tissue activities reporting to TJC, FDA, CLIA, 
or AABB when necessary.  This Medical Director must retain all 
technical responsibilities for these sections.  Communicates 
directly with the LLS Medical Director, Core Lab Director, Blood 
Donor Services Director, Blood Donor Services Compliance 
Officer, Lab Compliance Officer and administrative leadership, 
when necessary. 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 6 of 27 
 
- The Microbiology Medical Director and/or a qualified designee 
(as evidenced by the Laboratory Organizational Chart) is 
responsible for the review and documentation of QC data, 
proficiency testing performance, bi-ennial review of policies and 
procedures, and all other Microbiology departmental-related 
activities.   This Medical Director must retain all technical 
responsibilities for this section.  Communicates directly with the 
LLS Medical Director, Core Lab Director, Core Lab Manager, Lab 
Compliance Officer, and administrative leadership when 
necessary. 
- Point of Care Medical Director  and/or a qualified designee (as 
evidenced by the Laboratory Organizational Chart) is responsible 
for the review and documentation of QC data, proficiency testing 
performance, bi-ennial review of policies and procedures, and all 
Point of Care departmental-related activities.  This Medical 
Director must retain all technical responsibilities for this section. 
Communicates directly with the Core Lab Director, Lab 
Compliance Officer and administrative leadership when necessary. 
 
 
 
 
• Laboratory Administrative Directors: 
 
 
o The Core Lab Director and/or a qualified designee (as evidenced by the 
Laboratory Organizational Chart) is responsible for the review and 
documentation of QC data, proficiency testing performance, review of 
policies and procedures, and all other Chemistry, Hematology, 
Microbiology, and Transfusion Services departmental-related activities.  
Receives reporting from Departmental Supervisors and leaders of in house 
laboratory departments.  Reports directly to the Lab Medical Director and 
the Divisional Director of Diagnostic Services.      
 
o The Blood Donor Services Director and/or a qualified designee (as 
evidenced by the Laboratory Organizational Chart) is responsible for the 
review and documentation of QC data, proficiency testing performance, 
review of policies and procedures, blood and blood product collection, 
production and distribution and all other Blood Donor Services and Blood 
Distribution departmental-related activities.  Receives reporting from 
Departmental Supervisors, Compliance Officer, and leaders of blood 
donor and blood distribution departments. Reports directly to the Medical 
Director and the Divisional Director of Diagnostic Services.   
 
• Laboratory Managers: 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 7 of 27 
 
o The Core Lab Manager is responsible for the review and documentation 
of QC data, proficiency testing performance, review of policies and 
procedures, and all other Chemistry, Hematology, Microbiology, and 
Transfusion Services departmental-related activities.  Receives reporting 
from Departmental Supervisors and leaders of in-house laboratory 
departments.  Reports directly to the Core Lab Director and   
communicates directly with the Divisional Director of Diagnostic 
Services, Lab Compliance Officer, and administrative leadership when 
necessary.  
o The Affiliate Lab Manager is responsible for the review and 
documentation of QC data, proficiency testing performance, review of 
policies and procedures, and all other Chemistry, Hematology, 
Microbiology, and Transfusion Services departmental-related activities.  
Receives reporting from Departmental Supervisors and leaders of in-house 
laboratory departments.  Reports directly to the Core Lab Director and   
communicates directly with the Divisional Director of Diagnostic 
Services, Lab Compliance Officer, and administrative leadership when 
necessary.  
o The Blood Donor Services Manager is responsible for the review and 
documentation of QC data, proficiency testing performance, review of 
policies and procedures, blood and blood product collection, production 
and distribution and all other Blood Donor Services and Blood 
Distribution departmental-related activities.  Receives reporting from 
Blood Donor Services Supervisors, and leaders of blood donor and blood 
distribution departments. Reports directly to the Blood Donor Services 
Director and communicates directly with the Medical Director, Divisional 
Director of Diagnostic Services, Blood Donor Services Compliance 
Officer, and administrative leadership when necessary 
o The Children’s Hospital Lab Manager is responsible for the review and 
documentation of QC data, proficiency testing performance, review of 
policies and procedures, and all other departmental-related activities.  
Receives reporting from Departmental Supervisor and Senior 
Technologist.  Reports directly to the Core Lab Director and   
communicates directly with the Divisional Director of Diagnostic 
Services, Lab Compliance Officer and administrative leadership when 
necessary. 
 
o The OLOL Ascension Hospital Lab Manager is responsible for the 
review and documentation of QC data, proficiency testing performance, 
review of policies and procedures, and all other departmental-related 
activities.  Receives reporting from Departmental Supervisor and Senior 
Technologist.  Reports directly to the Ascension Lab Director and   
communicates directly with the Divisional Director of Diagnostic 
Services, Lab Compliance Officer and administrative leadership when 
necessary. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 8 of 27 
 
 
 
• Quality Personnel: 
 
o The Laboratory Compliance Officer has oversight/responsibility for 
coordinating, monitoring and facilitating quality assurance activities of the 
OLOLRMC Main Laboratory and OLOL Affiliate Laboratories.  These 
activities include the Quality Management Plan, auditing, and monitoring 
and correction of deficiencies.  The position also includes reporting the 
results of these activities at a minimum of annually to the LLS 
Quality/Compliance Committees.  Reports directly to the LLS Medical 
Director.  Communicates with the Divisional Director of Diagnostic 
Services, LLS Director, Core Lab Director, Blood Donor Services 
Director, Departmental Mangers, Departmental Supervisors, and all lab 
and hospital staff.   
 
o The Transfusion Services Compliance Officer has 
oversight/responsibility for coordinating, monitoring and facilitating 
quality assurance activities, including the Quality Management Plan, 
auditing, monitoring and correction of deficiencies having to deal with 
Transfusion Services at OLOLRMC Laboratory and OLOL Affiliate 
Laboratories. The position also includes reporting the results of these 
activities at a minimum of annually to the LLS Quality/Compliance 
Committees.  Reports directly to the Blood Donor Services/Transfusion 
Services Medical Director.  Communicates with Core Lab Director, Core 
Lab Manager and Departmental Supervisor and all Transfusion Services 
staff.   
 
o The Blood Donor Services Compliance Officer has 
oversight/responsibility for coordinating, monitoring and facilitating 
quality assurance activities, including the Quality Management Plan, 
auditing, monitoring and correction of deficiencies having to deal with 
Blood Donor Services and the Blood Distribution Center. The position 
also includes reporting the results of these activities at a minimum of 
annually to the LLS Quality/Compliance Committees. Reports directly to 
the Blood Donor Services/Transfusion Services Medical Director.  
Communicates with Blood Donor Services Director, Blood Donor 
Manager and Departmental Supervisors and all donor services and 
distribution center staff.   
 
 
 
• Laboratory Supervisors: 
 
o The Departmental Supervisors of OLOLRMC Main Lab and Lab 
Supervisors of OLOLRMC Affiliate Labs are responsible for planning, OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 9 of 27 
 
managing, and supervising the activities of their department/lab.  
Responsible for assigning and supervising the training of lab staff.  
Evaluates or delegates review of quality control and quality assurance 
statistics and modifies manuals as needed.  Responsible for maintaining 
the budget for the department and maintains control of lab costs.  Enforces 
technical and safety procedures.  Plans workload distribution and makes 
schedules.  Supervises purchase of supplies and maintains equipment 
inventory.  Also responsible for evaluating staff performance.  Reports 
directly to the appropriate Medical Director, Lab Director and Lab 
Manager. Communicates with the lab staff, Compliance Officers, and 
other Departmental Supervisors.   
 
 
 
 
 Applicable Documents:  
 Lab Organizational Chart  
 LBA003- Clinical Services 
 LBA005- Departmental Operations  
 LBA020- Delegation of Responsibility 
LBA022- Leadership Service Recovery 
LBA075- Laboratory Communications 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 3:  QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM  
 
The quality management system shall apply to all activities covered under the set standards of all 
governing and accrediting bodies.   
 
 The Quality Management System shall address, at a minimum, the following concepts:  
• Mission, Core Values, Scope and Goals 
• Organization and leadership  
• Customer focus  
• Facilities, work environment, and safety  
• Human resources  
• Suppliers and materials  
• Equipment  
• Process management  
• Documents, records and information management  
• Indicators of quality 
• Incidents, errors and accidents  
• Assessments: Internal and external  
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 10 of 27 
 
 To ensure the ongoing effectiveness of many of the above concepts, the Quality Management 
System utilizes a Monthly Random Sample Tracer audit tool.  This comprehensive audit 
captures all possible information for one specimen from test order to test result reporting.  
• Each Lab chooses one specimen per month for review 
• Specimens are rotated equally throughout sections and test menus. 
• All required elements from the audit are collected and reviewed for acceptability.   
• Findings are reviewed and discussed by the applicable Quality/Compliance 
Committees.  Unacceptable findings are addressed with the responsible 
lab/section(s). 
 
 Quality Management System Reviews:   
The quality management system shall be reviewed annually and reported at the applicable 
Quality/Compliance Committees.   
 
The Laboratory Medical Director along with the Quality/Compliance Committee shall review 
and evaluate the performance and effectiveness of the quality management system.  
 
 Communication of Concerns:  LLS has process for individuals to anonymously communicate 
concerns about quality or safety to OLOL leadership and to accrediting agencies as required. 
 
The following numbers are provided to employees to anonymously communicate concerns 
about quality or safety: 
 
• Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center and all OLOLRMC Facilities: 
o Integrity Link 
1.  Connect to the internet from any computer 
2.  Type fmolhsintegritylink.com into the address bar and hit Enter 
3.  Or Dial 1-888-400- 4517 to speak with a live hotline operator  
o On-line Safety Event Reporting: access through TeamLink Homepage by 
selecting Applications then, RLDatix, and then Report Real Safety Event. 
o OLOL Speak-up Line Call 5-1734 
 
• The Joint Commission: 
o By Phone: 1-800-994-6610 
o On-line: www.jointcommision.org 
 
• American Association of Blood Banks (AABB) 
o By Phone: 1-301-907-6977 
o In writing at AABB  8101 Glenbrook Road Bethesda, MD 20814-2749 
o Online: www.aabb.org 
 
• College of American Pathologists (CAP) 
o By Phone: 1-866-236-7212 
• Commission on Lab Accreditation (COLA) 
o By Phone: 1-800-981-9883 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 11 of 27 
 
 
 Applicable Documents:  
LBA006- Accreditation 
LBA500- Compliance Plan 
LBA501-LBA511- Compliance policies 
Annual QPM Review 
Annual PI Pathology and Lab Update to Quality Department 
Random Sample Tracer Audit Tool 
 
SECTION 4: CUSTOMER FOCUS  
 
 LLS shall:  
• Identify its customers and their needs and expectations for products and services 
• Determine its capacity to meet customer needs and expectations for products and 
Services 
• Agree upon and define customer and facility requirements for the product or service 
• Incorporate agreed upon requirements into product and service  
• Re-evaluate agreements with customers at defined intervals.  
 
 LLS shall seek feedback to monitor and evaluate the quality of products and services 
provided to the customer.  
 
 
 Applicable Documents: 
Patient Rights, Complaints, and Grievance Process- OrgClin/020 
Safety Events Reporting- OrgOps GN019 
Lab Service Agreement 
Customer Satisfaction Survey 
Physician Satisfaction Survey 
 
SECTION 5: FACILITIES, WORK ENVIRONMENT, AND SAFETY  
 
LLS shall establish and maintain policies, processes, and procedures to provide a work 
environment that adequately supports the activities performed, minimizes health and safety risks, 
and complies with applicable laws and regulations.  
 
 Facilities and Work Environment:   
• The physical workspace and infrastructure design, maintenance, and control shall be 
adequate to support the activities carried out in the facilities. 
• The work environment shall be clean and well-maintained.  
• LLS shall identify the environmental conditions that may affect the quality of 
materials, tests, products, or services provided by the facilities or cause harm to 
patients, donors, clients, visitors, and staff. These environmental conditions shall be 
controlled. 
• Building utilities shall be safe and adequate to meet the needs of the facilities.  
• The facility shall identify areas of limited access and control access to such areas.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 12 of 27 
 
• The information and communications technology infrastructure shall support the 
needs of the organization and its customers. 
• Storage for critical materials, products, samples and records shall be adequate to meet 
specified requirements and to prevent mix-ups.  
 
 Health and Safety:   
LLS safety programs shall address fire, biological, chemical, electrical, and where 
applicable, radiation safety. These programs shall include appropriate interventions to 
prevent and mitigate exposure.  
 
Biological, chemical and radioactive materials such as reagents, supplies, products, and 
samples shall be handled and discarded in a manner that minimizes the potential for human 
exposure to infectious or other harmful agents.  
 
 Emergency Management:   
The facility shall have an emergency management plan that addresses preparation for, 
response to, and recovery from the effects of internal and external disasters and other 
emergency situations. The plan shall also address continuity of operations to maintain 
facility defined essential services.  
 
 The emergency management plan, including emergency communication systems, shall be 
tested at defined intervals.  
 
 Applicable Documents: 
 OLOL Disaster Plan 
 Patient Safety and Quality PI Plan- OrgOps GN025 
 Safety Event Reporting OrgOps GN019 
 Sentinel Events and Root Cause Analysis- OrgOps GN018 
 LBA200 – Lab Safety Plan 
 LBA201 – Exposure Control Plan 
 LBA202 – Chemical Hygiene Plan 
 LBA204 – Lab Emergency Preparedness 
 Lab/Departmental Disaster Staffing Plans 
 
SECTION 6:  HUMAN RESOURCES  
 
 LLS shall establish and maintain policies, processes, and procedures to provide adequate 
numbers of qualified, trained, and competent staff to perform and manage the activities 
required by the set standards of governing and accrediting organizations.  
 
 Job Descriptions:   
Job descriptions shall define the roles, responsibilities, and reporting structure for each 
position involved in the activities covered by set standards of governing and accrediting 
organizations.  Job descriptions are written and maintained for each position.  
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 13 of 27 
 
 LLS shall have a medical director who has authority and responsibility for all laboratory 
policies, processes, and procedures. When the medical director delegates these   
responsibilities to another qualified physician/designee (as evidenced by the Laboratory 
Organizational Chart and Delegation Policy), the medical director shall retain ultimate 
responsibility.  
 
 LLS shall have a quality representative who, regardless of other duties, has the authority and 
responsibility for the quality management system. This individual shall report directly to the 
Medical Director on matters pertaining to the quality management system.  
 
 Job Qualifications:   
• Job qualifications, including the knowledge, skills, and abilities required to perform 
the duties of each position, shall be identified.  
• Current and signed job descriptions 
• Current licensure by the state, as required for each position 
• Continual education as required by the licensing board of the state 
• Completion of appropriate education and certification as appropriate for each position   
 
  Staff Selection:   
Staff selection shall include a process to verify that candidates are qualified for the 
position.  This shall be performed by the Human Resources department. 
 
 Staff shall be qualified by education, prior training, and/or experience.  
 
 Staffing:   
Adequate human resources shall be available to perform, verify, and manage all Quality 
management system and operational activities.  
 
 Orientation:   
New staff shall be oriented to the organization, its leadership, its quality management system, 
processes, and policies. New employees are provided orientation to the organization, 
department, and specific job for which they are hired. 
 
 Training:   
Each department shall identify training needs and provide for training that meets those needs.  
• Training shall include all of the following:  
o Application of the quality management system 
o Performance of job-specific processes and procedures 
o Application of safety policies, processes, procedures, and practices.  
• Staff shall be trained on new or changed policies, processes, and procedures.  
• Refresher training shall be provided as needed.  
 
 Competence Assessment:   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 14 of 27 
 
LLS shall evaluate staff knowledge and skills before independent performance of assigned 
duties, and at defined intervals thereafter to verify that competence has been achieved and is 
maintained.  
• Staff competence is initially determined during job task training. 
• Ongoing competence is assessed twice during the first year of testing and at least 
annually thereafter. 
• Documentation of competence assessment is maintained. 
 
 Staff Identification:   
LLS shall have a mechanism to uniquely identify the individuals authorized to perform, 
review, or manage activities covered by the set standards of all governing and accrediting 
bodies, and their inclusive dates of employment.  
 
 Performance appraisal:   
A performance review based on job accountabilities, objective measures, and pre-defined 
standards is completed annually for each employee, documented, and maintained. 
 
  Preceptor qualification:  
Selected individuals who meet qualifications may function as preceptors in this facility. 
 
 
 Applicable Documents: 
LBA010- Management of Human Resources 
LBA011- Respect for Cultural Values 
LBA012- Employee Training, Competency Assessments and Performance Evaluations 
LBA030- Laboratory Personnel Dress Code 
 
 
SECTION 7:  SUPPLIERS AND SUPPLY MANAGEMENT  
 
 LLS shall establish and maintain policies, processes, and procedures to verify that critical 
supplies (equipment, reagents, materials, and biologic products), services, and samples 
obtained from outside sources consistently meet specified requirements.  
 
 Supply or Service Requirements:   
  Requirements and specifications for critical supplies and services shall be identified.  
 
 Supplier Qualification and Selection:   
Criteria for qualification and selection of suppliers of critical supplies and services shall be 
established.  
• LLS shall qualify suppliers based on their ability to meet specified supply or service 
requirements.  
• LLS shall participate in the selection of suppliers.  
• LLS shall verify that its identified requirements are reflected in its agreements with 
suppliers.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 15 of 27 
 
• Agreements shall be reviewed at defined intervals to verify that they reflect current 
requirements and that changes are incorporated as needed. 
• LLS shall evaluate suppliers at defined intervals to determine if agreed upon 
requirements are being met. 
• When a supplier fails to meet specified requirements, the facility shall take 
appropriate follow up action, and shall report it to the facility’s purchasing authority.  
 
 Receipt, Inspection and Testing of Incoming Critical Supplies and Samples:  
Incoming reagents, materials, equipment, products, and samples shall be inspected, and 
tested as necessary, for acceptance before use.  
• Criteria for acceptance and rejection shall be established.  
   
 Inventory Management:   
LLS shall have an inventory management process that addresses the availability, control, 
storage, and handling of critical supplies and samples.  
• Adequate quantities of in-date critical supplies shall be available to meet the needs of 
the facility.  
• LLS shall maintain proper conditions for storage, handling, distribution, and 
transportation of critical supplies and samples.  
 
 Traceability:   
         Critical supplies and samples used shall be traceable to the finished product or service.  
 
 Laboratory testing and other services shall be performed in a facility certificated by CLIA.   
 
 Applicable Documents: 
LBA028-Reagent/Supply Handling 
Departmental Policies regarding supplier qualification 
 
SECTION 8: EQUIPMENT MANAGEMENT  
 
 LLS shall establish and maintain policies, processes, and procedures to ensure that critical 
equipment, including computer systems, performs as expected for its intended use.  
 
 Identification of Equipment:   
Equipment shall be uniquely identified.  
 
 A current and accurate inventory of all equipment identified as critical shall be maintained.  
 
 Equipment Qualification:   
Equipment, including computer systems, shall be qualified and found acceptable before 
actual use in work processes.  
 
 Installation Qualification:   
Equipment shall be installed per manufacturer’s specifications.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 16 of 27 
 
 
 Operational Qualification:   
The functionality of each piece of equipment and each component of a computer system shall 
be verified before actual use and shall meet the manufacturer’s operational specifications.  
 
 Performance Qualification:   
LLS shall demonstrate that equipment performs as expected for its intended use in the 
facility’s work processes. 
• Performance specifications established by the manufacturer shall be met, where 
applicable.  
 
 Calibration Program:   
Measuring equipment shall be calibrated and adjusted as necessary before use, after activities 
that may affect the calibration, and in accordance with a defined calibration schedule.  
• Measuring equipment shall be calibrated against known standards or reference 
materials.  
• Calibration shall be scheduled and performed at intervals that, at a minimum, meet 
the frequency recommended by the manufacturer.  
• Calibration procedures shall follow manufacturer’s instructions and shall include:  
o Instructions for performing calibrations 
o Acceptance criteria  
o Actions to be taken when unsatisfactory results are obtained.  
 
• Safeguards shall be in place to prevent equipment from adjustments that would 
invalidate the calibration setting.  
• Investigation and follow-up of calibration failures shall include:  
o Actions to ensure that the equipment is removed from service 
o Investigation of the failure 
o Assessment of the conformance of products and services provided when 
equipment is found to be out of calibration 
o Actions for adjusting or re-calibrating the equipment.  
 
 Equipment Maintenance:   
     Equipment shall be maintained in good working order.  
• Preventive maintenance shall be scheduled and performed at intervals that, at a 
minimum, meet the frequency recommended by the manufacturer.  
• Maintenance procedures shall follow manufacturer’s instructions.  
• Follow-up of equipment malfunctions, failures, or adverse events shall include:  
o Removing the equipment from use pending investigation 
o Investigating the malfunction, failure, or adverse event 
o Assessing the conformance of products and services provided when 
equipment is found to be malfunctioning or have failed 
o Repairing, adjusting, and requalifying the equipment before re-use 
o Reporting the nature of the malfunction, failure, or adverse event to the 
manufacturer and other affected parties, when indicated.  
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 17 of 27 
 
 Computer Systems:   
Modifications to computer system software, hardware, and databases shall be planned and 
controlled.  
 
 
 Applicable Documents: 
LIS Policies (Lab Admin Manual) 
IS Manual 
Computer Change Control Protocols 
IS Footprints  
LBA016-Computer Downtime 
LBA017-Method Performance Verification 
LBA025-Maintenance and Function Checks 
LBA027- Instrument Correlations 
 
SECTION 9: PROCESS MANAGEMENT  
 
 LLS shall establish and maintain policies, processes, and procedures that are designed to 
ensure the quality of products and services.  
 
 Process Improvement:   
  The following activities serve as a source of ideas for process improvements: 
• External assessment report findings (FDA, TJC, AABB, CAP, or LDH) 
• The findings from quality indicators of operating systems and internal quality audits 
• Reports of customer complaints 
• Analysis of incident, error, accident reports 
• Review of any selected process to determine if the process can be made more efficient 
and effective. 
 
 LLS uses an approach to problem resolution that includes: 
• Identification, prioritization, and selection of problems to be resolved 
• Use of data collection and data analysis tools 
• Implementation of process changes, where appropriate 
• Evaluation of applied solutions for effectiveness in solving the problem. 
• PDCA 
• Statistical tools to analyze numeric data are used where appropriate. 
 
 Process Development and Change:   
The development of new processes or significant changes to existing ones shall be controlled.  
 
 Process Planning:   
LLS shall address the following in the development of new or changed processes, products, 
and services:  
• Customer, quality and regulatory requirements, and other requirements considered 
necessary by the facility OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 18 of 27 
 
• Risk assessment 
• Impact on existing processes, products or services 
• Criteria for evaluating effectiveness of the new or changed process, product or service  
 
 Process Validation:   
Before implementation, new processes shall be validated to ensure that the requirements for 
the intended use are met. 
• Performance characteristics of laboratory test methods shall be either established by 
the facility or verified against manufacturer’s performance specifications.  
• Changes that may affect the state of a validated process shall also be validated before 
implementation.  
 
 Process Implementation:   
The implementation of new or changed processes shall be controlled.  
 
 Post-implementation Evaluation:   
Post-implementation, new or changed processes, products and services shall be evaluated 
against established criteria.  
 
 Process Performance:  
LLS shall follow its current policies, processes and procedures.  
 
 Planned Exceptions:   
Planned exceptions to policies, processes, and procedures shall require justification and 
approval from the appropriate medical director.  
 
 Process Control:   
Controls shall be established to ensure that processes perform as expected. Process controls 
shall allow staff to intervene in the event of a process failure before finished products and 
services are delivered.  
 
 Process Quality Control:   
A program of quality control shall be established that is sufficiently comprehensive to ensure 
that reagents, equipment and methods function as expected.  
• Quality control shall be performed at time intervals recommended by the 
manufacturer or more frequently.  
• Quality control results shall be reviewed and evaluated against acceptance criteria. 
• Quality control failures shall be investigated before release of test results, products, or 
services.  
• The validity of test results, products, or services provided shall be evaluated when 
quality control results are unacceptable.  
 
 Inspection:   
Products and services shall be inspected at facility-defined stages to verify that specified 
requirements are met.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 19 of 27 
 
 
 Process Records Creation:   
Records shall be created concurrently with performance of each activity that affects the 
quality of the product or service. 
• The actual result of each observation shall be recorded immediately. 
• Records shall be legible.  
• There shall be a means to display and verify electronic data before final acceptance 
and when data are entered or amended.  
 
 Applicable Documents: 
LBA017- Method Performance Validation 
 
SECTION 10:  DOCUMENTS, RECORDS, AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT  
 
 LLS shall establish and maintain policies, processes, and procedures to create, manage and  
     retain accurate and complete documents and records required by the set standards of  
     all governing and accrediting bodies and for the use, management, and protection of  
     information.  
 
 Document Control:   
     LLS shall control the creation, use, maintenance, and disposition of its documents.  
• Only current and approved versions of documents shall be in use.  
• Current and approved versions of documents shall be maintained.  
• An inventory of documents (e.g., master list), including policies, processes, 
procedures, labels, and forms that relate to the requirements of standards, shall be 
maintained.  
• The inventory of documents shall include:  
o Document identifiers 
o Current edition, version date, or revision number 
o The identity of the work unit(s) responsible for document review and 
maintenance 
o Distribution of controlled copies  
 
 
 Document Creation:   
Documents shall be designed and written in a manner that provides clear and 
understandable information.  
• Approved formats shall be used for policies, processes and procedures.  
• Each document shall be uniquely identified and include:  
o Title 
o An indicator of the current version (e.g., edition, version date, or revision 
number) 
o Facility identification 
o Page numbers. 
• Authorized personnel shall review and approve each new and revised document 
before use.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 20 of 27 
 
 
 Documents shall be in print and/or in electronic formats, and shall be maintained, approved, 
and revised, as necessary.  
 
 Documents shall be reviewed on a periodic, facility-defined basis.  
 
 External documents used in lieu of a facility-defined procedure shall be subject to document 
control.  
 
 Appropriate documents shall be available where activities essential to meeting the 
requirements of set standards are performed.  
 
 Documents shall be maintained in a manner that preserves legibility and protects from 
accidental or unauthorized access, destruction, or modification.  
 
 Removal from Use:  Invalid and obsolete documents shall be promptly removed from all 
points of use, or protected against inadvertent use, and archived or destroyed as appropriate.  
 
 Archived Documents:   
Archived documents shall have appropriate identification to prevent their inadvertent use.  
 
 Storage of Documents:   
Documents shall be stored in a manner that preserves legibility and protects from accidental 
or unauthorized access, destruction, or modification.  
• Documents shall be retrievable during the retention period.  
 
 Retention of Documents:   
Archived documents shall be retained according to a facility schedule drafted to meet the 
requirements of set standards of governing bodies and accrediting agencies.  
 
 Record Control:   
LLS shall identify all records and control their access, filing, storage, and disposition. 
 
 Record Traceability:   
The records system shall allow for the traceability of all of the following: 
• Critical activities performed 
• The individual who performed the activity 
• When the activity was performed 
• Results obtained 
• Method(s) used 
• Equipment used 
• Critical materials used 
• The facility where the activity was performed.  
 
 Record Review:  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 21 of 27 
 
LLS shall define the requirements for record review including:  
• The records subject to review 
• The schedule for record reviews 
• Criteria for acceptable records 
• The responsibility for record review 
• Records shall be reviewed according to the facility’s defined requirements.  
• Appropriate action shall be taken when acceptance criteria have not been met.  
 
 Changes to Records:  
Changes to records shall be controlled.  
• An audit trail of the date of changes to the record and the identity of the person 
who changed the record shall be created and maintained at least for the retention 
period of the original record.  
• Record changes shall not obscure previously recorded information. 
• Changes to records (including electronic records) shall be verified for accuracy 
and completeness.  
 
 Copies of Records:   
The completeness, accuracy, legibility, and accessibility of copies of records shall be verified 
against the original records before destruction of the original records.  
 
 Archived Records:   
Records shall be stored in an organized manner that:  
• Preserves legibility for the entire retention period 
• Protects from accidental or unauthorized access, destruction, or modification 
• Enables access and retrieval within a time frame appropriate to the circumstances 
• Allows for retrieval of records should the lab cease to operate 
 
 Retention of Records:   
Archived records shall be retained according to a facility schedule drafted to meet the 
requirements of set standards of governing bodies and accrediting agencies.  
 
 Destruction of Records:  
Records shall be destroyed in a manner that ensures confidentiality of the information 
contained within.  
 
 Information Management: 
LLS shall manage and protect information needed for critical operations and business 
continuity.  
 
 Clarity: 
Reports shall be designed and prepared to provide clear and understandable information to 
the intended user.  
• LLS shall verify that the content of reports provided to customers is understandable to 
the intended user.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 22 of 27 
 
 
 Confidentiality:  
Policies for confidentiality of data, information, and verbal and written communications shall 
be established and followed.  
 
 Access to Data and Information:   
Access to data shall be controlled. Unauthorized access to, and release of, data and 
information shall be prevented.  
• The authorization to access and release data and information shall be defined, and 
individuals authorized to enter, change, and release results shall be identified.  
 
 Data Integrity:   
Data integrity shall be maintained to ensure that data are retrievable and usable.  
• Data shall be accurately and reliably sent from the point of entry to final destination 
in a timely manner.  
• Verification of Data transmission shall be performed prior to implementation of an 
interface and every 2 years thereafter. 
• Data shall be retrievable for the entire retention period.  
 
 Storage Media: 
Data storage media shall be protected from damage or unintended destruction.  
 
 Back-Up Data:  
LLS shall define and routinely back up all critical data.  
• Back-up data shall be protected from unauthorized access, loss, or modification.  
• The ability to retrieve data from the back-up system shall be tested periodically.  
 
 Alternative System:   
The facility shall maintain an alternative system to ensure continued access to information 
needed for the continuity of facility-defined critical operations in the event that the primary 
source(s) of information is unavailable.  
• The alternative system shall be tested periodically  
 
 
 Applicable Documents:  
LBA002- Scope of Policies and Procedures 
LBA004-SOP for Policy and Procedure Manuals 
LBA005- Department Operations 
LBA007- Release of Lab Results 
LBA020- Delegation of Responsibility 
LBA024-Patient Test Results 
LBA033-Document Correction 
LBA074- Retention of Records 
IS Manual 
FMOLHS Policy on Record Retention 
OO-GN-031- Records Management OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 23 of 27 
 
 
 
SECTION 11: INDICATORS OF QUALITY 
 
 Indicators that reflect activities critical to patient outcome or have been a problem in the past. 
 
 Selected indicators are regularly compared to benchmarks and reported to the hospital PI 
committee for review. 
 
 Key indicators are monitored and reported on by each OLOL Laboratory.  Indicators are site-
specific and relevant to the size and scope of each lab.  Where applicable indicators 
encompass all phases (pre-analytic, analytic, post-analytic) of testing. 
 
 Stat Test Turnaround Time data may be collection-to-reporting turnaround time or receipt-in-
laboratory-to-reporting turnaround time of tests ordered with a “stat” priority.  May be 
confined to the Emergency Department or intensive care unit if a suitable reference database 
is available. Laboratories may monitor mean or median turnaround time or the percent of 
specimens with turnaround time that falls within an established limit. 
 
 Critical Value Reporting. Percent of critical results with documentation that results have been 
reported to caregivers. 
 
 The Laboratory is cognizant of our legal and ethical obligation to provide our clients with the 
quality of care reflected in recognized professional standards, to deliver care in a cost-
effective manner within our available resources, and to provide and maintain a safe patient 
environment. 
 
 The National Patient Safety Goals (NPSG) are designed to stimulate health care 
organization's improvement activities for several of the most challenging patient safety 
issues. The goals are reviewed and published each year and are a critical component of The 
Joint Commission's overall efforts to improve health care.  
 
 TJC National Patient Safety Goals: 
• Improve accuracy of patient identification:  
o Use 2ID for adult patients 
o Use 3 ID for pediatric patients 
o Eliminate transfusion errors 
• Improve effectiveness of communication among caregivers 
o Timely reporting of critical test results 
• Improve safety of using medications 
o Reduce harm from anticoagulation therapy 
o Properly label medications not for immediate use OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 24 of 27 
 
o Properly label all solutions on and off sterile field and in procedural settings 
• Reduce the risk of healthcare associated infections 
o Meet hand hygiene and respiratory isolation guidelines 
o Prevention multidrug-resistant organism infections 
o Prevent central line-associated blood stream infections 
o Prevent surgical site infections 
• Accurately and completely reconcile medications across the continuum of care 
o Compare current and newly ordered medications 
o Communicate medications to the next provider 
o Provide reconciled medication list to the patient 
o Compare medications that are minimally used to current medications 
• Identify safety risks inherent in our patient population 
o Identify individuals at risk for suicide 
o Identify individuals at risk for falls 
o Identify individuals at risk for pressure ulcers 
• Use universal protocol for preventing wrong site, wrong procedure and wrong person 
surgery. 
o Conduct a pre-procedure verification process 
o Mark the procedure site 
o Perform a time-out or final pause 
 
 CAP Patient Safety Goals: 
• Pre and Post Analytic Phases of Laboratory Testing 
o Goal 1: Ensure Correct Patient and Sample Identification 
- At the time of specimen collection  
- At the time of analysis 
- At the time of result delivery  
o Goal 2: Ensure the Verification and Communication of Laboratory Results 
Requiring Action on the Part of Treating Clinicians, examples may include: 
- New malignancies  
- Infectious disease diagnosis requiring immediate treatment or patient 
isolation OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 25 of 27 
 
- Critical laboratory values  
o Goal 3: Ensure Time Outs are performed prior to starting procedures 
- Correct test preparation  
- Correct patient position  
- Safety precautions based on patient history or medication use  
• Operationalization 
o Goal 4: Ensure the Identification, Communication and Correction of Errors 
- Timeliness of identification of errors  
- Revised reports  
- All inaccuracies in the medical record should be documented and 
communicated at the time the inaccuracy becomes known. The correct test 
result or diagnosis should be made clear in an amended or corrected report 
with the date of correction as soon as possible. The original inaccurate 
result should be reported as such in the medical record. The reason that the 
original result was reported incorrectly (i.e., due to error or other reason) 
may not be known and need not be reported in the medical record.  
- When an incorrect result or diagnosis causes material injury to a patient, 
the correct result/diagnosis and the fact that the result has been changed 
must also be reported to the patient. For an inaccuracy caused by or 
directly involving a pathologist, the pathologist involved in the case 
should discuss the matter with the physician who ordered the pathology 
consultation. The two physicians should jointly determine how best to 
communicate the corrected result to the patient.  
o Goal 5: Improve Integration and Coordination of Laboratory Patient Safety Role 
within Healthcare Organizations and Operations among the following groups: 
- Nursing  
- Administration  
- Point of care testing personnel  
- Providers  
o Goal 6: Provide a standardized list of acceptable abbreviations, acronyms, and 
symbols to the following groups: 
- Physicians 
- Nurses  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 26 of 27 
 
- Laboratory testing personnel  
o Goal 7: Improve hand-off communication approaches, in high risk clinical 
situations such as: 
- Shift changes  
- Laboratory testing performed during surgical procedure  
o Goal 8: Reduce the risk of health care associated infections by the following 
activities: 
- Reviewing WHO and CDC Hand hygiene guidelines  
- Implementing best practices 
- Conducting periodic risk assessments  
- Ensuring participation of laboratory staff in infection control activities in 
health care organization  
 As patient safety is central in the practice of laboratory medicine and anatomic pathology, 
patient safety activities are primary among medical director duties. Given the variety of 
laboratory size and complexity, appropriate systems to meet the patient safety needs of the 
laboratory may vary from one facility to another. 
 Applicable Documents: 
LBA008- Delay of Results 
LBA034-Laboratory Quality Control and Quality Assurance Policy 
LBA075- Lab Communication 
LBA076- Patient and Sample Identification 
OLOL PI Manual 
Dashboard Indicators 
Exception Reports 
 
SECTION 12: INCIDENTS, ERRORS, AND ACCIDENTS 
 
 Reporting, classifying, analyzing:   
OLOL maintains a mechanism to document and investigate events that have the potential to 
affect the quality and safety of services.  Where appropriate, events are further classified and 
reported to risk management, using the RLDatix Event Reporting System. 
 
 Corrective and preventive action 
• Action is taken to eliminate the root cause(s) of existing problems in order to prevent 
recurrence. 
• Corrective actions are monitored for effectiveness. 
 
 Tracking and trending  
• A log of events is maintained to ensure that the steps in resolving a problem are taken. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 27 of 27 
 
• Trend analysis of incidents, errors, and accidents is performed to aid in prioritizing 
process improvement efforts. 
 
 Management review and impact 
• Event reports are submitted to management for review and approval. 
• Root Cause Analysis performed and documented if deemed necessary by management. 
• Corrective Actions are documented and submitted for approval 
• Management approved Corrective Actions are monitored for effectiveness  
periodically. 
 
 Regulatory agency notification 
• A system exists to det ermine whether an e rror/event is reportable to any regulatory 
agency. 
• There is a procedure for reporting errors  
• Adverse events involving medical devices are reported to the FDA. 
 
 Applicable Documents: 
Safety Event Reporting OrgOps GN019 
Sentinel Events- OrgOps GN018 
Safe Medical Devices Act ECME006 
 
SECTION 13:  ASSESSMENTS: INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL 
 
 Assessments 
• LLS participates in external assessments conducted by LDH, FDA, CLIA TJC, CAP 
and AABB where required. 
• LLS conducts internal assessments as scheduled and when deemed necessary 
• A process is maintained to conduct, report, and follow-up on inspections, assessments, 
or investigations.   
• Lab conducts an interim self -inspection and documents efforts to correct deficiencies 
identified during that process.   
 
 
 Applicable Documents: 
LBA006- Accreditation 
 
 
REVISIONS 
2/1989 (created), 9/2013, 3/2015, 3/11/17, 7/31/18, 4/29/2020, 3/8/2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 