OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 2 
LBA022 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA022 
 
LEADERSHIP SERVICE RECOVERY 
 
 
DEFINITION 
Leadership service recovery refers to the actions the laboratory leader takes in response 
to a service failure. By including customer satisfaction into the definition, service 
recovery is a thought-out, planned, process of returning aggrieved/dissatisfied customers 
to a state of satisfaction with a company/service. Recognizing that humans have an 
intrinsic ability to fail, and that failure is inevitable, Leadership service recovery is the 
process of getting it “exactly right” the second time. 
 
 
PROCESS 
When an egregious service failure is identified, one of the Directors or Managers of the 
Laboratory Services will be assigned to follow the service recovery process, until 
completion.   
 
 
RESPONSIBILITY 
1. The Laboratory Medical Director will make this assignment or delegate the 
responsibility to the appropriate team leader.  
 
2. Employees of the laboratory in a Director or Manager position are deemed 
appropriate to take ownership of such follow-up. 
 
3. The assigned leader will personally “shepherd the process” to assure success on 
the second attempt.   
 
4. The assigned leader cannot delegate to any member of the laboratory services, not 
in one of the positions described above (#2). 
 
 
LIMITATIONS 
• This process is required in the event of a major service failure and/or documented 
grievance. 
• This process can be used at the leader’s discretion in all other service failures. 
• Complaints and situations where the customer has perceived they have received 
less than premier experience should be handled immediately by the staff present 
o Use OLOL’s Service Recovery process: 
o ACT 
Apologize 
Correct 
Thank OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 2 
LBA022 
 
 
    By    Date 
 Prepared/Revised AHL 7/3/14 
Blood Donor Service Director Review N/A N/A 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 7/14/2014 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 7/14/2014 
Medical Director Review A Harton 7/28/2014 
 Effective Date 7/28/2014 
 Origination Date 7/2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 