OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 6 
LBA016 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA016 
 
COMPUTER DOWNTIME 
 
 
POLICY 
Downtimes are managed as specified in the FMOLHS Downtime Policy and Procedure 
developed through a collaborative effort of Information Systems, Nursing, and Ancillary 
staff.  Extended downtimes are planned several weeks ahead of scheduled time and may 
be scheduled on weekends or nights.  These time frames are scheduled to avoid peak 
activity times, to minimize effects on patient care and to allow for maximum support 
from software and hardware vendors.  Users are notified of downtimes by e-mail to 
directors and supervisors prior to the scheduled downtime, by overhead announcements, 
and by TeamLink announcements.  The reactivation of the Computer system is 
announced over the speaker system. 
 
Orders for tests during downtime reach the lab on standard “Miscellaneous Order Forms” 
(NS-205 available in Central Supply) by tube system, faxing or hand delivery.  The forms 
are labeled with preprinted patient information stickers or manually written to include all 
necessary information.  Patient information must include patient name, Medical Record 
Number, DOB, location, tests ordered, priority of tests, ordering physician, and any other 
pertinent information.   
 
Specimens are collected, labeled, and delivered to the laboratory’s Central Processing 
Department.  Tests are performed, manually resulted, and instrument printouts are 
attached to the downtime order forms.  Results are faxed, or called, if necessary, and then 
filed alphabetically for easy retrieval.  The filed results are located in each respective 
laboratory section until the computer system is reactivated.  
 
When the computer system is reactivated, personnel from all laboratory sections result 
the tests ordered before the downtime, and order and result the tests that were received on 
manual requisitions reflecting the actual times of collection.  After all sections are caught 
up from downtime, tests on new admits are ordered and resulted and work lists cleared.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 6 
LBA016 
HOSPITAL PROCESS AND RESPONSIBILITIES:   
NURSE COLLECT 
LABS 
Previous orders: collect specimen and apply the pre-
printed label available on unit.                         
 
New orders:  complete all data on Misc. Order Form; 
apply label to specimen; send to lab with Misc. Order 
Form 
        X 
 
 
 
 
         X 
 
ALL ORDERS Nursing will enter all orders that have NOT BEEN 
faxed or requested on a Misc. order form  
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FUNCTION DOWNTIME PROCEDURE RESPONSIBILITY 
NURSE ANC 
LAB ORDERS 
(Fax number 3019) 
STAT AND TIMED: Unit will call lab to notify of 
order and prepare Misc. Order form for phlebotomist 
to pick up just prior to drawing the specimen.  Be 
sure all Misc. Order forms are labeled with patient ID 
information.   
 
Stat and timed results will be reported to the ordering 
dept. 
 
OTHER THAN STAT AND TIMED: Unit will list 
on Misc. form and hold on floor.  If the computer 
comes back on line by 2000, nursing will enter 
orders. 
           If the computer is still down at 2000, nursing 
will fax the miscellaneous forms and lab will enter 
these when the system is available. 
 
PREVIOUSLY ENTERED ORDERS – unscheduled 
downtimes. Note: If downtime occurs in the evening, 
lab will distribute forms for "Previously entered lab 
orders" by 2200.  Nursing will list the next day lab on 
this form for pickup by 0100. 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 6 
LBA016 
 
LABORATORY PROCEDURE: 
 
I. DOWNTIME MATERIALS 
 
A.  Open the Computer Downtime Box.  Downtime box located in Chemistry 
 
B.  Each Department will retrieve appropriate log sheets and specimen labels.   
 
II. INPATIENT PROCESS 
 
A. Specimens With Exisiting Lab Test Labels Printed Prior To Downtime  
 
1. Collection of Samples: 
a. Venipuncture draws patient and labels with Specimen ID label, 
phlebotomist’s initials and time of draw. 
b. Samples are delivered to Central Processing.  
 
2. Processing Samples: 
a. Central Processing records collection information, types of 
specimens received, and the time received in lab on Downtime 
Specimen Receipt Log (LBA016-B). 
b. Central Processing delivers samples to appropriate department.  
 
3. Samples in Department: 
a. Department logs in the samples on the Departmental Downtime 
Specimen Log (LBA016-A)  (record patient name, MRN, tests 
ordered and specimen ID number) 
b. Program specimen ID numbers into instrument and run tests.  
Follow departmental rules on repeats, critical, and resticks. 
c. Fax report to the correct location and document on manual 
order form or results. 
d. If critical value, call nurse, report result, and document 
readback by: RN, date and time on the manual order form or 
results. 
e. File results in the department’s folder. 
 
4. Computer Recovery: 
a. Central Processing receives specimens in the receiving activity 
in Epic from the information recorded on the Downtime 
Specimen Receipt Log.  
b. Each department transmits results from instruments or 
manually enters results. 
c. Techs verify results as needed, add comments, and 
Communication Logs recorded during the downtime, as OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 6 
LBA016 
necessary.  Result corrections may occur to allow the addition 
of comments to results that have autoverified. 
 
B. Labs Not Ordered In Computer- Manual Order Forms 
 
1. Collection of Samples: 
a. Nurse calls Venipuncture department to request a patient draw 
and faxes orders to Venipuncture.   
b. Venipuncture Tech reports to unit, gathers manual order form, 
and patient chart labels. 
c. Venipuncture Tech completes 2ID process using patient chart 
labels compared to patient armband. 
d. Venipuncture Tech draws samples, labels them with chart 
labels and includes initials and date/time of draw.  Also 
document initials, date and time of draw on the manual order 
form. 
e. Venipuncture Tech delivers samples to Central Processing. 
 
2. Processing Samples: 
a. Central processing records what specimens received and 
date/time on manual order form.     
b. Central Processing makes copies of manual order forms for 
each department.       
c. Central Processing delivers specimens and manual order form 
to department. 
   
3. Samples in Department 
a. Department logs specimen into department on Departmental 
Downtime Specimen Log (LBA016-A) (record patient name, 
MRN, tests ordered) 
b. Department assigns Specimen ID to the specimen- document 
on log (NOTE: All Micro and BB samples should be taken 
directly to - Do not assign downtime specimen ID numbers to 
Micro or BB samples) 
i. Place one Specimen label on tube. 
ii. Place one specimen label on Departmental Downtime 
Specimen log. 
iii. Place one specimen label on manual order form.  
c. The departments program numbers and tests into instrument. 
d. When running tests, follow departmental rules on repeats, 
critical, and resticks. 
e. Fax reports to the correct location - document on manual order 
form or results. 
f. If a critical value occurs - call nurse, report result, and 
document readback by:  RN, date and time on the manual order 
form or results.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 5 of 6 
LBA016 
g. File orders and results in the department’s folder. 
h. Forward shared specimens to the next department once testing 
is complete in your area. 
 
4. Computer Back Up – Downtime Ends 
a. Department checks in Patient Station to see if patient is 
registered. 
b. Select the appropriate encounter.  
c. In the Order Entry tab and place the orders from the manual 
forms.  
d. In the Order Inquiry tab, select the orders and collect the 
specimens in Epic. 
e. Receive the specimen into the lab.  
f. Department transmits results from instruments or manually 
enters results if instrument is not interfaced.  
g. Verify results as needed - add comments, read backs and 
communications recorded during the downtime, as necessary.  
May have to use result correction to add comments to results 
that have autoverified. 
 
III. OUTPATIENT PROCESS- CORE LAB STAFF:      
 All orders in Atlas should cross to EPIC when it is brought back up- if not then 
OLOL employees must re-order the tests in EPIC.  Outreach staff will attempt to 
cancel duplicate orders that occur during recovery from downtime.   
     
A. Processing Samples: 
1. Outreach staff receives samples (if this department available) - if not 
during normal hours skip to step 3. 
2. Records what specimens received, time and date on the requisition 
and the Outreach Log. 
3. Deliver samples to central processing. 
4. Central Processing records what types of tubes received and time 
received in lab onto the manual requisition, if not already present. 
5. Central Processing makes copies of manual order forms for each 
department. 
6. Central Processing delivers specimens and manual order form to 
department. 
 
B. Samples in Department 
1. Department logs specimen into department on Departmental 
Downtime Specimen Log (LBA016-A) (record patient name, FIN#, 
tests ordered) 
2. Department assigns Specimen ID to the specimen- document on log 
(NOTE: All Micro and BB samples should be taken directly to -Do not 
assign downtime specimen ID numbers to Micro or BB samples) 
a. Place one Specimen label on tube. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 6 of 6 
LBA016 
b. Place one specimen label on Departmental Downtime 
Specimen log. 
c. Place one specimen label on manual order form.  
3. The departments program numbers and tests into instrument. 
4. When running tests, follow departmental rules on repeats, critical, and 
resticks. 
5. Fax reports to the correct location - document on manual order form 
or results. 
6. If a critical value occurs - call nurse, report result, and document 
readback by:  RN, date and time on the manual order form or results. 
7. File orders and results in the department’s folder. 
8. Forward shared specimens to the next department once testing is 
complete in your area. 
 
C. Computer Back Up – Downtime Ends 
1. Atlas orders cross into EPIC or Outreach Registration registers 
patients and places orders. 
2. Outreach staff will deliver the requisitions and specimen ID labels to 
the  appropriate departments once the tests are ordered.     
3. Department transmits results from instruments or manually enters 
results if instrument is not interfaced.  
4. Verify results as needed - add comments, read backs and 
communications recorded during the downtime, as necessary.  May 
have to use result correction to add comments to results that have 
autoverified. 
 
              
REVISIONS 
2/2012 (created), 3/2015,8/2017 
 
 
    By    Date 
 Prepared/Revised D. Leger 8/9/17 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 10/17/2017 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 10/16/2017 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 10/17/2017 
Medical Director Review A Harton 10/17/2017 
 Effective Date 10/18/2017 
 Origination Date 2/2012 
 
 
 
 