OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
 
Page 1 of 8 
LBA076 
 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA076 
SPECIMEN INTEGRITY 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 5/18/2023 5/31/2023 5/31/2023 
Lab Administration Review J. Teague 5/30/2023 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 5/29/2023 10/2009 
 
 
I. POLICY 
The laboratory strives to establish and maintain the quality of samples submitted for testing 
through all phases of analysis:  pre-analytic, analytic, and post-analytic in order to meet or 
exceed Patient Safety Goals. The accuracy of an analytic result depends on the initial quality 
of the specimen, including adherence to pre-analytic parameters for the ordered test.  Proper 
collection techniques are essential. 
II. PROCEDURE 
A. Pre-Analytic 
Each collection of a specimen can represent a hazard to the patient.  In the pre-analytical 
phase of testing, specimens must be handled appropriately from the moment they are 
obtained to the moment they are tested.  Compromised specimens can occur when a 
container is mislabeled or unlabeled, when a container is not transported to the lab at a 
specific temperature, or not transported to the lab within a specific time frame. Vital 
collection information can be lost when the specimen isn’t collected appropriately in the 
computer system. 
1. Patients will be identified using a “2ID” or “3ID” process to improve sample 
identification at the time of specimen collection. 
2. Specimens will be labeled at the time of collection, in the presence of the patient.  
Pre-labeling tubes with patient information is prohibited. 
3. Collection, including capturing all necessary collection information, will be 
completed prior to sending specimens to lab for testing.   
4. Retrievable vs Irretrievable Specimens 
a. Retrievable Specimens - Specimens that are considered easily recollected, 
with minimal or no negative impact on the patient and can be characteristically 
representative of the original specimen. 
i. Blood 
ii. Urine 
iii. Swabs OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
 
Page 2 of 8 
LBA076 
iv. Sputum 
v. Stool 
vi. All Transfusion Services testing samples – see section 4b. 
b. Transfusion Services testing samples (Type and Screen, Draw and Hold, 
Prepare RBC, and ABO/Rh) are NEVER allowed to be relabeled.  NO 
EXCEPTIONS.  They must be redrawn.  These specimens must be labeled 
with the patient’s full name, Blood Bank Identification number, and a 2nd 
Patient identifier.  Date/Time drawn, and the identity of the collector may be 
documented electronically but must be included on the specimen when 
electronic documentation is not available.  Transfusion Services specimens 
without all necessary patient identification will be rejected and must be 
recollected. 
c. Irretrievable Specimens - Specimens that cannot be easily recollected, have 
the potential to cause significant negative impact to the patient, and any 
recollection that will not absolutely represent the original sample and can be 
identified with a reasonable degree of certainty may be considered 
irretrievable. Irretrievable specimens are usually obtained via invasive 
procedures.  The following list is not all inclusive.  Refer to appropriate 
supervisor or pathologist for exceptions requested by the physician. 
i. CSF (cerebral spinal fluid) 
ii. Body Fluid 
iii. Cytology Specimens 
iv. Tissue specimens (biopsies, resections, etc.) 
v. Culture samples collected prior to antibiotic therapy 
vi. Extremely difficult sticks 
vii. Pediatric urine specimens 
viii. Other Pediatric Specimens as determined by treating providers 
5. Criteria for Specimen Rejection – Recollect Required 
a. Unlabeled 
i.   No label affixed to the innermost specimen container.  
ii. Specimen label does not contain 2 patient identifiers.   
iii. Specimen label is unreadable. 
iv. All specimens must contain – 2 Patient-Specific Identifiers.  
Acceptable identifiers include:  
1. Name 
2. Date of Birth (DOB) 
3. Medical Record Number (MRN) 
4. Accession Number – Scannable barcode or complete readable 
numbers 
5. Social Security Number (SSN) 
6. LabCorp Number – acceptable for LabCorp Outpatient 
specimens only OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
 
Page 3 of 8 
LBA076 
v. Specimens containing 2 patient-specific identifiers listed above may be 
relabeled by licensed laboratory staff if the label is compromised.  
Specimen integrity will be maintained by double checking the 2 
identifiers on the original label against the 2 identifiers on the new 
label.  Examples include but are not limited to: 
1. Original label is placed horizontally around the tube and can’t be 
read by barcode scanner. 
2. Original label can’t be read by barcode scanner due to weak or 
skipped printing.  
3. Misalignment of label printer has caused a portion of the name 
and/or MRN to be cut off and 2 other acceptable identifiers such 
as DOB and Accession number are present. 
4. Specimens missing 2 acceptable identifiers must not be relabeled 
unless they are considered irretrievable. See section A6c. 
b. Mislabeled – Wrong blood in tube 
i. Specimens with two different patient chart/specimen labels  
ii. Specimens with incorrect patient label 
c. Unusable Specimen due to Improper Collection – These specimens are of 
poor quality and are highly likely to produce inaccurate results.  Lab Team 
Members are trained to detect and reject unusable specimens.  Poor quality 
specimens will be rejected at the lab’s discretion. Clotted or other unusable 
specimens that have potential to harm instruments will not be tested.  
Examples of unusable specimen below are not all inclusive: 
i. Specimens collected in the wrong media, collection device, or 
anticoagulant which are not acceptable for testing per manufacturer’s 
package instructions. 
ii. Proper storage requirements not followed. 
1. Room Temperature 18-25°C 
2. Refrigerated 2-8° C 
3. Frozen -15° C or colder 
iii. Proper collection procedures not followed.  
iv. Grossly hemolyzed samples 
v. Specimen is of insufficient quantity (QNS) 
vi. Specimen is from unacceptable source or is wrong sample type 
vii. Specimen received outside of acceptable testing time frame (ex. 
semen analysis, coagulation testing, etc.) 
viii. Specimen is clotted (if this is contraindicated for a specific test) 
ix. Improper blood to anticoagulant ratio 
x. Improper specimen to preservative ratio 
xi. Contaminated with other body fluids or IV fluids 
xii. Specimen emptied/spilled into biohazard bag 
xiii. Incorrectly timed OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
 
Page 4 of 8 
LBA076 
d. Requisition vs Specimen Discrepancy – Patient identification must match 
both name and 2nd identifier between the specimen and test requisition.  Where 
applicable, source/site must also match between specimen(s) and test 
requisition to be acceptable. 
e. Collection Information Incomplete – The following information may be 
documented electronically rather than on the specimen label.  Collection 
information must be complete and available. These omissions DO NOT require 
that the specimen be recollected. If any collection information is missing the 
specimen(s) will be considered “Incomplete Collection”.  Specimens submitted 
to the lab prior to completing all required collection information will not be 
accepted or tested by the lab until the collection is appropriately documented in 
EPIC by the responsible collector or other responsible team member.   
Laboratory will return the specimen(s) to the collection area accompanied by 
the “Specimen Collection Incomplete” notification form (LBA076-D) so that 
missing collection documentation can be completed.   
i. Date of collection 
ii. Time of collection 
iii. Identity of the Collector 
iv. Specimen source (ex. Blood, Urine, Fluid) 
v. Specimen Site (ex. Vein, central line, pleural fluid) 
6. Specimen Rejection Process – Inpatient and FMOLHS Facilities 
a. The patient’s nurse or the unit’s charge nurse will be contacted by lab staff and 
advised of need to recollect the specimen.  Communication may occur through 
phone or Voalte notification.  Retrievable Specimens should always be 
recollected. 
b. Retrievable Specimen 
i. Lab staff will “redraw” the specimen in EPIC.  The specimen will 
return to “draw list” to be collected. 
ii. Lab staff must document in the “redraw” comments:  reason for 
redrawing and the person notified. Can use “.rej” to produce canned 
verbiage.  
iii. Discard Specimen 
iv. If multiple specimens/departments are involved, the team member that 
detects the issue will notify other departments as needed to have 
specimens redrawn. 
v. Downtime - Use form LBA076-A Inpatient Mislabeled/Unlabeled 
Specimen form for retrievable specimens only if specimen cannot be 
marked for “redraw” in epic.  Ex.  Computer Downtime or Manual 
Process needed (Specimen is completely unlabeled, and Patient cannot 
be identified).  
c. Irretrievable Specimen - Recollection not an option  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
 
Page 5 of 8 
LBA076 
i. Team Member who collected and mislabeled the specimen or other 
available designee willing to take responsibility must come to the lab 
to identify and correct the specimen.   
ii. Form LBA076-A - Inpatient Mislabeled/Unlabeled Specimen Form 
will be filled out by lab staff. 
iii. All corrections will be witnessed by a Lab Team Member.  As a 
witness, it is the responsibility of lab staff to ensure that the form is 
completely and correctly filled out. 
iv. Deliver sample to department to run. Notify the department that the 
specimen is questionable. 
v. Result interpretation caution will be added to the chart comments by 
the resulting technologist by using “.rela” to produce canned verbiage 
informing the physician that the specimen has been relabeled and 
results should be interpreted with caution. 
vi. Forward completed Form LBA076-A - Inpatient Mislabeled/Unlabeled 
Specimen Form to the Compliance Officer for file. 
d. Irretrievable Specimens tested by Pathology Group of Louisiana (PGL) 
Irretrievable specimen errors detected by PGL will be forwarded to the 
applicable facility’s lab to facilitate onsite correction by the responsible area.   
i. PGL will notify applicable Lab.  
ii. The affected specimen(s) will be returned to the lab for correction. 
iii. Lab will follow process outlined in steps C.3.a-f. 
iv. Corrected specimens will be returned promptly to PGL for 
processing/testing and PGL will add any necessary cautions for 
interpretation by physician. 
e. FMOLHS Facility Labs 
OLOLRMC Main and Affiliate Labs (Ascension, Assumption, Children’s 
Hospital, Livingston, North Baton Rouge, and Woman’s MOB Lab) as well as 
other FMOLHS Labs (Lourdes, St. Francis, Angels, St. Dominic, etc.) may 
refer Inpatient specimens to each other for testing independently of the Lab 
Corp Outreach business agreement.  Any issues with these specimens will be 
treated as listed above.  Irretrievable specimens that can’t be transported back 
to the collecting facility will be corrected using the Outreach 
Mislabeled/Unlabeled Specimen Form (LBA076-E). 
7. Outpatient Specimen Rejection Process  
FMOLHS Outreach Business is owned and operated by LabCorp.  Through a reverse 
lab agreement and at the discretion of LabCorp, Outreach specimens may be routed 
to OLOLRMC Main or Affiliate Labs for testing.  The following is the established 
process for specimen rejection per LabCorp SOP. 
a. Retrievable Specimen OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
 
Page 6 of 8 
LBA076 
i.  Lab staff will complete the LabCorp “Test In Question (TIQ)” form 
and fax to LabCorp’s provided number. 
ii. If multiple specimens are involved, the team member that detects the 
issue will notify other departments of error as needed. 
iii. Retrievable specimens will be discarded.  Do not run specimens 
manually. 
iv. Cancel applicable orders in epic using the appropriate rejection reason. 
v. Forward completed paperwork to Compliance Officer for file. 
b. Irretrievable Specimen - Recollect not an option 
Irretrievable Outpatient specimens should remain limited to specimens 
collected by a Physician/PA/NP.  Facilities such as Baton Rouge Orthopedic 
Clinic (BROC), Surgical Specialty Center (SSC), and Lake Surgery Center 
may have specimens collected by both OR Physicians and LabCorp 
phlebotomists.  NOTE: Facilities listed may not be all-inclusive. Specimens 
collected incorrectly by LabCorp phlebotomists will be considered retrievable 
and will be rejected following the process outlined in section 7ai-v. 
i. Physician’s Office will be faxed form LBA076-E - Outreach 
Mislabeled/Unlabeled Specimen Form  
ii. The form must be completed by an individual willing to take legal 
responsibility for the correction before the test will be resulted in the 
computer.   
iii. Specimens will be tested offline, and results documented on 
manual/downtime form.   
iv. Hold results until resolution from Physician’s Office or until 3 days 
have passed. If no resolution after 3 days, notify Lab/Department 
Supervisor.  Supervisor will attempt to get correction completed. 
Document all attempts at correction. 
v. If no resolution after 7 days, notify Compliance Officer who will 
discuss with a pathologist to determine next steps.   
vi. Results will not be given until the form is complete. 
vii. Once form is complete, results may be entered into the computer. 
viii. Result interpretation caution will be added to the chart comments by 
the resulting technologist by using “.rela” to produce canned verbiage 
informing the physician that the specimen has been relabeled and 
results should be interpreted with caution. 
ix. OLOLRMC Lab and Affiliate labs do not return mislabeled or 
unlabeled specimens.  If there is a request that the specimen be 
returned, notify a Lab Supervisor (on-call if needed) and the General 
Pathologist (or pathologist on call).  DO NOT return rejected 
specimens without authorization from Supervisory Staff. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
 
Page 7 of 8 
LBA076 
B. Analytic 
1. Specimens received in the lab should remain labeled at all times.  When aliquoting is 
required, specimen integrity will be maintained by double checking the 2 identifiers 
on the original tube against the 2 identifiers on the aliquot tube before pouring off. 
2. When pipetting is necessary to transfer aliquots, one disposable pipet is used per 
patient. 
3. Aliquoting is never to be performed where there is a likelihood of cross-
contamination due to splashing.  If a lab accident occurs in which cross-
contamination is suspected, all specimens involved must be recollected unless more, 
uncontaminated specimen is available. 
4. Specimens shared between departments and specimens that may not be easily 
retrievable if testing is not performed within acceptable time and/or temperature 
limits may be investigated at technologist discretion or at the request of a healthcare 
provider.  Existing patient orders intended for a specimen that has already been 
collected and received in the laboratory but have not been documented as collected 
in the computer system, may be documented as collected by lab staff to ensure all 
needed patient testing is performed.  Lab staff will use the collection information 
(collector, date, and time collected) already attached to the specimen.  All lab staff is 
trained in manual/downtime documentation entry. 
C. Post-Analytic 
1. Questionable Results - Technical staff will review results that cause delta checks 
and may consult with the nurse or physician responsible for the patient if results are 
inconsistent with patient history.  Questionable results may result in recollection. 
a. Comm log should be initiated for documentation of communication regarding 
questionable results. 
b. Scripting - “Are these results expected for this patient?”  
c. If results are expected, tech will document in comm log and verify results in 
the system. 
d. If results are not expected, tech will document in comm log and mark 
specimen for “redraw”. 
2. Registration or Identification Errors - In the event of a mis-registration that is not 
revealed until testing is complete, the patient will be re-registered correctly and the 
results from the incorrect patient will be credited. In the event of a misidentification 
that is not revealed until testing is complete, the patient(s) involved will be 
recollected and results will be credited or corrected as applicable.  
a. Remove results from computer (Epic will accept blank values). 
b. Enter comment in computer as to why results are being corrected/removed. 
c. Credit Patient 
d. Notify appropriate Healthcare provider of the corrected report and document 
notification in the Comm Log using the Topic “corrected results”. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
 
Page 8 of 8 
LBA076 
3. Corrections - Any event requiring a corrected laboratory report to be submitted will 
be called to an appropriate clinical representative and appropriately documented. 
4. When multiple specimens/departments are involved, the team member that detects 
the issue will notify other departments as needed to have specimens redrawn or 
corrected as applicable. 
D. Specimen Integrity Monitoring – Quality Assurance Review 
Rejected specimens with focus on patient safety affecting mis-collections (Unlabeled, 
mislabeled, and improper collections) are monitored monthly to identify trends.  Data 
regarding specimen integrity is posted on Lab’s TeamLink SharePoint site Quality folder 
and is available to Department Supervisors, Nurse Managers, and Attending Physicians. 
Data includes units involved as well as names of individual collectors and tally of mis-
collected specimens per collector.  Re-training, counseling, and/or disciplinary action is 
recommended for employees or units with repeated errors. Increased frequency of high-
risk errors is reported by the Compliance Officer at Laboratory Quality meetings and at 
other Organizational Committee meetings as needed.  
III. REFERENCES 
CAP Standards:  GEN.40490, GEN.40491, GEN.40492, GEN.40825 
IV. ASSOCIATED POLICIES 
OrgClin018 - Patient Identification/Alert Bands  
NBL004 - Properly Labeling Lab Specimens  
NBL002 - Blood Bank Specimen Collection… 
Phlebotomy Specimen Collection Manual 
V. REVISIONS 
10/2009 (created), 3/24/15, 10/4/17, 4/15/18, 10/20/2020, 5/18/2023 