OLOLRMC MAIN AND AFFILIATE LABORATORIES 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BR, LA 70815 
LBA024 
Page 1 of 2 
 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA024 
RELEASE OF BODIES FROM THE MORGUE 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 8/23/2023 9/1/2023 9/1/2023 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 8/25/2023 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 8/26/2023 11/2/2009 
 
PURPOSE 
To provide guidelines for assisting Patient Care Services in releasing bodies from the morgue. 
 
POLICY 
Team members will positively verify the identity of a body when being signed into or out of the 
morgue.  The Morgue Logbook is dated timed and signed during the release of a body.   
 
PROCEDURE 
A. Bodies stored in the morgue must have two identification tags and a hospital armband 
with the patients first name, last name, and medical record noted.  One identification tag 
is located on the zipper of the body bag and the second identification tag is attached to 
the toe of the body.  The hospital armband is usually attached to the wrist but in some 
cases may be found on the ankle. 
B. Patient body delivery to the morgue 
1. The Patient Care Services  (attendant) or House Manager/House Supervisor 
representative will bring the body to the morgue and notify the lab of delivery. 
2. A laboratory team member will assist Patient Care Services with verifying the ID 
of the patient’s body as it is delivered to the morgue. 
3. All three identifiers (bag tag, toe tag, and patient armband) will be checked to verify 
that they are consistent with each other. 
4. Discrepancies are reported to Patient Care Services leadership for resolution. 
5. Resolution must be complete before body is logged into the morgue. 
6. All representatives (lab, House Manager/House Supervisor, and patient care 
services) must sign, date and document the time of delivery in the Morgue Logbook 
next to the name of the patient. 
C. Patient body release 
1. Requesting representative calls Patient Care Services to request the release of the 
body. 
2. The funeral home representative or autopsy transport representative identifies 
themselves and the name of the body being picked up.  
3. Patient Care Services team member notifies laboratory staff that a body is to be 
released. 
4. The laboratory representative will assist in verifying the ID of the patient’s body as 
it is released to the funeral home. OLOLRMC MAIN AND AFFILIATE LABORATORIES 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BR, LA 70815 
LBA024 
Page 2 of 2 
 
5. The body is identified by the funeral home representative, the patient care 
representative, and the laboratory representative by comparing all three identifiers 
confirming that all have the same first and last name and medical record number. 
6. Discrepancies are reported to Patient Care Services leadership for resolution 
before release of the body. 
7. The body is not released until all three forms of identifications match.  
8. All representatives must sign, date and document the time of release in the Morgue 
Logbook next to the name of the patient. 
D. Release of bodies being held by the Coroner 
1. The Coroner’s office may place a hold on a body to prevent the body’s removal to 
the funeral home.  Typically, these bodies will be released directly to the coroner’s 
office from the patient care unit. 
2. Lab does not participate in release of bodies outside of the morgue. 
E. Release of bodies for Autopsy 
1. If the body is for autopsy, an "Authorization for Autopsy” form must be completed 
and signed by the patient's next of kin before the procedure is started, except in a 
case where the Coroner has jurisdiction .  The form must be completed in full, 
indicate the extent of procedure to be done (trunk, head, partial, or total), and signed 
by two witnesses. 
2. A copy of the patient’s chart is sent to pathology along with notations as to which 
funeral home the body is to be released. 
3. Bodies will not be sent for autopsy until a  funeral home is identified for final 
release. 
F. Infectious Cases 
1. The infectious disease will be identified on the back of the toe tag and body bag tag 
prior to taking the body to the morgue.   
2. The House Manager/House Supervisor or designee will inform all assisting 
representatives of measures necessar y for precautions, if indicated. For special 
communicable diseases that have high pathogenicity refer to the Special 
Communicable Disease policy (IC 2013) 
 
ASSOCIATED PROCEDURES 
OC037-Death of a Patient/Autopsy 
OLOL AU – OLOL/PGL Autopsy Manual 
IC 2013 – Special Communicable Diseases Policy 
 
REVISIONS 
11/2/2009(created), 9/19/2017, 8/23/2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 