OLOLRMC MAIN AND AFFILIATE LABORATORIES 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 1 of 2 
LBA028 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA028 
REAGENT HANDLING AND STORAGE 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 1/23/2024 2/15/2024 2/15/2024 
Lab Administration Review J. Teague 2/2/2024 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 2/9/2024 3/17/15 
 
 
PRINCIPLE 
At least weekly, laboratory supply and reagent inventories are checked and ordered to 
prevent unnecessary cessation or referral of laboratory services.  Reagents and other 
supplies with a high-test volume will be ordered in duplicate or more, as required.  When 
the container in use is empty, a second container is opened, and a replacement is ordered.  
As inventory is received, stock is rotated by placing the most recently received supplies 
toward the back, and the older inventory toward the front.  Supplies and reagents with 
shorter expiration dates are used prior to ones with longer expiration dates. 
 
PROCEDURE 
A. Upon receipt, all reagents and supplies are labeled with the date of receipt. 
B. Check all reagents and supplies for appropriate shipping temperature – i.e., if the 
reagent is to remain cold, inspect for cold packs/dry ice and notify the department 
supervisor of any discrepancies. 
C. Reagents are stored and handled as recommended by the manufacturer.  Prepared 
reagents are prepared as recommended by the manufacturer, properly stored, mixed 
when appropriate and discarded when stability parameters are exceeded.   
D. All reagents and supplies are to be placed in the designated storage areas immediately 
– refrigerator, freezer, or room temperature storage. 
E. Reagent Kits  
1. If there are multiple components of a reagent kit, the lab will use components of 
reagent kits only within the kit lot unless otherwise specified by the 
manufacturer. 
2. Recommendations of the manufacturer for the proper use of reagents and 
controls in kit procedures are followed. 
3. If there are multiple components of a reagent kit, all components of the kit 
must be used within the expiration date printed on the container/vial. 
F. For individually packaged reagents/kits, the monitoring of reagent quality and stability 
is based on the volume of usage and storage requirements.  Processing of periodic “wet 
controls” is used to validate reagent quality, storage maintenance and operator 
technique. 
G. As applicable and appropriate, all reagents, calibrators and aliquoted solutions must 
be dated and properly labeled, with: OLOLRMC MAIN AND AFFILIATE LABORATORIES 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 2 of 2 
LBA028 
1. the contents and quantity (e.g., 10.0 mL bleach) 
2. concentration or titer (e.g., 1:50 bleach solution) 
3. storage requirements (e.g., refrigerate at 2-8°C) 
4. date prepared or reconstituted. 
5. expiration date 
a. A new expiration date must be recorded if the opening of the container 
changes the date, storage requirements, etc.  
b.  Labeling with “date received” and “date opened “is useful but not 
required.   
6. Technical staff initials 
H. Reagents and materials of substandard reactivity and deterioration may not be used. 
I. When discovered, all expired reagents and supplies are to be removed from the 
laboratory by discarding in the appropriate waste containers – biohazard, chemical 
waste, or sink. 
J. Prior to patient use, all new reagent lot numbers and/or shipments are validated with a 
suitable reference material before or concurrently.  External QC materials tested on    
the previous lot are used as the reference material. 
K. Each reagent purchased or prepared is tested for expected biochemical results. 
L. Acceptability Criteria for new lot/shipments received – QC results within range are 
considered acceptable.  New lot/shipment may be released for use in patient testing. 
M. Expiration dates  
1. Reagents and other supplies may NOT be used past the expiration date printed 
on the container/vial unless there is a written policy specifically exempting the 
reagent and its use detailed in the policy. 
2. Expiration dates are assigned to any reagents that do not have a manufacturer 
provided expiration date.  The assigned expiration date is based on known 
stability, frequency of use, storage conditions, and risk of contamination.   
N. Storage requirements  
Reagents must be stored as recommended by the manufacturer to prevent 
environmentally induced alterations that could affect test performance.  If ambient 
storage temperature is indicated, there must be documentation that this temperature has 
been maintained and corrective action taken when tolerance limits are exceeded.   
 
 
REFERENCES 
CAP Checklist: COM.30450 
CLSI EP26-A, User Evaluation of Between-Reagent Lot Variation, September 2013. 
 
REVISIONS 
3/17/15 (created), 1/23/2024. 
 
 
 