OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 1 of 3 
LBA029 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA029 
 
ALIQUOTTING SAMPLES 
 
 
PURPOSE 
This procedure defines the proper method of preparing and handling specimen aliquots. 
  
 
SCOPE 
This policy applies to testing personnel in the lab. 
 
 
PRINCIPLE 
An aliquot is defined as a portion of a sample.  Samples are sometimes divided for 
reasons such as the following: 
• Serum or plasma must be removed from cells, 
• Multiple tests performed in different areas of lab,  
• One sample must be tested at different times.   
Aliquots must be labeled, prepared and handled in a consistent manner to insure proper 
identification and lack of contamination. 
 
 
SPECIMEN 
Original patient or control specimen to be divided 
 
 
REAGENT/EQUIPMENT 
Aliquot containers 
Labels 
Appropriate transfer devices:  plastic transfer droppers, MLA pipettes, sterile droppers 
 
 
PROCEDURE 
A.  Centrifuge original specimen before aliquoting, if required by testing protocol. 
 
B.  Process only one sample at a time to eliminate chance of errors or cross- 
      contamination. 
 
C.  Obtain aliquot container.   Containers may be plastic tubes with closures, screw- 
      capped tubes, or other as appropriate to specimen. 
 
D.  Label the aliquot tube(s) with the appropriate label(s).   
1.  Label aliquots with the patient name, Second identifier (MRN or DOB), and  
     specimen type as well as the initials of person performing the aliquot.   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 2 of 3 
LBA029 
  
 
E.  Compare label information on the original specimen with the labeled container using  
      2 or more patient identifiers.  All information MUST MATCH EXACTLY 
 
F.  Discard any extra labels with patient information into the confidential trash container. 
 
G.  Transfer a portion of the original specimen into the appropriately labeled container  
      using a clean plastic transfer pipette or other aliquoting device. 
  a. Aliquots are made from the original specimen whenever possible.   
  b.  Hold tube in upright position to prevent spills. 
  c.  Verify required aliquot volume. 
  d.  Transfer desired amount to aliquot container using sterile technique. 
 
H.  Use/store specimen as needed.   
 
I. NEVER add aliquot back into the original sample 
  
 
UNRECOVERABLE SAMPLES/LIMITED VOLUME SAMPLES 
Aliquots are made from the original specimen whenever possible. Certain limited volume 
specimens may warrant the use of previously aliquotted specimens.  An exception is 
made for unrecoverable/limited volume samples that cannot be recollected.  Since 
unrecoverable specimens are collected during surgical/invasive procedures, aliquoting of 
such specimens is to be performed with care to avoid aliquoting the entire collection. 
 
Examples: 
• difficult venipunctures 
• neonate samples 
• specimens with critical collection times 
• fluids 
 
 
ADD-ON TESTING 
Add-on testing may occur after all information on the labeled aliquot has been compared 
and verified, including the two patient identifiers, with the add-on order and the original 
sample.  The time frame for specimen stability and temperature storage should also be a 
consideration. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
CAP Accreditation Checklist. CHM.12133  
 
REVISIONS 
3/19/15 (created), 9/28/17 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 3 of 3 
LBA029 
 
 
 
    By    Date 
 Prepared/Revised D. Leger 9/28/17 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 10/13/2017 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 10/12/2017 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 10/16/2017 
Medical Director Review A Harton 10/7/2017 
 Effective Date 10/16/2017 
 Origination Date 3/19/15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 