OLOLRMC MAIN AND AFFILIATE LABS 
LAB ADMIN 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 2 
LBA010 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA010 
MANAGEMENT OF PERSONNEL FILES 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 2/23/2021 5/13/2021 5/13/2021 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 4/8/2021 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 4/12/2021 2/1989 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 4/19/2021  
 
 
POLICY 
Laboratory Administration and Human Resources shall ensure that all personnel records 
are retained appropriately and are readily available.   
 
PERSONNEL RECORDS 
Personnel records for testing personnel, supervisory personnel, and other laboratory 
personnel shall include all the following as applicable: 
• Copy of academic diploma or transcript (non -waived testing and supervisory 
personnel) 
• License 
• Summary of trainin g and experience documented on form LBA020 -B – Test 
Authorization Summary 
• Description of current job duties: 
o Specific lab testing and other specific duties are summarized and  
documented on form LBA020-B 
o Job Description from LPM (Lawson performance manager) defines job 
duties according to organizational job titles. 
• Records of Continuing Education (may be summarized on form LBA012-F) 
• Work related incident and/or accident records, if any, will be maintained by 
Employee Health and kept in employee’s HR file. 
• Dates of employment can be found on employee’s Job Description from LPM  
 
JOB DESCRIPTIONS 
General Job Descriptions by Job Title are defined for the organization and are stored in 
Lawson Performance Manager (LPM) software.  These job descriptions shall inclu de 
representative duties consistent with the individual's training and experience.  The 
Laboratory Director or the Department Supervisor may make additional duty 
assignments. 
 
Job descriptions shall contain employee-specific, job-related performance standards.  The 
pre-employment physical examination includes checks for color blindness.  The lab will OLOLRMC MAIN AND AFFILIATE LABS 
LAB ADMIN 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 2 
LBA010 
be notified upon failure and the employee’s duties will be altered accordingly.  
Documentation of color-blind testing is maintained by Employee Health and will  be 
provided upon request. 
 
The Department Manager/Supervisor shall review the job description with the individual 
in the Lawson Performance Manager (LPM) system during Department Orientation and 
then annually at performance evaluation.  The employee shall acknowledge this review of 
his/her job description in the LPM system. 
 
The Laboratory Director and Human Resources representative shall review, and revise 
job descriptions as needed. 
 
LABORATORY TECHNICAL STAFF 
The laboratory technical staff is licensed b y the State Board of Medical Examiners  
(LSMBE) and is comprised of: 
• Medical Technologists  or Clinical Lab Scientists :  B.S. Degree, national 
certification, and state licensure 
• Medical Laboratory Technicians  or Clinical Lab Technicians :  A.S. Degree, 
national certification, and state licensure. 
• Phlebotomists: National certification and/or state licensure. 
• Medical Lab Assistants:  State licensure. 
State Licensure requires obtaining a minimum of twelve (12) hours of continuing 
education annually. 
 
PERSONNEL ROSTERS 
Each Laboratory maintains a Personnel Roster which is current and accurate.  
OLOLRMC Main Lab further divides the Personnel Roster by section/department.  
Rosters are updated as needed and are reviewed annually.  NOTE: Personnel performing 
waived testing only or whose duties are limited to phlebotomy, clerical work, or specimen 
processing are not required to be listed on the Personnel Roster. 
 
EVALUATION OF THE PERSONNEL ROSTER 
Personnel Rosters will be evaluated by performing Employee File Audits  annually.  
Audits will be performed  by laboratory director or designee to ensure that all employee 
files are being maintained appropriately.  All nonwaived testing personnel and personnel 
performing any CLIA defined duty are included.  An Employee File Audit T ool such as 
CJE-E will be used to document the audit and any findings.  Findings will be corrected  
upon discovery. 
 
REFERENCES 
GEN.54025, GEN.54400, GEN.54750, GEN.55400 
 
REVISIONS 
2/1989 (created), 3/15/15, 2/23/2021 
 
 