OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 1 of 3 
LBA027 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA027 
 
INSTRUMENT CORRELATIONS 
 
 
PURPOSE 
This procedure defines the requirement for instrument-to-instrument and instrument-to-
method correlation. 
 
 
PRINCIPLE 
If the lab uses more than one instrument/method to test for a given analyte, the 
instruments/methods must be checked against each other as least twice per year for 
correlation of results.  This applies to tests performed on the same or different instrument 
makes/models or by different methods.  This comparison includes all non-waived 
instruments/methods.  There should be an attempt to have samples that span the low, 
mid-point and high values. 
 
Quality control data may be used for this comparison for tests performed on the same 
instrument platform, with both control materials and reagents of the same manufacturer 
and lot number.    
 
Otherwise, the use of human samples (whole blood, serum, plasma, urine, etc.), rather 
than commercial controls is preferred to avoid potential matrix effects.  The use of pooled 
patient samples is acceptable since there is no change in matrix.  In cases when 
availability or pre-analytical stability of patient specimens is a limiting factor, alternative 
protocols based on QC or reference materials may be necessary, but the materials used 
should be validated to have the same response as fresh human samples for the 
instrument/method involved.   
 
This requirement applies to instruments/methods accredited under the same CLIA 
number only.   
NOTE: Respiratory blood gas instruments must be correlated against lab  
 analyzers at Livingston and Assumption Community Hospitals. 
 
**Each department has specific procedures applying to this process.  See individual 
department manuals for instruments compared and acceptable limits of each analyte.    
 
 
SPECIMEN 
Commercial QC material or Fresh human samples (whole blood, serum, plasma, urine, 
etc.) 
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 2 of 3 
LBA027 
CALCULATION:%Diff  =    Instrument #2 result   -  Instrument #1 result      X  100 
      Instrument #1 result 
 
 
PROCEDURE 
Using QC material:  Quality control data may be used for this comparison for tests 
performed on the same instrument platform, with control and reagent materials of the 
same manufacturer and lot number.  Obtain high, normal and low QC results from each 
analyzer.  Follow directions below starting with step 3. 
 
Using fresh samples: 
1. Obtain fresh samples for testing.   
• There should be an attempt to have samples that span the low, mid-point 
and high values. 
2. Run tests on both instruments/methods, designating one as the primary. 
• If stability of specimens is an issue, split samples between 
instruments/methods. 
• If stability is not an issue, it is acceptable to run on one instrument/method 
at a time. 
3. Record data on appropriate logs 
4. Review for acceptability.   
• Acceptable limits are established by departments using data obtained from 
CMS guidelines, CAP total allowable error, published reference 
documents, and/or analysis of lab data.  Typical ranges are in per cent, but 
departments may establish numerical ranges for ease in reviewing.  Refer 
to departmental-customized logs.   
• Corrective action is performed and documented.  Corrective action may 
consist of troubleshooting both analyzers, running controls, and repeating 
this procedure with fresh specimens.  Calibration of one or both analyzers 
may be necessary. 
• After corrective action, the correlation is repeated and documented. 
5. The Instrument Correlation is reviewed/signed by the section supervisor and 
stored with departmental QC material. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
CAP Accreditation Checklists 2014: URN.25925, TRM.31450, CHM.13800, 
IMM.34500, HEM.28000, POC.07568, MIC.11027. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 3 of 3 
LBA027 
 
    By    Date 
 Prepared/Revised A. Landry 3/17/15 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 5/15/2015 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 3/30/2015 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 4/1/2015 
Medical Director Review A Harton 6/13/2015 
 Effective Date 6/24/2015 
 Origination Date 3/17/15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 