OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 6 
LBA019 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA019 
 
TURN AROUND TIME (TAT) 
 
 
PURPOSE 
 
To define the laboratory’s expected turnaround time in order to ensure that results are 
reported in a timely manner to optimize patient care and outcomes.   
 
This policy refers to Laboratory Turnaround Time.  It applies to specimens that have 
been collected by laboratory staff, therefore avoiding factors outside of the laboratory’s 
control.  For example: delays in receiving nurse collected specimens and transport 
time.             
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
Total Turnaround Time  
Defined as the cumulative time taken for a sample to be processed. It includes the 
start time at which the test is ordered, the time the sample is taken from the 
patient, time spent in transportation, its arrival at processing/registration, pre-
analytical and post-analytical phases until verification by laboratory staff, the 
result being issued, and its subsequent receipt by the requesting physician.  
   
Laboratory Turnaround Time  
Defined as the total time taken for a sample to be processed within the laboratory,  
from its arrival in processing/registration until a result has been verified and  
released into the computer system.   
 
 
POLICY  
 
Clinical Laboratory services are geared to provide timely and accurate test results, which 
contributes to high quality patient care. Our goal is to provide services in a consistent 
manner throughout all areas of departmental services, allowing physician caregivers to 
make effective patient care decisions. 
 
Multiple aspects of the testing process that contribute to turnaround times are monitored.  
STAT inpatient, Emergency Care, and Outpatient turnaround times are monitored 
routinely to ensure test results are available in a timely manner and to identify 
opportunities for quality improvement. For specific quality assurance purposes, 
laboratory administration may decide to also focus on assessing additional components of 
the total testing process if these times can be accurately monitored and documented. This 
may then result in assessment of pre-analytical and/or post-analytical components as well 
as the analytical component of test turnaround time. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 6 
LBA019 
ORDER CLASSIFICATIONS 
 
Prioritization of specimen collection/reporting is determined by the order classification. 
  
• STAT Tests- Test results that are urgently needed for the diagnosis or treatment 
of the patient.  
o Highest priority.   
o Used to identify "potential life threatening condition."   
o STAT samples are collected immediately and reported within one hour 
(maximum time) of receipt in lab.  See expected TAT section below. 
o There may also be a need for certain locations with high risk patients to 
require expediting of specimens on a regular basis as a “STAT”. 
▪ ECU 
o STAT testing should be limited to critical patient needs. 
 
• ASAP (As Soon As Possible) - Test results that are needed as soon possible for 
the diagnosis or treatment of the patient.  
o Second tier of priority.   
o Collected and reported within two hours of order. 
 
• TODAY/ROUTINE- Tests that are collected and batched for efficiency and cost 
effectiveness.  
o These results are not needed on an immediate basis for diagnosis or 
treatment.   
o To be collected after other priority specimens and reported within 4 hours 
of order. 
 
• AM- To be collected by the established schedule for each unit.  
o Reported within 2 hours of collection.   
 
• TIMED-Orders specifying collection at a specific time usually coordinated with 
medication schedules, procedures, or processes.   
o Timed requests are reported within two hours of order. 
 
 
LIMITATIONS 
 
For tests performed within the Laboratory, the main factors directly affecting laboratory 
turnaround times are delays in receipt of sample, assay frequency, and abnormal results 
requiring further sample processing/dilutions, etc.  
 
 
REFERRAL TESTING 
 
Referral tests are shipped to outside laboratories throughout the day, Monday through 
Friday.  Tests referred to outside laboratories have varying turnaround times that are 
established by the referral laboratory.  Because most of these tests are esoteric and have OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 6 
LBA019 
complex testing methodologies, turn-around times can vary greatly from test to 
test.   Please refer to the OLOL On-line Test Catalog for more information on specific 
tests. 
 
 
 
OUTREACH LABORATORY SERVICES 
 
Test results performed in-house are reported, excluding batch tests, the same day or 
following day dependent upon the time specimens are received within the laboratory. 
 
STAT Testing for Outreach Clients: 
• Our goal is to have STAT results available within one hour from the time the 
specimen is received within the laboratory.  
• STAT testing should be limited to critical patient needs. 
 
 
NOTIFICATION WHEN TESTING IS DELAYED 
 
The section responsible for the delay of patient reporting will notify (and document) the 
appropriate person(s) regarding the circumstances leading to a significant delay in the 
timely reporting of lab results. The policy for notification when testing is delayed was 
developed with the input of Nursing Leadership. 
 
 
PROCEDURE 
 
The following TAT limits are defined for common laboratory tests performed continually 
by this lab.  Some specimens requiring special treatment may exceed these TATs.  
Batched tests and other specific tests (Microbiology, Transfusion Services, Special 
Chemistry) may have longer turnaround times.  Please refer to individual department 
policies and procedures for individual testing.   
 
 
ROUTINE/EXPECTED TURNAROUND TIMES 
 
Order Classification Measurement Times 
ECU STAT In lab to result <30 min 
STAT In lab to result <45 min 
AM In lab to result <2 hours 
ASAP Order to result <2 hours 
TIMED Order to result <2 hours 
TODAY/ROUTINE Order to result <4 hours 
 
*Note: Abnormal/Reactive tests results may take longer than these prescribed times due 
to required further processing and repeating for confirmation of results. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 6 
LBA019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STAT TESTING AVAILABLE  
• Definition of STAT Test- Test results that are urgently needed for the diagnosis or 
treatment of the patient. Used to identify "potential life threatening conditions." 
• Any test can be ordered as STAT, but the following tests are performed STAT. 
 
 
Chemistry 
Acetaminophen Cocaine Urine Screen Methotrexate 
Albumin  CPK Level Opiate Urine Screen 
Alcohol CPK MB Panel (No Troponin) Phenobarbital 
Alkaline Phosphatase Creatinine Level Phosphorus Level 
Amikacin Peak CSF Glucose Potassium Level 
Amikacin Random Depakene (Valproic Acid) Potassium Plasma Level 
Amikacin Trough Digoxin Propoxyphene Urine Screen 
Aminophylline (Theophylline) Dilantin (Phenytion) Protein Total 
Ammonia Direct Bilirubin Renal Function Panel 
Amphetamine Urine Screen Drug Screen Urine Salicylate 
Amylase Level Electrolytes Level Sodium Level 
Barbiturate Urine Screen GGTP Tetrahydrocannabinol Screen Urine 
Basic Metabolic Panel Gentamicin Peak Tobramycin Peak Level 
Benzodiazepine Urine Screen Gentamicin Trough Tobramycin Trough Level 
Bilirubin Level (direct and indirect) Gentamicin Random Tobramycin, Random Level 
Brain Natriuretic Peptide (BNP) Glucose Level Tricyclic Antidepressant Screen 
BUN Level HCG Titer Quant-Pregnancy Troponin Adv Level 
Calcium Level HIV Ab/Ag combo Urea Nitrogen Urine Random 
Carbamazepine Level Parathyroid Hormone (iPTH)* Uric Acid Level 
Cardiac Enzymes (No Troponin) Lactic Acid Level Vancomycin Peak Level 
Chem12(Comprehensive Metabolic 
Panel) Lipase Vancomycin Trough Level 
Chloride Level Lithium Level Vancomycin Random Level 
Cholinesterase Pseudocholinesterase Liver Profile (Hepatic Function)  
CKMB Level Magnesium Level  
CO2 Methadone Urine Screen *iPTH -intraoperative testing-
requires advance notification 
Hematology 
CBC PTT Urine Pregnancy  
Hemogram Fibrinogen Serum Pregnancy  
Hemoglobin and Hematocrit D-Dimer Acetone OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 5 of 6 
LBA019 
Platelet Count AT III Platelet Function Assay 
Retic Count ANTI-Xa  
Sed Rate Thrombin Time  
Sickle Screen Urinalysis  
PT/INR Transfusion Reaction Urinalysis  
Serology 
Mononucleosis 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
Cryptococcal antigen 
Microbiology 
Gram stain 
Gastric occult blood 
Fecal occult blood 
Rapid Flu 
Rapid RSV 
Rapid Rotavirus 
Rapid Strep A 
  
For all other lab tests and blood components consult the lab for availability and 
turnaround times. 
 
REPORTING OF RESULTS 
 
All results are available through the patient’s EMR.  For outpatient test reporting refer to 
individual client reporting systems (Atlas, EPIC, or secure fax). 
 
All critical results shall be reported according to the Laboratory Administration Critical 
Values Policy (LBA018) and OLOL Organizational Policy (OC-044). 
 
 
 
REVISIONS 
3/20/15 (created), 7/20/17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 6 of 6 
LBA019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    By    Date 
 Prepared/Revised D. Leger 7/20/17 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 10/3/2017 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 9/22/2017 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 9/26/2017 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/16/2017 
 Effective Date 10/6/2017 
 Origination Date 3/20/15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 