OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER
HEMATOLOGY DEPARTMENT
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808.

! LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL I
LBA012-HEME

. HEMATOLOGY COMPETENCY ASSESSMENT

1 2, —’Ll‘ Origitiation Date

m
E,mﬁ_

PURPOSE

To evaluate the competence of all testing personnel and verify that the techs maintain
competence to perform test procedures and report results accurately and proficiently. To comply
with Federal regulations and national accrediting agency guidelines, this procedure describes the
Hematology Department’s system for initial traihing of staff and assessment of competence
twice in the first year of employment and annually thereafter.

POLICY
Refer to Laboratory Administration Policy LBA0I2-Employee Tiaining, Competency
Assessments, and Performance Evaluations.

PROCEDURE

The supervisor, senior technologist, or qualified designee will monitor and decument employee
training and competency assessments. The designated categories of assessment vary somewhat
among shifts and/or job descriptions/duties. The categories assessed in the Hematology lab
inctude cbe testing, manual differential testing, body fluid testing, sed rate testing, coagulation
testing, urinalysis testing, platelet function testing, HPLC testing, flow cytometry testing,
maintenance, quality control, specimen processing, and lab safety.

A. Initial Training
1. Upon employmnient to the hematology department of OLOLRMC, each employee
is given their Hematology Initial Training Checklists with anh assigned/expected
deadline, Deadlines may be adjusted as needed for completion of training.
2. Training preceptors are employees with at least one year of experience in-patient
testing or performing other routine tasks.
3. Responsibilities:
a, New employees are responsible for having each item on his/her checklist
signed off by a qualified training preceptor within the assigned training
period.

Page 1 of 4
LBAQI2-HEM

OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER
HEMATOLOGY DEPARTMENT
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

b. Preceptors are responsible for assisting supervisory staff in evaluating
status of employee training and ensuring that training is being completed
by the assigned deadlines.

¢. ‘Supervisory Staff'is responsible for evaluating status of employee training;
ensuring completion of training-checklists, and coordinating re-training if
needed.

4, Once training is successfully completed, all checklists will be signed by both
employee and Supervisor and filed in the department.
NOTE: An employee may not become proficient and competent in testing that is
performed on a rare occasion such as platelet aggregation testing. It is acceptable
for the employee to begin routine patient testing prior to completing-all pending
training if the individual tasks have been documented as competent.

B. New Employee Competeiicy Assessment (6 month/semi-annnal)
Once initial training is complete and:patient testing has begun, new employees will be
evaluated for competency twice within the first year of patient testing in 6-month
increments. Competency Assessment will include all 6 required elements. This
reassessmient.of skills will be conducted by supervisory staff with the assistance of other
qualified testing personnel. See section C for more details.

C. Annual Competency Assessment
During assessment of staff competency, the Hematology department will utilize the:six
assessmerit methods mandated by CLIA and CAP to assess laboratory employee
competency.

Qualified personnel meeting applicable requirements-and delegated by the LMD will
assess and document competency. See Laboratory Administration Policy LBA012-
Employee Training, Competency Assessments, and Petformance Evaluations for
qualifications required.

These requirements include, but.are not limited to:
1. Direct observation of routine patient test performance
The supervisor, senior technologist, or qualified designee will monitor and
document direct observation of employee competency assessments. The
desighated categoties of assessment vary somewhat among shifis and/or job
descriptions/duties. Categories of assessment consist of CBC, manual procedures,
sed rates, coags, urines, platelet function testing, HPLC, and flow cytometry.
a. Scheduled/Unscheduled direct obsetvations of all patient testing and daily
duties
b. Qualified testing personnel will be used to assist in the assessment for
each discipline or test system.
Page 2 of 4
LBAO12-HEM

OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER
HEMATOLOGY DEPARTMENT
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

¢. Direct observations will be documented on each employee’s competency
checklist.

2. Monitoring the recording and reporting of test results
Monitoring of reports and results-are accomplished in several ways. In addition to
the daily monitoring of all critical reports, other reports and results are reviewed
intermittently and upon necessity, by utilizing all logs, forms; paper copies and
computer-based inquiries. These forms of review often consist of technoldgists
following fellow technologists, daily required pending reports, correction reports,
problem forms, corrective action logs and through statistical analysis-of daily
reporting functions and result monitoring.

Systems put in place to monitor reports daily also serve the capacity of observing
some intermediate testing. This form of review often consists of technologists
following fellow technologists, daily required pending reports, and CAP PT
exception reports and through statistical analysis of daily reporting functions and
result monitoring,

a. Al critical results/reports are reviewed daily by supervisory staff

b. Monitoring systems in place for passive review by technologist following

other technologists

3. Review of intermediate test results, QC records, proficiency test results,and
preventive maintenance records

a. Monitoring systems in place for passive review by technologist following
other technologists

b. All QC, PT, and maintenance records are reviewed by Supervisory Staff.

c. Direct observation will also be utilized to evaluate all intermediate phases
of testing,

4. Direct observation of performance of instrument maintenance and function
checks

a. Direct Observation of any/all maintenance on instrumentation.

b. Qualified testing personnel will be.used to assist in:the assessment.

c. Direct observations will be docuimented on each employee’s competency
checklist.

3. Assessment of test performance through testing previously analyzed
specimens, internal blind testing samples, or external proficiency testing
samples

a. Testing of unknown specimens utilizing previously tested specimens such
as CAP survey miaterial, and/or-anonymous Quality Control samples,
previously tested patient samples, or unknowns, may be used due to
unayailability of material and/or specimen.

b. Written exams, using pictures and images to assess competéncy.

Page 3.0f 4
LBAO12-HEM


OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER
HEMATOLOGY DEPARTMENT
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

C.

Competency for morphology assessment of personal shall be
accomplished no less than annually-and be consistent with all other
competency festing formats. Methodologies consisting of slide specimens,
photomicrographs, or digital images will be employed for these
assessments. Written asséssments for problem solving and troubleshocting
shall follow the guidelines set forth in section 6 of this policy for grading,
For body fluid differentials; Cells must be identified correctly. If the
technologist misidentifies a cell or cells incorrectly; this must be reviewed
a'second time by the technologist. If sti!l misidentifies, remediation will be
implemented, and an unknown smear will be given to performand
differentiation from the supervisory interpretation shall be applied in
grading and assessment of competency.

For urinalysis: The quantitative/semiquantitative results should be within
one grade of the actual result. Urine sediment components/cells must be
identified correctly. If the technologist misidentifies and or mis quantifies
a-cell and/or a sediment component incoirectly, it must be reviewed a
second time by the technologist. If still misidentifies or mis quantifies,
remediation will be implemented, and an unknown urine sediment will be
given to perform and differentiation from the supervisory interpretation
shall be applied in grading and assessment of competency.

For manual blood cell differentials: Cells must be identified correctly.
Platelet estimates of decreased, normal, or increased must be within one
grade of the actual resuit. If the technologist misidentifies a cell or cells
incorrectly or estimates platelets incorrectly, this must be reviewed a
secend time by the technologist. If still misidentifies and/or incorrectly
estimates, remediation will be implemented, and an unknown smear will
be given‘to perform and differentiation from the supervisory interpretation
shall be applied in grading-and assessment:-of competency:

6. Assessment of problem-solving skills

a,

b.

REFERENCES

Written-eéxams requiring critical thinking, problem solving and/or
troubleshooting skills

Two attempts will be allowed to achieve a score of 80%. Remediation
will be implemented, and no further testing allowed until an acceptable
test score is-achieved.

CAP Hematology and Urinalysis checklist HEM.35566, URN.30800

REVISIONS
12/5/19 (created)

Paged.of 4
LBAQ012-HEM

