OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA   70808 
Page 1 of 7 
LBA023 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA023 
CHAIN OF CUSTODY SPECIMENS: LAW ENFORCEMENT EVIDENCE, CORONER, 
LOPA, AND EMPLOYEE HEALTH URINE DRUG SCREEN SPECIMEN HANDLING 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 6/11/2020 7/14/2020 7/14/2020 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 6/19/2020 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 7/2/2020 3/2015 
 
 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to outline procedures to assure that specimens, hardware or 
foreign object explants, and all items being treated as evidence are properly handled and 
preserved once they are delivered to or requested from the laboratory.  Chain of Custody 
is a legal procedure that documents the transfer or control of an object between persons 
so that its purity and condition are clearly documented for use in court.  
 
 
POLICY 
Many different situations require the collection of evidence.  Situations include but are 
not limited to rape cases, law enforcement investigations, and surgical hardware implant 
issues.  The laboratory does not collect specimens to be used as evidence.  Evidence 
collected in the Operating Room or Emergency Room may be stored in the lab for up to 
one year until it can be retrieved by the requesting entity. 
Any of the following entities may request Laboratory specimens to be pulled and set 
aside for retrieval:  Risk Management Department, Law Enforcement, Louisiana Organ 
Procurement Agency (LOPA), or the Coroner’s Office.   
Blood, tissue, urine, and other body fluids collected by the laboratory for use in 
performing diagnostic laboratory testing are not treated to chain of custody 
protocols. OLOLRMC laboratory and its affiliate laboratories collect and test 
specimens for diagnostic purposes only.  Lab specimens may be converted to Chain of 
custody specimens at the request of the aforementioned entities at which time a “Chain of 
Custody” form will be implemented by the Team Member notified of the request to 
preserve specimens.   
 
CONDITION OF EVIDENCE OVERVIEW 
A. The physical condition of any evidence should be kept as close as possible to its 
original state.  
B. The fewer people who handle specimens or evidence the less likely the chance of 
destroying the evidence. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA   70808 
Page 2 of 7 
LBA023 
C. Any procedure or occurrence, medical or otherwise, which alters the original 
condition of the evidence, should be carefully documented.  Include the person who 
altered the condition, how the condition was altered and why the evidence was 
altered. 
D. If evidence is transferred to another person, such as pathology or another team 
member, then the “Chain of Custody” form must be used to document each individual 
who has control of the evidence at any point. 
E. Evidence should come to the lab with a Chain of Custody Form already in effect.  In 
the event that evidence is brought to the lab without the proper form, a Chain of 
Custody form should be implemented at that time.  A copy of the “Chain of Custody” 
form can be found on TeamLink under the Risk Management Department webpage. 
 
CHAIN OF CUSTODY OVERVIEW 
A. Preservation of evidence is the duty of all staff members. 
B. Ascertaining that the “Chain of Custody” form is initiated when necessary is the 
obligation of all personnel in the hospital.  It becomes the duty of each person 
handling the specimen to see that the “Chain of Custody” is appropriately 
documented.   
C. If evidence is transferred to another person, such as pathology or another team 
member, then the “Chain of Custody” form must be used to document each individual 
who has control of the evidence at any point. 
D. The evidence holder is responsible for: 
1. Assuring the accountability of the evidence during the time it is in that 
person’s possession 
2. Protecting the specimen/evidence property 
3. Recording: 
a. Individual from whom it was received 
b. To whom it was given 
c. The date, time of receipt and the date and time of delivery 
E. Upon release from the laboratory, the evidence or specimen(s) should be sent with a 
copy of the Chain of Custody form.  A copy of the Chain of Custody form should also 
be forwarded to the Laboratory Compliance Officer for filing.  
 
 
LAB PROCESS – CHAIN OF CUSTODY EVIDENCE 
Chain of custody items kept as evidence for law enforcement may be held in the lab if 
they cannot be given directly to Law Enforcement by the Operating Room or Emergency 
Room.  Examples of items kept as evidence (not all-inclusive):  bullets, bullet fragments, 
knives, and knife fragments. 
 
Only evidence items explanted from a patient may be sent to and stored in the lab. 
External evidence items such as clothing, cell phones, wallets, or purses may not be sent 
to the lab for storage and will not be accepted.  Hospital Security will assist in advising 
team members on storage for these items.  
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA   70808 
Page 3 of 7 
LBA023 
A. Receipt into Lab 
1. Any available licensed MT or MLT will be the initial recipient of chain of 
custody evidence delivered to the lab. After hours the lab charge tech, if 
available, may assist with the process but is not solely responsible for this 
task. 
2. The receiving Lab Team Member will review the paperwork that came with 
the evidence to determine if further lab processing is needed.  Consultation 
with a pathologist may be necessary if a surgical pathology report or gross 
examination is requested by the submitting physician.  If no pathologist 
examination is needed, proceed to section C. 
B. If the evidence needs to be evaluated by a pathologist: 
1. During Routine Business Hours: 
a. The technologist that receives the evidence will engage the G 
(General) pathologist to perform gross exam.   
b. The technologist will accompany the G pathologist to the grossing 
room and document on the Chain of Custody form the transfer of 
evidence.  The technologist must stay in the presence of the 
pathologist until gross exam is complete.  Evidence will then be 
transferred back to the technologist and locked up (see section C). 
c. If the G pathologist is not available to perform gross exam at that 
time, coordinate a time and lock up the evidence until gross exam can 
be performed. 
 
2. After-hours, Weekends, Holidays: 
a. Lab Team Member initially receiving evidence will record handoff 
and secure the evidence per protocol. 
b. After securing in the refrigerator, leave a copy of the specimen 
requisition on a Lab Supervisor’s desk with a note that the specimen is 
chain of custody evidence that needs grossing and can be found in the 
locked fridge. 
c. Lab Supervisor will notify G pathologist during routine business 
hours of pending gross exam. 
d. G pathologist will coordinate with the lab supervisor to pull evidence 
and perform gross exam. 
 
3. Delay in Completing Pending Orders: 
a. PGL monitors a workqueue to ensure that grossing exam orders are 
completed. 
b. PGL will notify the PGL Histology department onsite to initiate 
investigation on delays in completing pending orders. 
c. PGL Histology department employee will engage Lab Staff to assist 
in investigation.   
i. Review the Chain of Custody Log 
ii. Search the appropriate storage bin to locate specimen 
iii. Once specimen is located, engage G pathologist to perform 
grossing. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA   70808 
Page 4 of 7 
LBA023 
iv. If the specimen cannot be located or has already been retrieved 
by law enforcement, notify Lab Compliance who will work 
with PGL Compliance on any further investigation and 
documentation. 
 
4. In general, Chain of Custody evidence will not be sent out to PGL for 
processing.  Any request for such transfer should be handled by a lab 
supervisor/charge tech and a pathologist. 
 
C. Secure the Evidence 
The evidence is to be recorded into the log on the front of the locked chemistry 
refrigerator.  The evidence is then placed in the appropriately labeled bucket in this 
refrigerator for storage.  The chain of custody form is to remain with the evidence at 
all times. 
 
D. If the patient was admitted under a trauma alias, any evidence collected while the 
trauma alias is in use will be labeled with this identifying information. When law 
enforcement presents to the lab for retrieval of evidence, they will likely have the 
patient’s true identifying information rather than OLOL facilities’ alias identification.  
Laboratory Personnel can reconcile hospital trauma alias and law enforcement’s 
identifying information by searching Patient Station in Epic.   
1. If the trauma alias has been updated and the patient has no previous 
encounters, the Medical Record Number (MRN) will remain the same and 
will match the MRN on the evidence chain of custody paperwork.  
Additionally, prior to selecting a record to enter in Patient Station, brief 
demographic information including an Alias list will populate at the bottom of 
the computer screen.  The trauma alias should be listed in this section. 
2. If the trauma alias has been updated and the patient has previous 
encounters/other MRN, admissions may merge all information under a 
previous MRN.  Search in Patient Station using the trauma alias MRN.  Epic 
will list a note in Search Criteria that says, “No patients currently have that 
MRN, but we found patients that used to have it”.  The patient name should 
match what has been presented by law enforcement and the trauma alias 
should be listed in the Alias section of the patient demographics. 
3. If the trauma alias has not yet been updated in epic, search by trauma alias 
MRN or name.  Choose and open the patient record.  The demographics page, 
if the patient has been marked for merge, will give an alert that says “this 
patient has been marked for merge” with the pending patient name listed. 
4. Once patient identifiers have been reconciled, Lab personnel should record all 
patient identifiers on the chain of custody form. 
 
E. Evidence Retrieval by Law Enforcement 
1. Any evidence retrieved from the locked refrigerator for release must have the 
chain of custody form completed by the lab employee retrieving the evidence 
and the individual receiving the evidence.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA   70808 
Page 5 of 7 
LBA023 
2. The individual receiving the evidence must provide identification such as law 
enforcement ID or driver’s license.  A copy of the ID should be made and kept 
with the lab copy of the completed chain of custody form.   
3. The person releasing the evidence (Lab Staff) is to print their name, sign their 
name, and record the date of time of transfer in the “Released By” blank.   
4. The person receiving the evidence (Law Enforcement, Risk Management, 
Attorney, etc…) is to record their same information in the “Received By” 
blank. 
5. The release of the evidence must also be recorded on the log sheet located on 
front of the locked refrigerator.   
6. Once all paperwork is completed, a copy is sent with the evidence and a copy 
is to remain in the lab for the Lab Compliance Officer to file.   
F. All evidence located in the locked refrigerator should be assumed to be chain of 
custody. Always check the paperwork with the specimen and the label on specimen 
container. If needed, use the steps in section D to reconcile patient identifiers and 
document ALL patient identifiers on the chain of custody form. 
G. Chain of Custody Evidence will be stored in the Lab for one year unless otherwise 
requested by the Risk Management Department.  
H. Any questions about this process should be directed to Lab Administration or Risk 
Management.   
 
 
LAB PROCESS – LAB SPECIMENS REQUESTED TO BE SET ASIDE FOR 
RETRIEVAL  
A. LOPA, the Coroner’s office, OLOL Risk Management department, Law 
Enforcement, or other requesting entity will contact the lab to request preservation of 
all available specimens. 
B. The lab team member that receives the request should initiate retrieving available 
specimen.  A chain of custody form should also be initiated at that time. 
C. Specimens should be removed from electronic storage to document their disposition 
as being submitted to the appropriate requesting entity.   
D. The specimens should be forwarded to Transfusion Services for proper storage and 
documentation on the log sheet located on the front of the Serology refrigerator.   
E. Releasing Specimens 
a. LOPA and Coroner’s Office specimens may be released at any time to the 
appropriate personnel.   
NOTE:  A funeral home may NOT retrieve specimens on behalf of law 
enforcement or the Coroner’s Office.   
b. Specimens requested by agencies other than LOPA or Coroner’s Office 
should be released during routine business hours with the blessing of the Risk 
Management Department OR after-hours with a subpoena. 
NOTE: Although specimens should not routinely be released after-hours, they 
should be pulled and stored upon request to avoid accidental discard. 
c. The individual retrieving the specimens must provide identification such as 
law enforcement ID or driver’s license.  With the exception of LOPA OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA   70808 
Page 6 of 7 
LBA023 
personnel, a copy of the ID should be made and kept with the lab copy of the 
completed chain of custody form.  
d. Complete the chain of custody form and record on the log sheet located on the 
front of the Serology refrigerator.  
e. Once all paperwork is completed, a copy is sent with the specimen(s) and a 
copy is to remain in the lab for the Lab Compliance Officer to file.   
 
 
LAB PROCESS – EXPLANTS FOR RETURN TO PATIENT, MANUFACTURER, 
OR OTHER LEGAL PURPOSES 
The term explant refers to an implant that has been surgically removed from a patient.  
All requests for return/release of an explanted device will be managed by the OLOL Risk 
Management department.  The lab will never directly release any explanted device to 
a patient, family member, company representative (vendor), or physician.   
 
The Risk Management department can only store items that have been terminally 
sterilized. Lab will hold explants prior to sterilization or explants that can’t be sterilized.  
If a device is to be returned to the manufacturer, an attorney’s office, or a laboratory 
designated by an attorney’s office without sterilization, the Laboratory Referrals 
Department may assist Risk Management in packaging and shipping the device.  Risk 
Management Department should provide any packaging and shipping instructions to the 
Lab Referrals Department.  Explants will be stored in the Lab for one year unless 
otherwise requested by the Risk Management Department.  
 
Explanted items sent to PGL for testing will be returned to OLOL Lab marked to the 
attention of the Lab Compliance Officer.  The Lab Compliance Officer will log the item 
into the locked chemistry refrigerator until further instructions are received from Risk 
Management.  If sterilization is needed of the explanted device, the device will be picked 
up by Surgical Services to be forwarded to Sterile Processing and then to Risk 
Management. 
 
By a decision of Perioperative Services, The Executive Committee, the Pathology 
Department, and Infection Control Department, NO TISSUE is to be released to a 
patient or patient’s family. 
 
LAB PROCESS – AUTOLOGOUS BONE FLAPS FOR RE-IMPLANTATION 
Autologous Bone Flaps recovered in surgery (for re-implantation) are received with a 
Chain of Custody Form.  They must be given to Transfusion Services for further 
handling.  DO NOT STORE IN THE CHEMISTRY REFRIGERATOR.  If brought 
without a chain of custody form, one should be implemented by the receiving 
Transfusion Services technologist. 
 
OLOL Lab Tissue Bank is not licensed by the FDA to ship tissue.  If a patient requires 
re-implantation of the bone flap at another facility, the OLOL Lab Tissue Bank Medical 
Director will contact the FDA to request that a special exception be made for extenuating 
circumstances. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA   70808 
Page 7 of 7 
LBA023 
 
LAB PROCESS – EMPLOYEE HEALTH FOR CAUSE DRUG SCREEN 
In the event that an employer needs a for-cause drug screen collected after-hours, the 
employer and employee will report to the laboratory for collection.  Refer to the Legal 
Drug Screen Collection Protocols located in the Chemistry Department.  The employee 
should present a driver’s license ID at that time.  If the employee fails to present a 
driver’s license ID at that time, the OLOL Team Member badge will suffice.  Make a 
copy of the badge and have both the employee and employer print and sign their names 
on this copy.  If any other issues arise, notify the House Manager.   
    
 
RELATED POLICIES 
SOP029 - Specimens, Operating Room 
 
REVISIONS 
3/23/15 (created), 9/26/17, 6/11/2020 
 
 
 