OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 2 
LBA015 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA015 
 
CHARGE CAPTURE REVIEW AND AUDIT 
 
 
PURPOSE 
Process for auditing Core Lab Charges by:  daily and periodic review processes and 
notifying Lab Management of deviations. 
 
 
EQUIPMENT/MATERIALS 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Management Information System 
 
 
PROCEDURE 
Daily (M-F business work day) 
 1.  Pull Daily Revenue and Usage report for Blood Bank, Chemistry, Hematology,  
      and Microbiology by Supervisor or Senior Tech. 
 2.  Supervisor or Senior Technologist will transfer daily (M-F business work day)  
     data to an Excel Spread sheet broken down by months. 
 3.  Supervisor or Senior Technologist will monitor daily data comparing   
     data to past day, week, month, and year- looking for dips or spikes which can be    
     not accounted for- Initial, sign off each days review. 
 4. Supervisor or Senior Tech will report unexplained changes in data  
     to Lab Management. 
 5. Lab Management will notify Revenue Management if unexplained changes  
     cannot be resolved. 
 6.  Manual charges are reviewed for frequency.  CDM’s are created as necessary  
      to restrict the use of miscellaneous charges. 
 
Monthly 
 1.  Lab Referrals review monthly statements from the Reference Lab(s) to verify  
      that all appropriate Manual Billing was performed and sign off top of  
      Statements with their initials and date performed.  Approved statement will be  
      sent to Chemistry Supervisor or Senior Tech for noting in Referrals  
     Monthly Expense statement and then passing to Admin. Manager to sign off. 
 2.  Transfusion Services, Chemistry, Hematology, and Microbiology  
Supervisor or Senior Tech will e-mail Monthly Revenue and Usage reports to             
Manager of Core Lab by 3rd business day of each month. 
 3.  Manager will review monthly Revenue and Usage reports for completeness  
      and changes  
 4.  Manager will forward any discrepancies to Outreach Director. 
 5.  Manager will – Initial, sign off monthly review and save in computer file by  
      month and year for future review. 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 2 
LBA015 
Quarterly 
 1.  Transfusion Services, Chemistry, Hematology, and Microbiology  
     Supervisors or Senior Tech will perform and document computer audit from  
     department (instrument) to reporting. 
 2.  Review and document charges firing for test(s) ordered.   
 3.  Screen prints will be retained with Computer Audit documentation along with  
      initials and date performed. 
 
Annual Charge Master Audit  
Transfusion Services, Chemistry, Hematology, and Microbiology Supervisors or Senior 
Tech will perform and document, with spread sheet review, CDM audit for all tests 
revised or added since the previous Oct-Dec audit.  Documentation of this audit will be 
kept by the Outreach Director. 
 
 
 
Revisions 
6/2010 (created), 3/2015, 7/2017 
 
 
 
 
 
    By    Date 
 Prepared/Revised D. Leger 7/31/17 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D. Gremillion 10/3/2017 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 9/21/2017 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 9/26/2017 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/16/2017 
 Effective Date 10/6/2017 
 Origination Date 6/2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 