OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 2 
LBA002 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA002 
SCOPE OF LABORATORY POLICY AND PROCEDURE 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 2/27/19 7/5/2019 7/5/2019 
Blood Donor Service  and Core Lab Director Review J Teague 6/25/2019 Origination Date 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 6/27/2019 2/1989 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 7/2/2019  
 
 
 
PURPOSE 
The Laboratory Medical Directors of OLOLRMC Main Laboratory and Affiliate 
Laboratories have approved development of broad policies and procedures relating to 
diagnostic testing and patient care support.  Located in the Laboratory Administration 
Policy Manual, these policies and procedures reflect current professional standards and 
applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.  
 
Laboratory Administration policies and procedures are intended to: 
• Provide quality patient care. 
• Ensure optimum clinical results in a minimal turn-around-time. 
• Ensure that laboratory services are provided in accordance with laws, rules, 
regulations, and professional standards. 
• Establish state-of-the-art communication mechanisms. 
• Promote consistency, continuity, and safety for clients and staff. 
• Minimize errors. 
• Aid in orientation, education, and training of clients and staff. 
• Aid in evaluating job performance. 
• Promote Service Excellence Standards. 
 
Technical and complex procedures that are available to staff in department 
procedure manuals, operator's manuals, and other references need not be 
duplicated in Laboratory Administration policies and procedures.  Employees are 
responsible for updates to procedures and policies issued by the individual departments.  
All team members must be knowledgeable about the contents of the procedure manuals 
(including changes) relevant to the scope of their testing activities.    
 
 
POLICY  
All Laboratory policies and procedures including those located in the Lab Administration 
Manual are current and: OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 2 
LBA002 
• All new policies, processes and procedures as well as substantial changes to 
existing documents are reviewed and approved by the appropriate Lab 
Administration personnel prior to implementation.  Appropriate personnel may 
include but is not limited to the Department Supervisor, the Laboratory Medical 
Director, and the Departmental Medical Director (where applicable). 
• The date of any revision will be indicated on the document.   
• Policy/Procedure Review:  
o CAP accredited labs- Every two years, each individual policy/procedure is 
reviewed and signed by the laboratory director or designee, as evidenced 
by the laboratory organizational chart. (Departmental Supervisors or 
Mangers) 
o COLA accredited labs- Every year, each individual policy/procedure is 
reviewed and signed by the laboratory director or designee, as evidenced 
by the laboratory organizational chart. (Departmental Supervisors or 
Managers) 
• Personnel have read the policies/procedures relevant to their job activities. 
o During departmental orientation, personnel review policy and procedure 
manuals relevant to the scope of their testing activities and this is 
documented on their training checklists; thereafter, review of policies and 
procedures are performed when revisions to the procedure are made. 
• Discontinued policies/procedures are kept in a separate file for a minimum of two 
years after the date of discontinuation.  (For exception, see Blood Bank record 
retention policies)  
• Electronic versions of procedures are subject to proper document control. 
 
If there is a change in directorship, the new director will ensure, over a reasonable period 
of time (usually within 3 months) that the laboratory’s procedures are well documented 
and undergo scheduled review.   
 
 
REFERENCES 
CAP Checklist, COM.10100, COM.10200, COM.10300, COM10500 
 
REVISIONS 
2/1989 (created), 3/2015, 6/2017, 2/27/19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 