  1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY  
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
  
Page 1 of 10  
LBA004 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA004 
SOP FOR POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUALS 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 10/23/17 12/12/2017 12/12/2017 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 12/11/2017 Origination Date 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 12/11/2017 10/23/17 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 12/11/2017  
Medical Director Review A Harton 12/12/2017  
                    
 
 
I. PRINCIPLE 
       The purpose of a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for policy and procedure manuals  
 is to provide guidance and consistency in the process of writing, maintaining and  
 disseminating policies and procedures for use in the clinical laboratory. Policy and  
 Procedure manuals are a key element in quality control within the laboratory  
 and ultimately in assuring quality health care. All policies, procedures, forms, and job  
aids used in the laboratory are subject to proper document control.  All policies, 
procedures, forms, and job aids created and maintained by Lake Lab Services (LLS) 
Laboratories will adhere to the Document Control 
 
II. DEFINITIONS 
  
 Policy – A guiding principle used to set direction in an organization. 
 
Procedure – A series of steps to be followed as a consistent and repetitive approach to 
accomplish an end result.  May also be referred to as Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP). 
 
Variance – Any deviation from established standard operating procedure or 
specifications. 
 
III. MATERIALS/EQUIPMENT 
A. Laboratory Policy Manuals 
B. Laboratory Procedure Manuals         
B. Laboratory Job Aids 
C. Laboratory Forms 
D. Microsoft Word 
E. Microsoft Excel 
F. Electronic File containing archived policies and procedures.   2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY  
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
  
Page 2 of 10  
LBA004 
G. Physical File containing archived policies and procedures. 
H. Policy / Procedure Template (LBA004-A) 
I. New/Revised SOP Notification Form Template (LBA004-B) 
J. Approval for SOP Variance (LBA004-C) 
K. Biennial Review Template (LBA004-D) – [for CAP labs] 
L. Table of Contents Template (LBA004-E) 
M. Master List of Laboratory Policies and Procedures (LBA004-F) 
N. Annual Review Template (LBA004-G) – [for COLA labs] 
 
IV. PROCEDURE 
  
A. TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The policies or procedures are listed in the order of appearance in each manual.  Each 
SOP or policy has a title and unique document identifier.  Each SOP or policy has the 
most current version date listed. 
 
B. HEADER 
The facility name, department name, city, state and zip code of the facility must            
appear at the top left corner of each procedure page. 
 
C. SOP or POLICY RECORD BOX (Template LBA004-A) 
 A detailed record of the history of a policy or procedure must include: 
1. Manual Name 
2. Policy or SOP Name 
3. Document Identifier (Index #) – Each policy or procedure is assigned a 
prefix and unique number. The prefix designates the policy or procedure 
manual associated with the policy or procedure. The unique number is the 
number of the procedure as it appears in the Table of Contents.  [E.g. this 
SOP’s Document Identifier is LBA004]. 
4. Origination Date - The date of implementation of the original procedure. 
This shall remain permanently on the procedure. 
5. Prepared/Revised by/Date – Initials and Date procedure written or 
revised. 
6. Validated by/Date (optional) - Initials and Date procedure reviewed by 
Testing Personnel and revisions found acceptable for use by that 
individual.  This step is useful in ensuring that the SOP written or revised 
by supervisory staff can easily be used by Testing Personnel prior to 
implementing new or changed SOP. 
7. Reviewed by/Date - Initials and Date procedure approved by the 
Supervisor or designee, the Departmental Medical Director (may not be 
applicable to every lab), and the Laboratory Medical Director.        
8. Issue Date – Date procedure issued for training and/or review by affected 
employees. 
9. Effective Date - Date of implementation of the new or revised procedure. 
 
   3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY  
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
  
Page 3 of 10  
LBA004 
D. FOOTER 
The footer section of each procedure consists of two parts: the Document 
Identifier and the page number.  
1. Document Identifier is noted at the bottom center of each page.   
2. Page numbers are assigned using the Page X of Y format and are noted at 
the bottom right of each page of the procedure. 
 
E. FORMAT 
All laboratory policies and procedures should be structured so that the user can 
quickly focus on the aspect of policy or procedure relevant to their decision/task 
at hand.  Policies and procedures will be typed using the Microsoft Word 
Document Program.  Type Font should ideally be 10 or 12 point (less than 8 point 
not recommended) so that policies and procedures are easily legible.  Font style 
should be reasonable and standard throughout a single document employing 
generous use of white space. Times New Roman font style is preferred. Calibri, 
Cambria, and Arial are also acceptable.  
 
F. PROCEDURE OUTLINE  
Some Elements may be not applicable to the procedure being written.  Conversely 
additional elements may be necessary in order to write a comprehensive 
procedure.   
Manufacturer’s instructions should be the primary resource for test procedures.   
Manufacturers often provide procedure templates for use in creating appropriate 
procedures with all applicable elements.  These may be used as long as they are 
formatted using the standardized LLS Laboratory format described in this 
procedure. 
 
1. Title 
The title should be concise and descriptive.  Consideration should be given 
to using logical wording that facilitates indexing and locating any given 
procedure.  The word order should be based on usual laboratory inquiry. 
 
2. Principle 
The principle of a procedure defines the objective of the procedure and the  
general process or method used.   
 
3. Specimen 
Includes the type of blood specimen required along with the following 
criteria: 
a. Conditions for patient preparation, if applicable 
b. Type of blood specimen, i.e., EDTA or clot 
c. Amount of specimen 
d. Anticoagulant of choice, alternative anti-coagulants, and 
unacceptable choices 
e. Storage and stability requirements   4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY  
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
  
Page 4 of 10  
LBA004 
f. Conditions that can interfere with test results, i.e., hemolysis and 
lipemia 
 
4. Materials/Equipment/Materials/Forms 
The reagents, supplies, and equipment needed and any forms as 
applicable. Storage requirements should also be listed.   
 
5.  Calibration 
The process of configuring an instrument to provide a result for a sample 
within an acceptable range. 
 
6. Quality Control 
Includes identification of control material, frequency with which controls 
should be run, acceptable and unacceptable results for the controls, and 
corrective action to be taken when QC results are unacceptable. 
 
7. Procedure  
a. Write clear, step-by-step procedure to be followed.  Include all 
critical steps of process in sufficient detail for trained and 
competent individual to follow. 
b. Begin each step with an action verb. 
c. Define abbreviations in document prior to use. 
 
8. Interpretation of Results 
The preparer should define acceptable end-points and the range of 
expected results where applicable.  The preparer should also identify 
procedures used in reporting abnormal results to the physician.  The 
appropriate explanation for those procedures that require interpretive 
reporting should also be included. 
 
9.  Limitations 
Defines elements that may cause false or erroneous results. 
 
10. References 
These are specific citations that substantially support the procedure and its 
objective. Sources of reference may be manufacturer's operating manuals, 
direction inserts, technical manuals, Regulatory standards, and textbooks. 
 
11. Revisions 
The procedure revision date is recorded at the end of the procedure.  
Previous revision dates are retained to provide a historical sequence of 
revisions for the procedure.     
 
 
 
   5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY  
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
  
Page 5 of 10  
LBA004 
G.  POLICY OUTLINE 
 
1.  Title 
The title should be concise and descriptive.  Consideration should be given 
to using logical wording that facilitates indexing and locating any given 
procedure.  The word order should be based on usual laboratory inquiry. 
 
2.  Scope 
The scope of a policy defines the extent to which the policy is relevant.  It  
provides a consistent, logical framework for action.  The scope should  
consist of a concise summary statement of the rationale for the policy,  
including if appropriate, reference to external regulations. 
 
3.  Definitions 
Definitions of terms (as needed).  Acronyms and abbreviations should be 
defined before use. 
 
4.   Policy 
Detailed policy statement.  The policy should include related policies and 
references for more information.  Ensure that documents cited are readily 
available.  If needed, provide additional background discussion here. 
Reference the detailed procedures that are recommended in order to carry 
out the intent of the policy. 
 
5.   References 
These are specific citations that substantially support the policy and its  
Objective. Sources of reference may be manufacturer's operating manuals,  
direction inserts, technical manuals, Regulatory standards, Over-arching  
Organizational policies, and textbooks. 
 
6.   Revisions 
The policy revision date is recorded at the end of the procedure.   
Previous revision dates are retained to provide a historical sequence of  
revisions for the policy. 
 
H. CONTROLLED ACCESS 
1. Each policy and procedure manual is maintained in an individual file folder 
on the T drive within the Microsoft software program. 
2. Access to the Tdrive is provisioned to Laboratory Supervisory Staff that has 
been delegated to revise, create, and manage Laboratory policies and 
procedures. 
3. Departmental Supervisors and Senior Technologists are the folder owners 
for their specific file folder. 
4. Lab Supervisory staff that has been authorized to access the T drive will not 
modify or access a Departmental Folder not their own without permission 
of the Folder Owner. See LBA020 – Delegation of Responsibility for   6 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY  
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
  
Page 6 of 10  
LBA004 
defined Laboratory Roles. 
5. A hard copy of each policy and procedure manual is kept in the applicable 
department for use by Laboratory Staff. 
6. Laboratory Policies and Procedures may be shared online through the 
SharePoint Document system as long as the following criteria are met: 
a. Policies and Procedures will be shared in PDF format to prevent 
intentional or unintentional modification of documents. 
b. Policies and Procedures shared electronically will be immediately 
updated to the most current version in-use as revisions occur. 
c. Policies and Procedures must also be available in hard copy form 
in the event of a computer downtime. 
 
I. CREATING AND REVISING ELECTRONICALLY 
1. Each Department or Lab has their own individual Folder on the T drive.   
2. Within each Main Departmental/Lab folder, current versions of in-use 
documents, documents being revised or created, and documents that have 
been retired are kept separate from each other. 
3. Revisions are never made directly to an existing document. 
a.  Perform “save as” on the existing document to create a copy that 
can be revised without interfering with the integrity of the current 
version. 
b. Add “rev” to the title of the copied document to indicate that this 
is a working version which is not yet in effect.  
c. Save the copy in a designated working folder separate from 
current documents.   
d. New documents should also be created in a working folder.  Add 
“new” to the title of the new working document. 
4. Multiple authorized users may work on a single document within the tdrive 
using the “Track Changes” functionality of Microsoft Word.  Users can 
see proposed changes and approve or reject them.  This function reduces 
the risk of revisions being lost due to having multiple copies being revised 
independently. 
 
J. REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF NEW/REVISED DOCUMENTS  
1. The Departmental Supervisor or designee, the Departmental Medical 
Director, and the Laboratory Medical Director review and approve each 
applicable new or revised policy or procedure before it is implemented.   
2. Each policy, procedure, job aid, or form is submitted for approval prior to 
use in the following manner: 
a. Optional validation step - Procedure is given to a lead individual 
to read and perform steps of procedure as written to check for 
clerical errors, that steps of procedure can be followed as written, 
and to make suggestions for improvement of procedure.  If there 
are no corrections proceed to step c.  If corrections are needed 
continue to next step. 
b. Corrections are made to procedure and the lead individual will   7 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY  
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
  
Page 7 of 10  
LBA004 
then repeat step a. 
c. Each policy, procedure and/or job aid must be reviewed with 
accompanying forms and approved/signed by the Departmental 
Supervisor or designee, the Departmental Medical Director (where 
applicable), and the Laboratory Medical Director. If there are no 
corrections proceed to step 3.  If corrections are needed continue to 
next step. 
d.  Corrections are made to procedure and step c will be repeated. 
3. Each policy or procedure must be posted for review by the personnel 
responsible for carrying out the policy or procedure prior to 
implementation using the New/Revised Notification Form Template 
(LBA004-B).  Any training required will be indicated on this form. The 
review and documentation of review must be performed prior to 
implementation, or any modification thereof. 
4. Submit approved procedure to staff for documentation of review of the 
new/revised policy/procedure before it is implemented in the following 
manner:   
a. Issue date – the date a policy or procedure is submitted to relevant 
staff for review and acknowledgement of changes prior to being 
put into effect.  The time between Issue Date and Effective Date 
should be sufficient to allow all relevant staff to be made aware of 
the pending change.  Two weeks for review and implementation is 
usually sufficient. 
b. Personnel on vacation, extended leave, or PRN are required to 
review new policies and undergo necessary training prior to 
performing tasks.   
c. Personnel review may be manually documented using 
New/Revised SOP Notification Form Template (LBA004-B) or it 
may be performed electronically.  Both methods will be monitored 
by supervisory staff for compliance prior to putting policies and 
procedures into effect. 
d. Effective date – the date a policy or procedure is put into effect.   
e. Policies and procedures may be put into effect prior to obtaining 
all employee signatures; however, a reason for delay must be 
documented on the New/Revised SOP Notification Form Template 
(LBA004-B).  Employees will perform Review and necessary 
training prior to performing tasks. 
f. Level of training needed for changes are decided by Supervisors in 
conjunction with Manager and Compliance Officer and are subject 
to Medical Director Supervision.  Procedures changed to improve 
format or to implement needed clerical changes may need only a 
review and require no additional training. 
5. Some forms may be changed at need, independent of a procedure.  When 
this occurs, date of revision is documented in footer section of form.  
 
   8 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY  
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
  
Page 8 of 10  
LBA004 
 
K. REVIEW OF POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUALS 
   Policies and procedures will be reviewed and revised as needed to remain current.  
   In addition, all Laboratory policies and procedures will be periodically reviewed  
   to ensure that all content is current in regards to Regulatory Standards,  
   Manufacturer’s Package Inserts, associated Organizational Policies, and any local,  
   state, or federal guidelines. 
1. Each policy and procedure manual is reviewed biennially by the 
Departmental Medical Director or designee (CAP accredited labs). 
Documentation of this review is maintained on the Biennial Review Form 
(LBA004-D) located at the beginning of each manual.   
2. COLA accredited lab reviews are performed annually by the Lab Medical 
Director.  They are not delegated.  Documentation of this review is 
maintained on the Annual Review Form (LBA004-G) located at the 
beginning of each manual.   
 
L. ARCHIVE RETIRED/REVISED DOCUMENTS 
1. When a policy or procedure is discontinued or a revised version has been 
approved, the retirement date is documented on the original hard copy.  
This copy is filed and maintained for at least two years (AABB 
accreditation standards require 5 year retention).  The file shall be placed 
in a location that ensures Laboratory Staff are unable to access 
unintentionally. 
2. Copies of Retired/Revised Forms must all be removed from use upon 
implementation of New/Revised Forms.  It is the responsibility of the 
Supervisory Staff implementing New/Revised Forms to locate and remove 
copies of outdated Forms from use. 
3. Retired/Revised electronic version shall be moved to an archive folder on 
the Tdrive. 
 
M. FORMS 
Applies to Forms associated with both Policies and Procedures 
 
1. Forms will be given a Document Identifier and will be included on a Master 
Forms List.   
NOTE – The Template Forms listed in this procedure may be assigned a 
new Document Identifier as needed for implementation within individual 
Departments or other LLS Laboratories. 
2. Each form related to procedure will be linked to that procedure in the 
following manner: 
a. The form will be assigned a Document Identifier that links it to the 
procedure which describes its use followed by an alpha link to that 
policy. [E.g. the first form associated with this procedure is 
(LBA004-A).] 
b. The title of the form will include the Document Identifier. 
c. The form is filed with that procedure as part of the procedure.   9 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY  
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
  
Page 9 of 10  
LBA004 
d. A master list of forms in use will be kept in the Department and 
will include the Form name, Document Identifier, and Current 
Version. Master Form List may be included on the end of or 
integrated into the Table of Contents. 
3. All forms must have the Current Version date in “Footer” section of 
document. 
4. All forms must have the Document Identifier in the “Footer” section of the 
document. Forms are identified in the “Footer” in one of the following 
ways: 
a. By filename and pathway (Filepath) – Filepath allows all 
supervisory staff who have been granted access to the tdrive to 
easily identify exactly where forms are stored on the tdrive in the 
event that the last original printed copy gets used.  This is 
especially useful when forms are shared and used throughout the 
lab.  Filepath includes the Title of the form which will also include 
the Document Identifier.  Filepath is assigned in the following 
manner: 
i. From Insert Tab, click Quick Parts,  
ii. From dropdown box choose Field 
iii. Choose Field Name of “File Name” 
iv. Check off “add path to filename” under Field Options 
b. Document Identifier – it is acceptable to simply list the Document 
Identifier in the “Footer”. 
5. Every effort should be made to limit forms to one page.  In the event that a 
single form requires multiple pages, the pages will be listed in the 
“Footer” section in X of Y format on the right hand side. 
 
N. JOB AIDS 
Applies to Job aids associated with both policies and procedures 
  
1. Job aids include Quick Reference guides, flowcharts, and any other 
abbreviated document that helps Laboratory Staff perform their job duties 
quickly and accurately without the need to access the full policy or 
procedure. 
2. Job aids shall be treated in the same manner as Forms.  Follow all 
instructions listed in Forms section K steps 1-5.  
 
O. SOP VARIANCE APPROVAL 
Situations may arise that justify variance from SOP.  When these situations are 
encountered appropriate approval must be secured prior to varying from SOP.   
1. Complete an “Approval for SOP Variance” form (LBA004-C). Bring it to 
the Supervisor or Senior Technologists for review.  Submit to 
Departmental Medical Director or Clinical Pathologist for review.  If 
Supervisor is unavailable, obtain Pathologist approval.  
2. Completed forms are kept in the applicable Department. 
3. In some clinical situations there might not be enough time to pursue   10 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LABORATORY  
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
  
Page 10 of 10  
LBA004 
approval.  In this case complete a form and submit it for review as soon as 
the time or situation permits.   
  
V. REFERENCES 
A. CAP standard GEN.20375 
B. AABB Standards for Blood Banks and Transfusion Services, Current Edition. 
 
VI. REVISIONS 
 10/23/17 (created)
  