OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 1 of 6 
LBA007 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA007 
TEST RESULTS 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 10/22/2020 1/11/2021 1/11/2021 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 1/8/2021 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 1/3/2021 3/2015 
 
 
 
I. POLICY 
Ensuring quality patient results is the primary goal of Our Lady of the Lake 
Laboratories.  Computer resulting is accomplished by registered medical 
technologist/technicians who cover all shifts and are the designated personnel to 
correlate data (clerical and/or technical) and monitor test performance/results for 
reasonableness with a review of method interferences if indicated.  Age related 
normal ranges with high and low flags are built into computer resulting as well as 
delta checks of previous results.  Results which fall outside of reportable limits will 
be repeated and/or diluted before reporting.  Any questionable results will be resulted 
as preliminary when possible and held for supervisory review and finalization of 
results.  Laboratory results are the property of OLOL and the information in the 
record belongs to the patient.  Results are maintained in the computer for the benefit 
of the patient, physicians, and hospital.   
II. PROCEDURE  
A. GENERAL RELEASE OF RESULTS 
1. Laboratory personnel documents patient results in the computer 
systems concurrently with testing performance.  In cases of downtime, 
the laboratory has procedures in place to concurrently document 
results on downtime documents. See LBA016-Computer Downtime.   
2.  Laboratory results are accessible using LIS system.  Physicians have 
access to view results on all of their patients from within the hospital 
or at home via remote access. 
3. Laboratory results are available as they are verified in the Laboratory 
Information System. 
4. To keep up with quality of service in turnaround of result reporting, 
lab staff works from Worklists designed for each department.  
Worklists are set to routinely refresh so that information is up-to-date. 
5. Supervisory review monitors and ensures turnaround times are being 
met, proper follow-up action is taken and documented, testing OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 2 of 6 
LBA007 
parameters are met prior to reporting results, and corrective actions are 
performed as needed. 
B. PATIENTS REQUESTING LAB RESULTS 
1. Patients requesting lab results must obtain their laboratory results 
through OLOLRMC Online Patient Center (MyChart), their doctor’s 
office, or the hospital’s Release of Information (ROI) Department. 
2. Laboratory employees wishing to obtain their results must follow the 
steps listed above for the release of information.  UNDER NO 
CIRCUMSTANCES will an employee access their own Medical 
Record or that of a family member. 
C. FAXING OF LAB RESULTS  
1. Laboratory results should only be faxed to known or confirmed fax 
numbers, using the EPIC information system.  Any deviation from this 
should be documented in order to be in compliance with, or exceed the 
statutes brought forth by the American Recovery and Reinvestment 
Act, Title XIII, Subpart D.  As a further security measure, OLOLRMC 
does not use patient social security numbers to identify its patients and 
under normal circumstances, social security numbers are not located 
on patient reports. 
2. Patient reports may be set to “autofax” to a designated, secure fax 
machine or printer directly from Epic LIS.  
3.  Occasionally reports will be requested by Healthcare Providers other 
than the Ordering Physician.  If reports are sent ad hoc, they must be 
sent using the “CC List” found in the Specimen Inquiry activity in 
Epic to ensure the report will print in a compliant manner, with an 
acceptable coversheet. There must be a confirmation of the recipients 
fax number prior to faxing patient results using this ad hoc method.  
Confirm the fax number in one of the following ways: 
a. All fax numbers and submitters available in the “CC List” in 
Epic are confirmed secure fax numbers. 
b. Review the submitter’s information in the Phone Book activity 
in Epic.  If a number is present in this activity then it is safe to 
use in the “CC List” ad hoc method. 
c. Any fax number documented/received as part of an official lab 
order is considered verified.  Use the “CC List” ad hoc method 
to send information to this number as requested by the ordering 
practitioner.    
d. If the number is not found in one of the above locations, you 
MUST use the Manual Fax Confirmation Form (LBA007-A) to 
confirm the fax number and document the fax on a “Manual 
Fax Log” kept within the department. 
e. “Sending (Faxing) Results” Job Aid (EJA5.1) located on the OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 3 of 6 
LBA007 
Laboratory Services Department Page provides instruction on 
faxing within EPIC. 
4. Under certain circumstances reports must be faxed manually.  Such 
times include, but are not limited to computer downtime.  Results 
faxed manually should be done so with the utmost care in order to 
ensure no errors in dialing the fax number.  Manual faxes should be 
logged on a “Manual Fax Log” kept within the department and the 
completed Manual Fax Confirmation form (LBA007-A) submitted to 
the Laboratory Compliance Officer.   
5. A cover sheet shall be attached to all faxed documents stating that the 
Transmittal is confidential and that the receiving party is prohibited 
from disclosing the information to any other unauthorized party. 
6. Patient-related information may be faxed only if the authorization and 
release complies with federal, state, local laws and policies of Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center. 
7. Patient-related material requested shall be copied or printed from 
electronic record and faxed to the requesting party. 
8. Cover sheets are located in proximity of the fax machine. Fill in all 
requested information and instructions as necessary. This sheet should 
be the first sheet sent. 
9. Faxes should always contain a coversheet which instructs the recipient 
on what to do if the fax is received in error.  Lab reports which autofax 
and any report sent ad hoc using the EPIC “CC List” will 
automatically print a coversheet before each batch of patient reports. 
D. MISFAXES 
1. Faxes received in error MUST be reported to the laboratory 
compliance officer. 
2. Any misdirected faxes that are the result of incorrect submitter 
registration must be reported as well. 
3. Misfax logs will be kept for at least one year, and may be subject to 
audit by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).  In the 
event of a “misfax” event involving 500 or more patients, HHS must 
be notified.  At the end of each year, a copy of the breach log for the 
hospital will be forwarded to the HHS by the FMOLHS Corporate 
Compliance Officer. 
4. Any misdirected faxes that contain the patient’s protected health 
information may require that the patient must be notified within sixty 
(60) days of the discovery of the information breach.  FMOLHS 
Corporate Offices will make the decision as to which breaches require 
the patient to be notified. 
5. The laboratory compliance officer will review misfaxes and forward 
the details of each misfax to the FMOLHS Corporate Compliance OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 4 of 6 
LBA007 
Officer for further action. 
E. DELAY OF RESULTS 
When testing, or reporting of test results is delayed due to an unforeseen 
circumstance, including, but not limited to, instrument malfunction or 
unacceptable specimens, the laboratory section responsible for the delay shall 
notify the appropriate personnel.  A “delay” in testing or reporting refers to 
any circumstance in which reporting will grossly exceed established reporting 
turnaround times which are based on order priority.  In the event of computer 
downtime, an overhead announcement will alert all units of the downtime and 
there is no need to call individual units.  Specimens will be processed as 
efficiently as possible in accordance to defined downtime procedures. 
1. Multiple inpatient delays will be reported to the charge nurse on the 
unit as soon as possible.  If the charge nurse is unavailable, the next 
responsible person will be alerted. 
2. Delays affecting single patients will be reported to the nurse in charge 
of the patient as soon as possible. 
3. Delays affecting STAT tests ordered on outpatients of 24 hour 
facilities will be reported to the nurse, ordering physician, or his/her 
representative as soon as possible. 
F. QUALITY CONTROL (QC) 
QC shall be performed and found acceptable prior to performing patient 
testing.  QC review is performed by supervisory personnel or designee at 
defined intervals with appropriate corrective action, if indicated.  See lab 
policy LBA034-Laboratory Quality Control and Quality Assurance Policy.   
G. AMENDED RESULTS 
1. Amended Data is defined as any data that has been altered after the 
initial result has been accepted, finalized, or filed.  This is done by a 
supervisor or a lab testing employee with computer amend privileges.  
The amended results are noted in the patient’s printed report and in result 
inquiry fields in a manner that will not obscure the original data.   
2. Correction of Results in LIS  
a. For confirmed errors detected after reporting, the corrections 
must be made promptly and reported to the client, nurse or 
ordering physician so that immediate action can be taken if 
necessary.    
b. Document notification in LIS Comm Log using “Corrected 
Results” as the topic. 
c. Document the name of the person notified along with the 
reason for amending the report. Date, time, and tech 
identification are electronically stamped. 
d. Notify Pathologist if error is likely to result in patient injury. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 5 of 6 
LBA007 
e. If multiple sequential corrections are made to a single test 
result, all corrections are referenced by the LIS in sequential 
order on subsequent reports. 
3. Correction of Results on Forms (see LBA033-Document Correction) 
a. If it is necessary to alter or correct any written record, use the 
following guidelines: 
i. Changes to records must be legible and indelible 
ii. Original (erroneous) entries must be visible 
iii. Never use white correction fluid or any medium that 
would obliterate the original recording. 
iv. The original recording may be crossed out using a 
single line but never overwritten. 
v. The person responsible for the change must initial and 
date the change.  
H. PATIENT TEST REPORTS 
Paper and electronic reports are reviewed for content and format at least every 
two years.  Paper and electronic test reports include the following elements: 
1. Name and address of testing laboratory 
2. Patient name and identification number, or unique patient identifier 
3. Name of physician of record, or legally authorized person ordering 
test, as appropriate 
4. Date of specimen collection, and if appropriate, time of collection 
5. Date of release of report (if not on the report, this information should 
be readily accessible) 
6. Time of release of report, if applicable (if not on the report, this 
information should be readily accessible) 
7. Specimen source, when applicable 
8. Test result(s) and units of measurement, when applicable 
9. Reference intervals, as applicable 
10. Conditions of specimen that may limit adequacy of testing 
I. INTERFACE RESULT INTEGRITY 
1. Verification of accurate transmission of patient results from the point 
of data entry to patient reports must be performed prior to 
implementation of an interface, when changes are made to an existing 
interface that could affect the accuracy of transmission, and every 2 
years thereafter.  This includes evaluation of data transmitted from the 
LIS to other computer systems and their output devices. 
2. The Monthly Random Sample Tracer Audit Tool is used to routinely 
capture interface result integrity. 
3. A comparison of the following information is performed: 
a. Test results (include individual results and test packages or 
batteries) OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 6 of 6 
LBA007 
b. Reference Ranges 
c. Abnormal flags, if applicable 
d. Results with comments/footnotes, if applicable 
e. Corrected results, if applicable 
4. All patient results are expected to be accurately transmitted. 
5. Any patient results failing to accurately transmit are immediately 
investigated, possibly resulting in a revalidation of the computer 
interface. 
III. REFERENCE 
AABB Technical Manual, Current Edition. 
CAP checklist, Current Edition. 
CAP standards: GEN.41303, GEN.41304, GEN.41306, GEN.41307, GEN.41310, 
GEN.41312, GEN.41345, GEN.41096, GEN.41067, GEN.20450, GEN.48500 
IV. ASSOCIATED POLICIES 
LBA026-Infectious Disease Reporting 
LBA018-Critical Values 
LBA033-Document Correction 
LBA034-Lab Quality Control and Quality Assurance 
V. REVISIONS 
3/2015 (created), 11/2015, 8/2017, 11/2018, 10/22/2020 
 
 
 
 
 