OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 1 of 10 
LBA017 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA017 
LABORATORY VALIDATIONS 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 12/6/18 1/9/2019 1/9/2019 
Blood Donor Service Director Review J Teague 12/20/2018 Origination Date 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 12/20/2018 2/2012 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 1/8/2019  
Medical Director Review A Harton 12/23/2018  
 
 
 
PURPOSE 
Validating a process ensures that the output is what it is intended to be.  Validation also 
provides objective evidence that process variables were considered and control systems 
evaluated before the process is used in the live environment. 
Sound laboratory practice requires full characterization of an assay before its use for 
patient testing, irrespective of federally-designated test complexity and without regard to 
when it was first introduced by a given laboratory.  The laboratory verification/validation 
data will include each test's analytical performance specifications. Such data may 
originate from manufacturer’s information, published reports, and/or the laboratory's own 
studies.   In addition, the laboratory will enroll in a valid proficiency survey or acceptable 
substitute prior to the implementation of the method. 
• For unmodified FDA-cleared or approved tests, the laboratory may use data from 
manufacturers' information or published literature, but the laboratory must verify 
such outside information on accuracy, precision, reportable range, and reference 
intervals.  
• For modified FDA-cleared or approved tests and laboratory-developed tests 
(LDTs), the laboratory must validate by establishing accuracy, precision, analytic 
sensitivity, interferences (analytic specificity), reportable range, and reference 
intervals, as applicable; data on interferences may be obtained from 
manufacturers or published literature, as applicable. 
 
DEFINITIONS 
• FDA-Approved – A test that has gone through premarket approval (PMA) with 
no predicate test.  This is the most stringent type of application.  Manufacturer 
demonstrates sufficient valid scientific evidence that provides reasonable 
assurance that the test is effective for intended use. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 2 of 10 
LBA017 
• FDA-Cleared – A test that has gone through the 510(k) process and a predicate 
test exists.  Manufacturer demonstrates substantial equivalence to a test that is not 
subject to PMA. 
• CLIA – regulates laboratories that perform testing on patient specimens to ensure 
accurate and reliable test results. 
• FDA – regulates manufacturers and devices to ensure that devices are reasonably 
safe and effective. 
• Analytical Verification - the process by which a laboratory determines that an 
unmodified FDA-cleared/approved test performs according to the specifications 
set forth by the manufacturer when used as directed.  
• Analytical Validation - the process used to confirm with objective evidence that 
a laboratory-developed or -modified FDA-cleared/approved test method or 
instrument system delivers reliable results for the intended application.  
 
POLICY 
For each test performed on whole blood, serum, plasma, CSF, urine, stool, or other 
approved body fluid the laboratory must have appropriate data to support the validity of 
the test system in use. Final review and approval of Method Performance Validation will 
be performed by the Laboratory Medical Director and will not be delegated. 
 
 
Upon installation of equipment, new test on existing equipment, or new specimen type 
added to existing test system, Verification Studies will be performed.  Instrument 
Manufacturer may perform Verification studies that meet some of the requirements of the 
Method Validation outlined in this policy. This data may be incorporated into the lab’s 
Method Validation; however, the laboratory must participate in the verification 
studies and must ensure that all necessary parameters have been verified. 
 
A. Non-Waived Testing - Perform the following activities and submit data along with 
the Validation Form: 
1. Accuracy is established by comparing results from assayed specimens or 
reference materials to a definitive or reference method, or may be verified by 
comparing these results to an established comparative method. Use of 
reference materials or other materials with known concentrations or activities 
is suggested in establishing or verifying accuracy.    
a. A Correlation Study or Method comparison can be used to establish 
accuracy.  A correlation study is performed by running a pre-
determined number of patient samples in all ranges using both 
methods (old and new).  Results are then listed side by side with a 
third column to show the differences.   
b. A minimum of 20 samples should be used.   If the laboratory medical 
director determines that fewer samples are sufficient to meet the needs 
of the validation study, the criteria used to determine the 
appropriateness of the sample size must be recorded. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 3 of 10 
LBA017 
c. Analyte concentrations should be distributed across the analytical 
measurement range. 
2. Precision is established by repeat measurement of samples at varying 
concentrations or activities within-run and between-run over a period of time 
and incorporates operator variance.  
a. Sample Selection - Patient samples, reference materials, proficiency 
testing samples, or control materials may be used as the test samples, 
provided there is sufficient sample material for testing each sample as 
needed to complete the study. 
b. Within Run – consecutive replicates consisting of all levels in a single 
run.   
c. Between Run - running QC for multiple runs incorporating Operator 
Variance.   
d. Data analysis - The mean, SD and CV will be calculated for all data 
and compared with monthly QC statistics as applicable. 
3. Reportable Ranges are established/verified for each analyte before 
implementation.  Verification of reportable ranges in qualitative or semi-
quantitative tests may simply consist of the ability to produce both 
positive/reactive and negative/non-reactive results.  The reportable range 
includes results that may be reliably reported and embraces two types of 
ranges: 
a. Analytical Measurement Range (AMR) is the range of analyte 
values that a method can directly measure on the specimen without 
any dilution, concentration, or other pretreatment not part of the usual 
assay process. 
b. Clinically Reportable Range (CRR) is the range of analyte values 
that a method can measure, allowing for specimen dilution, 
concentration, or other pretreatment used to extend the direct 
analytical measurement range. 
The limits of the reportable range are based on meeting accuracy and 
precision requirements such as the minimal limit of quantification or 
sensitivity, when applicable.  In some cases, clinically relevant limits may be 
narrower than the potential analytical range, and the clinically relevant limit 
would be used as the limit of the reportable range.  This is further detailed on 
the current CAP Chemistry Checklist, Calibration and Standards section. 
4. Reference Interval – Reference Intervals are important to allow a clinician to 
assess patient results against an appropriate population. It is at the discretion 
of the Lab Medical Director to use a previously established Reference Interval 
or to create a new one.   
a. To create a new Reference Interval, 120 “normal” patient samples 
should be tested to achieve a 90% confidence limit.   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 4 of 10 
LBA017 
b. The transfer of a Reference Interval is acceptable if the test subject 
population and methodology are the same or comparable, but must be 
verified by testing at least 20 “normal” patient samples with < 2 falling 
outside of limits.   
c. “Normal” patients are established by listing interferences or sources of 
biological variability.  Selection criteria for individuals is documented.  
Documentation is maintained with the method validation data. 
d. If a formal reference interval study is not possible or practical, then the 
laboratory should carefully evaluate the use of published data for its 
own reference intervals, and retain records of this evaluation.  For 
many analytes, literature references or a manufacturer’s package insert 
information may be appropriate.  This should be documented and kept 
with the Method Validation data. 
 
B. Waived Testing Methods:  Certain requirements are different for waived versus 
non-waived tests.  
1. For waived tests, follow manufacturer instructions for: 
a. Test procedure and method validation 
b. Reagent storage, handling and validation 
c. QC performance 
d. Calibration, cal verification, analytical measurement range validation, 
and clinically reportable range. 
2. For waived tests, the following are not required (unless required by the test 
manufacturer): 
a. Lot-to-lot reagent validation 
b. Correlations between waived instruments and between waived 
instrument and main lab instruments. 
c. Initial AMR validation and six-month interval validation. 
C. The laboratory must retain records, including raw data, of method performance 
verifications while the method is in use and for at least two years after 
discontinuation of a method. 
D. When to perform validation/verifications:   
1. New Equipment  
2. New Test Method 
3. New specimen type  
4. Changes in reagents, test kits, etc., based on suggestions from manufacturers 
or lab management 
5. Relocation of equipment  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 5 of 10 
LBA017 
6. After repairs or replacement of critical components of instrument or 
equipment 
7. Intermittent testing requirements. 
8. If original validations are lost or incomplete. 
E. Multiple instruments:  The laboratory must follow manufacturer's instructions for 
instrument set up, maintenance, and system verification. Each instrument is 
considered a separate test system, including instruments of the same make and model. 
The laboratory must verify the performance specifications of each instrument. 
Instruments considered to be part of an established method test system such as Point 
of Care Activated Clotting Time (ACT) instruments, will have relevant performance 
specifications verified.  Reference Ranges do not need to be re-established.  This 
should be documented in the Method Performance Validation Form. 
F. Re-Validation, Abbreviated Validation, or Additional Validation studies – Not 
all scenarios listed in part D will require a full validation; however, all validation 
studies will be appropriate to ensure the quality of the test or instrument being 
validated.  The extent of the Validation Plan is at the discretion of the Laboratory 
Medical Director.  Refer to manufacturer’s instruction for guidance.  Examples of this 
scenario include but are not limited to: relocation of equipment, repairs to equipment, 
and intermittent testing requirements. 
After an Initial validation study has been performed and implemented, it may be 
determined that an additional validation study is needed (for example, if original 
validations are incomplete).  Addendum to Method Validation Protocol Form 
(LBA017-B) may be used when the testing performed is to be used in addition to the 
original studies performed.  
G. Additional Requirements: 
1. Policies/procedures/forms are written/modified and must conform to lab 
document control guidelines.  See policy LBA004-SOP for Policy and 
Procedure Manuals.  
2. Reference ranges, reportable ranges, etc. listed in policies/procedures/forms 
should agree with above studies.  
3. Proficiency Testing, CAP notification:   
a. Test name is added or updated (e.g. waived to non-waived) if 
necessary in CAP Test Menu.  
b. A valid proficiency test survey or alternative proficiency test is 
established and ordered, if applicable.  
NOTE:  If a PT challenge is not offered during the validation period prior 
to beginning patient testing, the laboratory may perform an alternative 
assessment of the test. In such a case, the laboratory must participate in 
the next scheduled PT event. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 6 of 10 
LBA017 
4. LIS modifications are outlined and submitted for review, if applicable.  
Modifications are completed and tested prior to being implemented in the live 
environment. 
5. Training and competency:  Initial Training checklists and Ongoing 
Competency Assessment Checklists are updated.  Initial Training of lab 
testing personnel is completed and documented prior to the method being 
implemented.   
6. Notification of clients:  If the lab changes its analytic methodology so that test 
results or their interpretation may be SIGNIFICANTLY different, the change is 
explained to clients.  This may be done through direct mailings, lab or hospital 
newsletters, or part of the test report itself  
7. Change to On-line Test catalog submitted to appropriate personnel 
 
 
FORMS 
A. Method Performance Validation Protocol Form (LBA017-A) 
B. Addendum to Method Validation Protocol Form (LBA017-B) 
C. New Instrument/Test Checklist Form (LBA017-C) 
 
PROCEDURE FOR COMPLETING METHOD PERFORMANCE VALIDATION 
FORM 
A. Perform the required testing and complete the Method Performance Validation 
Protocol form, either LBA017-A or LBA017-B as applicable, as outlined below. 
1. Process Title – State the name of the process or system that is being 
validated. 
2. Purpose  
a. State whether the validation is prospective or retrospective. 
b. State process parameters and product outcomes that the validation study 
will attempt to prove. 
3. System Description  
a. Obtain or develop a comprehensive system/process description before 
writing the validation protocol 
b. When equipment is part of the process to be validated, the system/process 
description should include information about: 
i. manufacturer make 
ii. type of equipment or instrument 
4. Responsibilities- List the individuals responsible for the following activities. 
The individual that develops the plan or performs the testing may not be the 
same individual that reviews/approves of the plan or the testing.  If there are OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 7 of 10 
LBA017 
any questions about assigning responsibilities, consult the Compliance 
Officer: 
a. Developing the validation protocol 
b. Reviewing/Approving the protocol 
c. Performing the validation 
d. Reviewing the validation 
e. Performing the Installation Qualification 
f. Reviewing the Installation Qualification 
g. Calibration and maintenance support 
h. Support Services 
i. Training and Competency  
5. Determine a Validation Study Procedure for each of the following validation 
phases: 
a. Installation Qualification (IQ) – This step is typically managed by the 
BioMedical Department. 
i. Identify all steps required to verify that the equipment operates in the 
manner that meets all of the installation requirements. 
ii. Provisions for sign off that the installation qualification has been passed 
prior to continuing performance qualification. 
b. Operational Qualification (OQ) 
i. Identify all steps required to verify that the equipment operates in the 
manner intended by the manufacturer. 
ii. Provisions for sign-off that the operational qualification has been passed 
prior to performance qualification. 
c. Performance Qualification (PQ) 
i. Identify all steps required to verify that the equipment and processes 
operate in the manner that meets requirements for safe and reliable 
patient testing. 
ii. Provisions for sign-off that the performance qualification has been 
passed prior to putting the equipment/instrument into service. 
6. Validation Study Procedure - For each validation phase (installation, 
operational and product performance) describe: 
a. SOPs needed to perform the study and support activities 
b. Personnel and qualifications of personnel to execute the protocol    
c. Equipment required to complete the study 
d. Materials required to complete the study OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 8 of 10 
LBA017 
e. Testing samples required to complete the study 
f. Testing Conditions required to complete the study 
g. Data/Information to be collected - Determine the step-by-step procedure 
for conducting the validation study and documenting the study data. 
h. Acceptance Criteria/Acceptable Failure Rate - Determine acceptance 
criteria and acceptable failure rate before performing the validation study.  
Describe how the results will be evaluated to determine if the study was 
successful. Include any applications of statistical analysis. Define the 
acceptable criteria for data collected in each study phase (IQ, OQ, PQ). 
Specify allowable run-to-run variations.  
i. Corrective Action for failures.  Describe the corrective actions that will 
be taken if any of the testing does not meet the acceptance criteria defined.  
Specify any conditions that will allow one trial or the entire validation 
study to be repeated. 
7. Study Conclusions 
a. Address the following when deriving conclusions from the study data. 
b. explanation of deviations from the expected results 
c. actions taken to correct the deviations 
d. assessment of the impact of deviations on the study 
e. explanation and justification of any revisions to the acceptance criteria 
f. a record of the discussion and evaluation of the data 
g. Conclusion as to whether or not the process can be considered validated 
and description of any limitations on the process. 
B. A thorough review of manufacturer’s guidelines must be conducted to ensure 
adherence to all aspects of testing: pre-analytic, analytic and post-analytic 
procedures.  Any deviations from the manufacturer’s package insert/guidelines must 
have appropriate validation studies performed to specifically validate performance 
characteristics related to the deviation.  Study results must be reviewed and approved 
by the laboratory Medical Director.  Deviations include, but are not limited to the 
following: 
1. Specimen source 
2. Collection containers 
3. Specimen stability  
4. Transportation conditions 
5. Storage instructions 
6. Centrifugation requirements – RCF, time 
C. Quality Control – Quality Control ranges (mean and standard deviation) for 
quantitative assays must be verified/established prior to implementation of the OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 9 of 10 
LBA017 
procedure.  Upon initial method validation the following guidelines may assist in 
establishment of QC ranges: 
1. Assayed controls - verification of manufacturer’s range, assuming the range is 
established for the methodology and instrumentation being validated. 
2. Un-assayed controls require establishment of ranges over time through 
concurrent testing of control materials with previously determined statistical 
parameters.  In lieu of concurrent testing for initial implementation where no 
QC material with previously determined statistical parameters are available, 
comparison to published peer data for the control lot and specific 
methodology/instrumentation may assist with initial range establishment. 
D. Limits of Data Acceptability.  During the course of these implementation studies, all 
results will be compared to the limits defined by the material manufacturer.  In those 
instances where patient samples are utilized, acceptable limits will be analyte-
dependent and determined by the manufacturer’s guidelines, limits defined in the 
federal register, or by the medical director or designee.   
E. Data Compilation and Analysis.  Data is compiled using the completed Method 
Performance Validation Protocol form.  Include studies created by the manufacturer or 
by the laboratory.  Each study is clearly marked as to what the information is 
validating.  Where applicable, ranges and acceptability criteria will be marked on each 
study.  Dept. supervisor reviews and signs each study.  All discrepancies will be 
addressed and corrected, with the director’s approval, prior to the method being 
implemented. 
F. Release of Test Method/Instrument for live patient testing – All validation data is 
submitted with the completed Method Performance Validation Protocol form.  The 
Department Supervisor, the Department Medical Director, and the Laboratory Medical 
Director must review and approve the documentation before patient testing may begin. 
A statement of approval or disapproval of the acceptability of performance of the 
Validation Study is required.  See Method Performance Validation Protocol form 
(LBA017-A) for standard statement.  NOTE: This statement comment is applicable 
only to tests implemented after June 15, 2009. 
  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
Availability of Validations/Verifications.  The lab’s current test methods, including the 
validation results are available to clients of the lab and to Inspection teams upon request 
(CAP COM.40700). 
Intermittent Testing.  When a test is put back into production, the following requirements 
must be met: 
A. PT or alternative assessment performed within 30 days prior to restarting patient 
testing. 
NOTE:  For tests for which PT is required by CAP, if a PT challenge is not offered 
during the 30-day period prior to restarting patient testing, the laboratory may OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 10 of 10 
LBA017 
perform an alternative assessment of the test. In such a case, the laboratory must 
participate in the next scheduled PT event. 
B. Method performance specifications verified, as applicable, within 30 days prior to 
restarting patient testing. 
C. Competency assessed for analysts within 12 months prior to restarting patient testing. 
 
REFERENCES 
A. Quality Systems in the Blood Bank Environment, Abbott Quality Institute and AABB, 
2nd ed., 1998. 
B. Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. Analysis of Body Fluids in Clinical 
Chemistry; Approved Guideline. CLSI document C49 -A (ISBN1 -56238-638-7). 
Clinical and Labo ratory Standards Institute, 940 West Valley Road, Suite 1400, 
Wayne, Pennsylvania 19087-1898 USA, 2007.) 
C. College of American Pathologists All Common Checklist.  COM.30980, COM.40000, 
COM.40100, COM.40200, COM.40250, COM.40300, COM.40310, COM.40350, 
COM.40400, COM.40450, COM.40500, COM.40600, COM.40610, COM.40620, 
COM.40630, COM.40640, COM.40700, COM.40800, COM.50000, COM.50100. 
 
REVISIONS 
2/2012(created), 3/15/15, 4/4/18, 5/30/18, 12/6/18 