OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 1 of 5 
LBA035 
 
 
 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA035 
GENERAL SPECIMEN COLLECTION, TRANSPORT, AND PROCESSING  
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D. Leger 4/29/2020 7/14/2020 7/14/2020 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 4/30/2020 Origination Date 
Lab Medical Director Review A Harton 5/30/2020 4/8/2020 
 
 
I. PURPOSE 
To provide guidelines for the general collection, transport, receiving, and processing 
of patient specimens. 
 
II. POLICY 
In order to ensure quality results, patient testing specimens will be collected 
appropriately.  Collected specimens will be received, processed, and distributed to the 
technical sections of the laboratory in an efficient manner. 
 
III. PROCEDURE 
A. General Blood Collection 
1.Most laboratory tests are performed on anti-coagulated whole blood, 
plasma, or serum.  
2.Specimens should be transported to the laboratory as soon as possible after 
collection.  
3.Some tests have specific instructions which vary from these general ones. 
Please refer to the online test catalog for specific requirements.  
4.Draw a sufficient amount of blood in order to yield the necessary testing 
volume.  
 
B. Specimen Integrity  
Laboratory test results are dependent on the quality of the specimen submitted.  
1.It is important that all specimens, orders, and requisitions be properly 
labeled. 
2.If there is any doubt, question or concern regarding the type of specimen 
that should be collected, it is imperative that you clarify the order and 
specimen requirements prior to collection.  
3.For specimens with specific temperature requirements, please ensure the 
specimen maintains that temperature after collection and during specimen 
transport (when applicable). Please see the table below for temperature 
reference ranges. 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 2 of 5 
LBA035 
 
 
 
 
Room Temperature  18-25C  
Refrigerated  2-8C  
Frozen  <10C  
 
4.Each vacutainer tube has an ideal fill volume in milliliters (ml) noted on 
the label of the tube.  Our tube manufacture places a visual marker (◄ 
black arrow) on the tubes label that indicates when a tube has been 
adequately filled.  Hold the tube vertically (top up) and compare the level 
of the sample to the black indicator mark.  The tube is properly filled 
when the level of the sample falls between the top and bottom of the black 
arrow on the tube label. 
5.Under filled tubes may not be acceptable for laboratory testing.  
Acceptability of under filled vacutainer tubes must be verified with the 
laboratory section performing the test.   
6.Difficult to recollect and sample containers subject to breakage during 
transit of the tube system should not be sent to the laboratory via the tube 
system. These samples are to be hand carried to the laboratory.   Difficult 
to recollect sample would include: 
a. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
b. Fluid aspirates from surgery 
c. Tissues 
d. Biopsies 
e. Slides 
 
C. Centrifugation  
1.Always balance the centrifuge by placing tubes of equal volume in 
opposite wells.  
2.Refer to section E for centrifugation specifics depending on collection 
container.  
3.Outpatient specimens may be spun at outreach collection sites prior to 
being transported. 
4.Aliquot serum from plain, red-top tube by removing serum with a pipette 
and placing into a properly labeled plastic vial.  
5.Aliquot may then be frozen as required.  
6.Note: Do not freeze plain, red-top tube or serum gel tube.  
 
D. Specimen Labeling 
Please label each specimen/tube with the following information:  
1.Patient’s full name  
2.Patient’s date of birth  
3.Date and time of draw of specimen 
4.Identity of collector 
5.Source and time of draw (as applicable)  
6.Unlabeled and Mislabeled tubes and other specimens will be rejected. 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 3 of 5 
LBA035 
 
 
 
 
 
E. VACUETTE® TUBE COLLECTION GUIDE 
The following table includes general instructions for Vacuette® tube collection. 
Since some tests may have specific instructions that vary from this table, please 
use the online test catalog for specific collection requirements for each test. 
 
 Cap Color  Tube Contents  Purpose  Recommended 
Centrifugation  
g-force  
(relative centrifugal 
force or rcf) & time  
Recommended  
Inversions  
Special Instructions  
COLLECT BLOOD CULTURES FIRST, THEN THE REQUIRED TESTS IN THE ORDER BELOW  
Red  No Additive  
Clot Activator  
Serum for chemistry,  
immunohematology, and 
other lab tests  
Minimum 1500 g for 10 
min  
5-10  **Centrifuge 30 minutes 
after blood collection to 
minimize fibrin buildup.  
Royal Blue  
No 
Additive  
No Additive  
Clot Activator  
Serum for trace element 
testing  
Minimum 1500 g for 10 
min  
5-10  **Centrifuge 30 minutes 
after blood collection to 
minimize fibrin buildup.  
Light Blue  Sodium Citrate  Plasma for coagulation  Platelet Poor Plasma 
Preparation:  
2000 g for 10 min  
4  ** Fill completely for proper 
ratio of anticoagulant to 
blood  
** If using butterfly 
collection device, see Note 
below.  
Red (SST)  Yellow ring  
Clot activator  
Gel Separator  
Serum for chemistry,  
immunohematology, and 
other lab tests  
1800-2200 g for 10-15 
min  
5-10  ** 9 mL available for 
Hepatitis testing  
**Centrifuge 30 minutes 
after blood collection to 
minimize fibrin buildup.  
**If frozen serum is 
required, aliquot before 
freezing. DO NOT FREEZE 
SERUM GEL TUBES.  
Green  Sodium Heparin 
or  
Lithium Heparin 
with  
Glycolytic 
Inhibitor  
Heparinized plasma for 
chemistry, AFB Blood 
Cultures, T-Spot.TB and other 
tests  
2000-3000 g for 15 min  5-10  **If plasma is separated 
from cells, label aliquot as 
plasma.  
Green with 
Gel 
Separator  
Lithium Heparin 
with  
Glycolytic 
Inhibitor  
Gel Separator  
Heparinized plasma for 
chemistry studies  
1800-2200 g for 10-15 
min  
5-10   
Royal Blue  
With EDTA  
EDTA  Whole blood or plasma for 
trace element testing  
For Plasma Preparation:  
2000-3000 g for 15 min  
8-10  ** Do NOT use iodine-
containing products to 
disinfect the collection site.  
Lavender  K2EDTA  Whole blood or plasma for 
Hematology, Blood Bank, and 
other lab testing  
For Plasma Preparation:  
1800-2200 g for 10 -15 
min  
8-10  ** 9 mL available for Blood 
Bank testing  
Grey  Potassium 
Oxalate  
Sodium Fluoride  
Whole blood or poured off 
plasma for glucose and 
special chemistry tests  
2000-3000 g for 15 min  5-10   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 4 of 5 
LBA035 
 
 
 
Yellow  ACD (Acid Citrate 
Dextrose) 
Solution  
Whole blood for special 
chemistry, flow cytometry, 
and other lab tests 
 8-10   
Note: When using a winged blood collection set (butterfly needle) for venipuncture and a 
coagulation tube is the first tube needed, first draw a discard tube. The discard tube must be used 
to prime the tubing of the collection set, which will assure maintenance of the proper 
anticoagulant/blood ratio in the first tube filled. The discard tube should be a non-additive tube 
(plain red) or coagulation tube (light blue) and need not be completely filled. 
 
F. Specimen Processing  
1.If all the criteria are met, receive the specimen into the laboratory in the 
receiving activity in Epic.  
2.If all the criteria are not met, do not receive the specimen, mark for redraw 
in Epic. 
3.All specimens are received into the Laboratory before being taken to the 
testing location. 
4.Patient samples are processed by test priority: 
a. 1st priority:  Codes, Trauma, and Open-Heart samples 
b. 2nd priority: Surgery 
c. 3rd priority: Emergency care unit 
d. 4th priority: STAT inpatient biohazard bags (STAT or ASAP 
priority) 
e. 5th priority: STAT outpatient orders and inpatient Timed 
specimens 
f. 6th priority: Routine (completed within 4 hours of draw time.)    
g. All specimens should be processed no later than one hour from 
their original received lab time except under extenuating 
circumstances. 
5.Blood Bank 
a. Type and Screen (ABO/Rh, Antibody screen) and Draw and Hold 
specimens: A purple top specimen container must have the 
patient’s first and last name, medical record number, DOB for 
outpatients, time and date of draw (may be documented 
electronically), collector identification (may be documented 
electronically), and blood bank ID. 
b. ABO/Rh, ABO/Rh (NOCHG), and DAT COMP, DAT IgG 
specimens: A purple top specimen container must have the 
patient’s first and last name, medical record number, DOB for 
outpatients, date and time of draw (may be documented 
electronically), and collector identification (may be documented 
electronically). 
6. Chemistry 
a. Performance Indicator (PI) for ECU troponin testing measures the 
time the sample is received to result reporting.  It is expected that 
an ECU troponin be processed and resulted in 30 minutes or less 
from sample arrival in the laboratory.  Do not place other tests in 
the same instrument carrier as ECU troponins.   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 5 of 5 
LBA035 
 
 
 
b. Samples with hemolysis can be placed directly on the Architect 
analyzers as hemolysis is run during the testing process. 
c. Sample tubes received centrifuged but containing serum that 
appears cloudy or a gel barrier that is slanted are to be re-
centrifuged.  When re-centrifuging, pour over the sample in 
question to a new labeled container and then re-centrifuge the 
recovered serum.  Do not re-centrifuge the original container. 
Always place the questionable serum sample in a new labeled 
container and centrifuge. 
d. Deliver instrument test racks that have been set up with patient 
samples for testing to the departments in a timely manner.  Do not 
hold a test rack to fill it completely with sample tubes before 
taking the test tray to the proper analyzer. 
e. Do not stack carriers on top of each other when carrying them to 
the analyzer. Carry a maximum of two big carriers at a time when 
delivering samples. 
f. Process and centrifuge all SST tubes, plain red top tubes, and 
“extras” promptly unless specifically instructed to not to 
centrifuge.  Extra tubes are centrifuged and set aside for possible 
future use.   
g. Ammonia and homocysteine testing requires that the sample 
container be received on ice and centrifuged in the cold centrifuge.   
h. Gray top tubes collected for lactic acid testing must be received on 
ice and centrifuged as soon as possible. 
i. When a purple top tube is received for multiple tests including a 
BNP, the BNP is typically run last.  Examples include CBC’s and 
sedimentation rates which are performed on un-centrifuged 
samples. Give the BNP label to Hematology when delivering the 
sample.     
7.Hematology 
a. Performance Indicator (PI) standard for ECU CBCs is resulting 
within 30 minutes or less from the time the specimen is received.   
b. Deliver instrument racks to the department for testing in a timely 
manner.  Do not wait for racks to be completely filled before 
loading on the instruments. 
c. Do NOT spin Platelet Function samples. 
d.  Serum acetones and pregnancy screens should be delivered in a 
timely manner and the tech alerted when they are dropped off. 
8.Urinalysis 
a. For shared urine specimens (UA and DOA SCRN U), if both labels 
are on the urine container, reprint the DOA SCRN U label and give 
it to Hematology with the urine sample. Hematology will deliver 
any additionally requested tests to the appropriate department. 
 
IV. REVISIONS 
4/8/2020 (created), 4/29/2020 