OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 1 of 3 
LBA026 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA026 
INFECTIOUS DISEASE REPORTING 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 3/8/2021 5/13/2021 5/13/2021 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 4/8/2021 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 4/12/2021 3/2015 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 4/19/2021  
 
 
PRINCIPLE 
Due to their transmittable nature, certain diseases and/or conditions are reportable to the 
Infection Control Officer and various government agencies.  Reporting requirements are 
determined by the class into which they are categorized.  Regardless of the reporting 
method used, laboratory personnel shall follow all Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) guidelines to protect the medical record of the patient. 
 
PROCEDURE 
I. Refer to Louisiana Administrative Code (LAC) Title 51, Public Health – Sanitary 
Code [LAC 51 (Public Health - Sanitary Code), Part II, Chapter 1, §105] for the lists 
of all Class Diseases/Conditions to be reported. 
 
A. Class A Diseases/Conditions:  Reporting is required within 24 hours  
Class A diseases/conditions are of major public health concern because of the  
      severity of disease and potential for epidemic spread.  Such diseases must be      
      communicated immediately upon detection of a case, a suspected case, or a  
      positive laboratory result.  All cases of rare or exotic communicable diseases,  
      unexplained death, unusual cluster of disease and all outbreaks shall be  
      reported. 
 
B. Class B Diseases/Conditions:  Reporting is required within 1 business day 
Class B diseases/conditions are of major public health concern because of the  
      potential for epidemic spread.  Such diseases must be communicated by the  
      end of the next business day upon detection of a case, a suspected case, or a  
      positive laboratory result. 
 
C. Class C Diseases/Conditions:  Reporting is required within 5 business  
Days Class C diseases/conditions are of significant public health concern.   
Such diseases must be communicated by the end of the work week upon  
detection of a case, a suspected case, or a positive laboratory result. 
 
D. Class D Diseases/Conditions:  Reporting is required within 5 business  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 2 of 3 
LBA026 
Days 
 
II. Results of reportable infectious diseases are forwarded to the state of Louisiana using  
      the time frame defined in the Sanitary Code.  One of the following 3 methods are used. 
 
A. Automatic Reporting to State (primary system of reporting): Reportable 
disease test results from this lab are automatically sent to the state through the  
electronic reporting system.   
B. Manual Reporting to State: Test results from this lab are manually sent to the  
        state by fax or mail.   
C. On-line Reporting to State (backup system): If a report is not automatically  
      sent to the state through electronic reporting system, then reporting should be  
             performed through IDRIS.  Class A disease reporting should be called within 24     
                   hours to the Infectious Disease Epidemiology Program at 1-800-256-2748. 
 
III. Responsible Parties that routinely report results to OPH. 
A. Infection Control 
B. Microbiology 
C. Referrals 
D. Blood Distribution Center 
 
IV. Reporting to Healthcare providers 
All lab results are available electronically to healthcare providers immediately upon 
verification.  Additionally, Epic EMR functionality provides physicians the opportunity 
to receive inbox notifications when patients’ lab results are available. Infectious 
Disease results are not manually/verbally called by the laboratory unless the test has 
been classified as “critical” by OLOLRMC Main and Affiliate Labs.  See LBA018-
Critical Values.  
 
V. Reference Lab Results 
Reference Labs used by OLOLRMC Main and Affiliate Labs will be in compliance 
with and adhere to reporting requirements and strive to abide by laboratory reporting 
requirements for each state health department regarding reportable disease conditions.  
Clients shall be responsible for compliance with any state-specific statutes concerning 
reportable conditions, including but not limited to birth defects registries or 
chromosomal abnormality registries.  This may also include providing patient 
address/demographic information.  Referral Laboratory reporting does not replace the 
client/physician responsibility to report as per specific state statutes.  
 
VI. Reporting of Bioterrorism organisms to CDC  
A. Diseases associated with Bioterrorism are classified as Class A  
Diseases/Conditions on the State Sanitary Code (attachment A).  These are  
reported by the lab to the state and by the state to the Centers for Disease  
Control (CDC).  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
  Page 3 of 3 
LBA026 
B. The State of Louisiana reports to CDC using software compliant with the 
federal Healthy Initiatives.  Refer to CDC Reportable Disease website at 
http://wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss   
 
VII. Sanitary Code changes 
A. The state Sanitary Code is occasionally updated by the state.  Because the lab  
         does not always receive notification of this, the lab and infection control will  
      monitor the state website for the most current version.  
B. If changes involve new diseases/conditions, an IS ticket is opened to update  
            reporting. 
 
VIII. Lab Test Menu changes  
If the lab adds, deletes, or changes methodology of a test from the lab test menu that 
is listed as a state reportable disease/condition on the current Sanitary Code, an IS 
footprint ticket is entered by the lab requesting this test be added/deleted/modified 
from the list of reportables. 
 
IX. Infection Control Department 
Please refer to the Infection Control Policies found on TeamLink IC4004 and 
attachments 
 
ASSOCIATED POLICIES 
LBA018 – Critical Values 
LBA203 – Guidance for Specimen Collection, Transport, Testing and Submission for 
Patients with Suspected Infection with Ebola Virus Disease or Other Special 
Communicable Disease 
IC4004 – Reportable Diseases, Reporting of 
IC2013 – Special Communicable Disease Management Plan 
REFERENCES 
Louisiana Department of Health (LDH), Office of Public Health (OPH), Infectious 
Disease Epidemiology Program. 
http://www.dhh.louisiana.gov/index.cfm/subhome/16 
State of Louisiana Division of Administration, Louisiana Administrative Code Title 51: 
LAC 51 (Public Health - Sanitary Code), Part II, Chapter 1, §105 
CAP Standards: GEN.41316, GEN.20374 
REVISIONS 
3/23/15 (created), 9/27/17, 10/23/2020, 3/8/2021 
 
 
 
 
 