OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 6 
LBA005 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA005 
LABORATORY OPERATIONS OVERVIEW 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 6/15/2020 7/14/2020 7/14/2020 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 6/19/2020 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 6/21/2020 2/1989 
 
 
 
ORGANIZATION 
Our Health System, Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System (FMOLHS), 
encompasses Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) Main 
Laboratory and OLOLRMC Affiliate Laboratories. The following laboratories are 
considered Sister Facility laboratories within the FMOLHS system, but are not managed 
by OLOLRMC Laboratory Administration: 
• Our Lady of Lourdes Laboratory (including the Affiliates Heart Hospital of 
Lafayette and Lourdes Womens and Childrens) – Lafayette, La 
• St. Francis Medical Center Laboratory – Monroe, La 
• Our Lady of the Angels Laboratory – Bogalusa, La 
• St. Dominic’s Laboratory - Jackson, Ms 
 
LABORATORIES 
OLOLRMC Main and Affiliate Laboratories are bound by the Laboratory Administration 
Policies and Quality Plan of OLOLRMC Main Lab.  Delegation of Authority for all labs 
can be found in LBA020-Delegation of Authority. 
The following Affiliate Laboratories function as departments of OLOLRMC Main Lab:   
• OLOL Livingston Laboratory  
• OLOL North Baton Rouge Laboratory 
• OLOL Children’s Hospital Laboratory 
• OLOL Lab at Breast and Gyn Cancer Pavilion – Physician’s Office Lab 
• Assumption Community Hospital Laboratory – Managed by OLOLRMC Lab 
Administration by Contract 
• OLOL Ascension Laboratory 
 
LOCATIONS 
OLOL Laboratory and Affiliate Laboratories are located on-site of their respective 
facility.  
 
HOURS OF OPERATION 
Hospital Laboratories provide clinical services at all times, twenty-four hours per day, 
seven days per week. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 6 
LBA005 
 
Physician’s Office Laboratories provide clinical services during routine business hours of 
Physician’s Office operation. 
 
OUTREACH BUSINESS 
FMOLHS is in partnership with LabCorp, a Nationally recognized laboratory, who 
provides testing for FMOLHS Outpatient specimens.  
 
STAFFING 
The laboratory is appropriately staffed with Medical Technologists, Medical Laboratory 
Technicians, Medical Laboratory Assistants, and Venipuncture Technicians at all times.  
Pathologists, Administrative Staff, and support staff members are available on-site or on-
call. 
 
The laboratory is staffed to process all specimens on the day of receipt.  Staffing levels 
are monitored using labor statistics to ensure appropriate staffing levels.  Increased 
volume can be processed using PRN employees or overtime.  Decreased volume can 
result in reducing staff levels.   
 
CLIA REQUIREMENTS 
• The requisition, report, and record of patient testing must contain the following 
information: (CLIA ’88 and COLA) 
o Name and address of the requesting entity  
o Test(s) requested 
o Pertinent clinical information 
o Patient name 
o Unique patient ID 
o Date and time the specimen(s) were collected 
o Test results with unit of measure and reference ranges 
o Identification of the testing analyst  
o Address of the testing lab 
 
SPECIMEN IDENTIFICATION 
• Positive patient identification must be accomplished before any specimen is 
collected.   
o All inpatients must be identified using verbal verification and matching 2 
IDs of specimen collection labels to armband. (See policy- OrgClin018)   
o All outpatients must be identified by verbal verification and matching 
name and DOB to lab test request, insurance card, or demographic sheet.   
• Labeling is to be completed prior to leaving patient's presence 
• Collection information, including collector identification, must be documented for 
each specimen collected.  This information is routinely captured electronically in 
the computer system when specimen collection is performed.  When electronic 
documentation is unavailable, information will be written on specimen using 
Downtime or Manual processes (See policy LBA016-Computer Downtime). 
• Labels should be applied straight and smooth and not extend beyond tube. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 6 
LBA005 
• Microtainer labels should form a "flag". 
• Only 1 label per tube.   
• Always label the container, not the lid.  
• Additional Labels for “add-on” testing should be placed on tubes directly under 
patient name to enable access to view both names.   
• Patient ID is verified at each step of specimen journey. 
• All specimens must have a label attached, which provides proper identification of 
the patient and specimen.   
• Specimens are to remain labeled at all times and when aliquoting a specimen the 
patient’s 2 IDs must be re-checked before pouring off the specimen.  (See policy: 
LBA029) 
 
SPECIMEN COLLECTION 
Outreach: LabCorp Phlebotomists are available at draw sites located throughout the 
community to collect outpatient specimens. 
 
Inpatient: OLOL Phlebotomists are available to collect inpatient specimens. 
 
Specimens are collected in accordance with age appropriate methodologies and minimum 
sample requirements. 
 
Members of the phlebotomy team have been instructed to attempt drawing a patient no 
more than twice.  Draw assignments for patients not drawn because of difficulty in 
obtaining the sample and/or patients not present on the floor for drawing will be returned 
to the working Draw List with a comment stating why sample is not collected, the name 
of the nurse notified, and the time of notification. 
 
The laboratory uses minimum draw vacutainer and micro-sample collection containers to 
reduce unnecessarily large blood draw volumes.  All lab sections share blood samples 
when multiple tests are ordered.  Re-stick requests are also coordinated to reduce 
unnecessary large blood volumes and the number of venipunctures.   
 
 
TESTING ORDERS 
Laboratory specimens are analyzed only at written or electronic request of an authorized 
healthcare provider, or by submitting the universal downtime form when the Computer 
Information System is not operational.    
 
For verbal orders the laboratory staff must perform a read-back for confirmation of 
accuracy and then solicit written or electronic authorization for the verbal orders within 
10 days.   
 
Please refer to policy: LBA504-Laboratory Compliance Orders for Tests and Services for 
specific instruction on Verbal or Add-on orders.  
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 6 
LBA005 
 
ORDER CLASSIFICATIONS 
Prioritization of specimen collection/reporting is determined by the order classification. 
Order priorities are generally based upon the desired time of collection, not the time that 
the test will be performed.   
  
• STAT Tests- Test results that are urgently needed for the diagnosis or treatment 
of the patient. Highest priority.  Used to identify "potential life-threatening 
condition."  STAT samples are collected immediately and reported within one 
hour of receipt in lab.  
o There may also be a need for certain locations with high risk patients to 
require expediting of specimens on a regular basis as a “STAT”. 
▪ ECU 
o STAT testing should be limited to critical patient needs. 
 
• ASAP (As Soon As Possible) - Test results that are needed as soon possible for 
the diagnosis or treatment of the patient. As-soon-as-possible orders are the 
second tier of priority.  ASAP's are collected and reported within two hours of 
order. 
 
• TODAY/ROUTINE - Tests that are collected and batched for efficiency and cost 
effectiveness. These results are not needed on an immediate basis for diagnosis or 
treatment.  To be collected after other priority specimens and reported within 4 
hours of order. 
 
• AM - To be collected by the established schedule for each unit and reported 
within 2 hours of collection.   
 
• TIMED - Orders specifying collection at a specific time usually coordinated with 
medication schedules, procedures, or processes.  Timed requests are reported 
within two hours of order. 
 
 
REPORTING TEST RESULTS 
• Do not report results until all QC and Preventive Maintenance requirements are 
met for the procedure being performed. 
• Do not report results that exceed reportable/linearity limits. 
• All test results are entered into the Computer System by interface or manually.  
• Test reporting follows all applicable federal and state reporting regulations. 
• Test results are reported in  a format determined by the test manufacturer  and are 
meaningful to the test being performed.   
o When results obtained are larger than that of what is required, results shall 
be rounded to the last significant digit. 
o Rounding Rules: 
▪ When the digit following the last significant digit is less than 5, the 
number remains unchanged. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 5 of 6 
LBA005 
Example 1.64 is rounded to 1.6 
▪ When the digit following the last significant digit is greater than or 
equal to 5, the digit to be retained is increased by 1. 
Example 1.66 is rounded to 1.7 and 1.65 is rounded to 1.7 
 
 
CRITICAL VALUES 
• Abnormal values meeting established criteria or any other clinical test result that 
requires urgent response are immediately reported by telephone to the appropriate 
Physician/designee and documentation is noted. (See policy: LBA018) A read-back 
for confirmation of accuracy is also performed and documented in the computer. 
(OrgClin044-Critical Results Reporting) 
• All critical/panic values are verified by repeat testing as necessary. 
 
 
ERRONEOUS RESULT/CORRECTED REPORT (See policy: LBA024) 
• Notification to the ordering physician and any physician that has received the 
patient results must be made as soon as the error/result is discovered and 
documented. 
• When possible, rerun the sample and/or redraw the patient or patients involved as 
necessary to obtain correct results. 
• Print a copy of the original report then correct the result in the computer system.  
Any results corrected in the computer system will state that the result is a 
corrected result.  It will include the previous result along with the date and time 
that the previous result was verified.  
• Document all actions of erroneous results including:  
o Physician/designee notified with date and time of notification 
o Patient info with dates and times of event  
o Individuals involved 
o Why the erroneous result was reported and not discovered prior to 
reporting.   
• Enter Patient Safety Event in Electronic Patient Safety Reporting Software and 
submit all documentation and copies of original and corrected report to the 
department supervisor. 
• Lab Supervisor will review and discuss at department huddle for follow-up or 
additional training of staff as needed. 
• Corrections will be monitored on Correction reports pulled from the LIS.  
 
 
NOTIFICATION WHEN TESTING IS DELAYED 
The section responsible for the delay of patient reporting will notify (and document) the 
appropriate person(s) regarding the circumstances leading to a significant delay in the 
timely reporting of lab results. The policy for notification when testing is delayed was 
developed with the input of Nursing Leadership.  (See policy: LBA008) 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 6 of 6 
LBA005 
TEST RESULT REPORTS 
The laboratory utilizes EPIC Information System for reporting results.  All patient results  
will be transmitted into EPIC and will be available to providers for review. 
 
PROHIBITED PRACTICES 
Licensed practitioners (physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, registered 
nurses or any lab staff) shall not order/run/result laboratory tests on themselves.   
 
 
REVISIONS 
2/1989 (created), 3/2015, 6/2017, 4/4/19, 6/15/2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 