OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R5 
Page 1 of 3 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA204-R5 
FIRE (CODE RED) RESPONSE PLAN– ASCENSION LAB 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 9/30/2022 9/25/2023 9/25/2023 
Supervisory Review R Wickwire 9/25/2023 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review J Jastram 2/14/2023 5/1/2018 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake Ascension’s (OLOLA) written Code 
RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of Lab Administration or designee. 
Each OLOLA department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response 
Plan. 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire.  
 
PROCEDURES: 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
If a Fire occurs in the Laboratory: 
• Perform RACE and Pass.   
• Evacuation will proceed as outlined below.   
  If the Fire occurs in an area other than lab, remain in place: 
• Until given the all-clear or 
• Instructed to evacuate or OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R5 
Page 2 of 3 
• It becomes apparent that evacuation is necessary (smoke compartment has been breached). 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exit Locations 
o Main Lab Door across from Respiratory – exit to ED/Surgical hallway to ED 
ambulance entrance parking area. 
o Side Door of Lab next to Emergency entrance – exit thru ED entrance to ED/Plaza 
parking area. 
• Smoke Compartments 
o Laboratory does not contain any smoke compartments 
o The nearest smoke compartment can be reached by moving through the ED back 
hallway 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
NOTE:  The Laboratory operates 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.  Responses during evening and night 
shifts will be performed by the Section designee. 
• In the event that there are patients or visitors in the Outpatient Lab Draw Room, the Phlebotomist 
will assist in moving any patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an 
emergency exercise to ensure your safety”.  Any Laboratory Team Member may assist with a patient 
or visitor. 
o Any Lab Team Member performing a procedure on an outpatient will remain with the 
patient and any visitors and will assist them to safety. 
• Manager, Supervisor, Senior Technologist, or designee after-hours will ensure that all employees 
in their section are accounted for.  
• Manager, Supervisor, Senior Technologist, or designee after-hours will ensure that each room in 
their section is empty by marking the door/door frame with chalk to indicate that the room is empty.  
 
There are no medical gas shut off valves within the Laboratory 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Laboratory does not house patients and there is no transport equipment available. 
• All outpatients and visitors in the laboratory will be at least partially ambulatory.   
 
Location of Fire Pull Stations – There are no pull stations inside of the Laboratory.  The nearest 
pull stations are located: 
• There are no pull stations inside of the Laboratory.  
• The nearest pull station to the Main Lab is located adjacent to the ED entrance. 
• The nearest pull station to the Outpatient Draw Room is located next to the Physician door   
 
Location of Fire Extinguishers: 
• In Main Lab next to Microbiology Dept 
• In the ED hallway outside of the side door of the Lab 
• In the back hallway of ED leading to Surgery 
• In the ICU hallway next to the Physician door 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R5 
Page 3 of 3 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Instruments do not need to be turned off 
• Combustible products: 
o All Lab Departments have flammable Reagents/Chemicals used in testing 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o Lab Team Members located in the Main Lab will proceed to the ED entrance located 
outside of the side door of the Laboratory. Team Members will follow the hallway out of 
the building and across the parking lot to rendezvous in the grassy median next to the 
service road. 
o Any Phlebotomists in the Outpatient Draw Room area will proceed through the Physician 
door to the Physician parking lot and rendezvous in the grassy median next to the service 
road. 
o Team Members outside of the Laboratory when a Code Red is called will shelter in place 
and will not attempt to return to the laboratory until an all-clear is given. If it becomes 
necessary to evacuate from the current location, Lab Team Members should attempt to 
make their way to the Lab Rendezvous point if it is safe to do so. 
• Secondary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o Lab Team Members located in the Main Lab will proceed to the nearest Smoke 
Compartment located in the back hallway of ED. Team Members will follow the hallway 
out of the building, through the Surgical area, and across the parking lot to rendezvous in 
the grassy median across from the ED ambulance entrance next to the service road. 
 
 
RELATED POLICIES 
LBA204-Emergency Preparedness 
ECEP001-Emergency Operations Plan  
ECEP007-OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan  
ECLS-012-Department Specific Code Red Response Plan (Template) 
 
REVISIONS 
5/1/18 (created), 9/30/2022 