OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R1 
Page 1 of 4 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA204-R1 
FIRE (CODE RED) RESPONSE PLAN– MAIN LAB 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 6/11/19 7/5/2019 7/5/2019 
Blood Donor Service  and Core Lab Director Review J Teague 6/26/2019 Origination Date 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 6/27/2019 5/1/18 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 7/2/2019  
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of Lab Administration or designee. 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
If a Fire occurs in the Laboratory: 
• Perform RACE and Pass.   
• Evacuation will proceed as outlined below.   
  If the Fire occurs in an area other than lab, remain in place: 
• Until given the all-clear or OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R1 
Page 2 of 4 
• Instructed to evacuate or 
• It becomes apparent that evacuation is necessary (smoke compartment has been breached). 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exit Locations: 
o Front of Laboratory – All exit to Administration Hallway 
▪ Front door in Outpatient Waiting Room  
▪ Front door in Hematology/Chemistry  
o Side of Laboratory – All exit to hallway between Lab and Treatment Center 
▪ Side door in main hallway by Microbiology 
▪ Side door in Pathology Offices hallway 
o Back of Laboratory – All exit to back hallway of the hospital 
▪ Back door in Transfusion Services/Serology 
▪ Back door by Venipuncture Staging Area 
▪ Back door in Team Member Break room 
• Smoke Compartments: 
o Laboratory does not contain any smoke compartments. 
o The nearest smoke compartment can be reached by moving across the back hallway into 
the Information Services area. 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
NOTE:  The Laboratory operates 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.  Responses during evening and night 
shifts will be performed by the Section designee. 
• Venipuncture staff will move any Phlebotomy carts in the hallway into the Venipuncture 
Staging area room.  
• Central Processing Staff will clear main hallway exit routes of any trash bags or boxes waiting 
to be picked up.   
• Phlebotomists, MT/MLT, and MLA’s will close any open doors nearest to them at the time 
that the Code Red is announced. 
• Transfusion Services MLA or designee will ensure that the fire window has closed.  If it has 
not automatically closed, this person will manually close the window. 
• In the event that there are patients or visitors in the Outpatient waiting area, Outreach Call 
Center staff will assist in moving any patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety”.  Any Laboratory Team Member may 
assist with a patient or visitor.   
o Any Lab Team Member performing a procedure on an outpatient will remain with 
the patient and any visitors, and will assist them to safety. 
o Hematology Charge Tech or designee will check the Outpatient Waiting area to 
ensure that it is empty after hours. 
• Supervisor, Senior Technologist, or designee after-hours from each Lab section will ensure 
that all employees in their section are accounted for. 
• Supervisor, Senior Technologist, or designee after-hours from each Lab section will ensure 
that each room in their section is empty by marking the door/door frame with chalk to indicate 
that the room is empty. 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R1 
Page 3 of 4 
The location of medical gas shut off valves: 
• Back Hallway by the Venipuncture Staging Area – This is a hospital Medical Gas shutoff.  It can 
be turned off by any Lab Supervisor, Senior Technologist, or designee at the direction of Plant 
Services or Respiratory. 
  The location of other gas shut off valves located in the laboratory: 
• Hallway outside of the Microbiology Department – Microbiology Supervisor, Senior 
Technologist, or designee after hours will be responsible for turning this off. 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Laboratory does not house patients and there is no transport equipment available. 
• All outpatients and visitors in the laboratory will be at least partially ambulatory.   
• Any outpatients and visitors in the laboratory will be assisted by the Outreach Call Center Staff 
and any lab staff member that is available. 
Location of Fire Pull Stations – There are no pull stations inside of the Laboratory.  The nearest 
pull stations are located: 
• On west side of administrative hall across from Laboratory Waiting Room. 
• On wall next to elevator across from Morgue and Venipuncture Supply Room in back hallway. 
Location of Fire Extinguishers: 
• Across from Outpatient Laboratory Waiting Room on West side of Administration hallway 
• On Left of entrance into Pathologist office hallway 
• Chemistry/Hematology - On support column in Electrophoresis area 
• Transfusion Services/Chemistry - On South wall across from Transfusion Services 
Compliance Officer’s desk. 
• To Left on entrance into Employee Lounge from back hallway 
• On South wall of Microbiology 
• Inside of the Histology Grossing Room 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Instruments do not need to be turned off 
• Combustible products: 
o Microbiology has Carbon Dioxide Tanks 
o All Lab Departments have flammable Reagents/Chemicals used in testing 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o All Lab Team Members will proceed to the nearest Smoke Compartment Located in the 
Information Services Hallway.  Team Members will follow the hallway out of the 
building, through the Mary Bird Perkins Parking Garage, and across the service road to 
rendezvous on the canal side of the service road.  
o Team Members outside of the Laboratory when a Code Red is called will shelter in 
place and will not attempt to return to the laboratory until an all-clear is given.   If it 
becomes necessary to evacuate from the current location, Lab Team Members should 
attempt to make their way to the Lab Rendezvous point if it is safe to do so.     OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R1 
Page 4 of 4 
• Secondary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o If the primary evacuation route is inaccessible, All Lab Team Members will evacuate 
from the front of the lab, out of the front of the hospital, and across Hennessy Blvd to 
rendezvous in the employee parking lot behind Walgreens. 
 
 
RELATED POLICIES 
LBA204-Emergency Preparedness 
ECEP001-Emergency Operations Plan  
ECEP007-OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan  
ECLS-012-Department Specific Code Red Response Plan (Template) 
 
REVISIONS 
5/1/18 (created), 6/11/19 