OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 1 of 3 
LBA204-Y1 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA204-Y1 
MASS CASUALTY (CODE YELLOW) RESPONSE PLAN – MAIN LAB 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 6/19/2020 7/14/2020 7/14/2020 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 6/19/2020 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 7/2/2020 2/1989 
 
 
PURPOSE 
To provide the appropriate laboratory response in the event of a Mass Casualty Incident (MCI). 
To delineate authority, responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a Code Yellow 
or Mass Casualty Incident. 
 
PROCEDURE 
A Mass Casualty Incident (MCI) is either an internal or external incident or disaster which 
generates more patients than available resources can manage using routing procedures.  A Mass 
Casualty Incident is described at OLOLRMC and Affiliate Hospitals using the phrase CODE 
YELLOW.  When a Mass Casualty Incident (MCI) occurs, the hospital will be notified and if 
appropriate, a Code Yellow will be activated.  Code Yellow is activated at the discretion of the 
hospital’s Administrator on Call or Emergency Room charge Nurse.  When a Code is activated, 
the Incident Command Center is also activated.  The Administrator on Call (AOC) acts as the 
head of Incident Command during any emergency event.  The Laboratory shall provide disaster 
support in accordance with the hospital disaster plan. 
 
A. Code Yellow Activation – Lab Response Duties: 
1. Laboratory staff are notified of Code Yellow by the following: 
a. Overhead announcement of "Code Yellow" three times to alert staff within the 
building.  If the number of anticipated patients is known, the alert will include 
“times number”. 
b. Notification through Hospital’s Mass Text Alert System 
c. Notification through a departmental call tree. 
2. All personnel on duty will remain within the hospital until released by their 
Department Head or designee. 
3. The Lab Disaster Checklist (LBA204-A) should be followed and completed for all 
Code Disasters and Drills. Each department head or designee will, as applicable: 
a. Evaluate current departmental staffing. 
i. How many employees are staffed currently? 
ii. How many employees are needed to adequately manage the code? 
b. Activate the departmental disaster call list.  Make note of: 
i. How many employees were called? 
ii. How many employees were contacted? OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 2 of 3 
LBA204-Y1 
iii. How many employees would be able to report to the Hospital? 
4. Emergency Events that occur after routine business hours: 
a. Heme charge tech will notify Lab Director or designee.  Designee will be a 
member of Lab Administration (Lab Manager, Phlebotomy Manager, or Lab 
Compliance Officer).  Lab Director or designee will determine if individual 
Departmental Supervisors should be notified.  Heme charge tech will 
communicate with Incident Command Center (located in Administration 
Office across the hall from lab) and other lab departments under direction of 
Lab Director or designee until or unless that individual can arrive on-site. 
5. Venipuncture: 
a. Dispatch six (6) venipuncture technicians to ECU to assist with STAT lab 
work. 
b. Transport specimens to lab (do not use tube system). 
c. Transport lab results to appropriate locations if needed. 
d. Assess venipuncture supplies:  needles, specimen collection tubes, gauze, 
tourniquets, etc. 
6. Transfusion Services: 
a. Fill out specific departmental checklist (TSPOL-I-26-C) that includes 
inventory information. 
b. Assess blood and blood product inventory 
i. Provide current inventory numbers to ECU and Incident Command 
Center. 
ii. Notify Blood Distribution Center (BDC) of Code.  Communicate 
current need for additional blood/blood products.  Communicate 
anticipated number of patients and possible usage of blood/blood 
products. 
c. Report to ECU as needed to provide Emergency Release blood/blood 
product support to Code Yellow patients.   
i. Refer to XMTCH-16-Emergency Issue of Blood Products.  
ii. Personnel will respond with Emergency Release/Trauma packets in 
coolers. 
• 4-Pack O Negative Red Cells 
• 2 units Group A plasma 
iii. Transfusion Services Staff may use Code Yellow (MCI) 
Patient/Product Tracker Form (LBA204-Y-A) to keep track of Code 
Yellow patients as they are transfused and/or transported to different 
locations rapidly. 
7. Hematology: 
a. Perform stat hematology and coagulation procedures. 
b. Urinalysis - discontinue routine Urinalysis and shift staffing to Transfusion 
Services and Hematology. 
c. Assess reagent supply 
8. Chemistry:  
a. Perform stat chemistries; assist in detection of chemical causation of disaster  
b. Reassign staff to other departments as indicated. 
c. Assess reagent supply OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 3 of 3 
LBA204-Y1 
9. Microbiology: 
a. Reassign staff to other departments as indicated. 
b. Assess reagent supply as needed. 
10. Central Processing: 
a. Receive and distribute Code specimens for STAT testing 
b. Reassign staff to other departments as indicated. 
11. Morgue: 
a. Lab Director or designee will report capacity within the hospital morgue to the 
Incident Command Center.  Lab Director or designee will continue to monitor 
and alert the Incident Command Center when necessary. 
b. Mortuary support will be requested from the East Baton Rouge Parish 
Coroner’s Office and/or through East Baton Rouge Office of Homeland 
Security and Emergency Preparedness when necessary. 
12. All Lab Departments: 
a. Provide a Department status report to the Lab Director or designee that 
includes: 
i. Status of staffing 
ii. Status of supplies  
iii. Status of blood/blood product inventory (Transfusion Services). 
b. Lab Director or designee will report to Incident Command Center 
B. At the conclusion of the drill or event an all clear announcement will be made. 
C. Post disaster: 
1. Complete checklist and forward to Compliance/Safety Officer. 
2. Evaluate the effectiveness of the department's response. 
3. Drill information will be forwarded to Disaster Committee Chairman by 
Compliance/Safety Officer. 
 
 
 
RELATED POLICIES 
LBA204-Laboratory Emergency Preparedness 
TSPOL-I-26-Transfusion Services emergency Operations Plan in Response to a Disaster 
XMTCH-16-Emergency Issue of Blood 
CH-BB-114- Transfusion Services emergency Operations Plan in Response to a Disaster 
CH-BB-015-Emergency Issue of Blood 
 
 
REFERENCES 
OLOLRMC Environment of Care Disaster policies 
CAP Checklist: GEN.73800, GEN.73900 
 
REVISIONS 
2/1989 (created), 3/20/15, 10/6/17, 6/19/2020 