OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 20 
LBA201 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA201 
 
EXPOSURE CONTROL PLAN  
 
 
POLICY  
 
The Laboratory Department is committed to providing a safe working environment and 
believes employees have a right to know about health hazards associated with their work. So 
that employees can make knowledgeable decisions about any personal risks of employment, 
this Exposure Control Plan is established to include policies, procedures, and responsibilities 
designed to develop awareness in employees of potentially infectious materials in the 
workplace and to train employees in appropriate, safe working conditions. A copy of the plan 
is available in the Laboratory Administration Manual located in the Lab Conference Room 
and on TeamLink.   
 
It is important that employers assume responsibility for laboratory safety. All employees will 
have access to pertinent safety information and appropriate personal protective equipment 
through their supervisory staff. The people who work in any given laboratory are best able to 
detect potential problems in either the facility or work procedures. When safety concerns arise, 
employees are encouraged to contact their supervisors. 
 
A training program has been designed for the benefit and protection of all laborat ory 
employees. Necessary information is available to inform the employee how best to handle 
potentially infectious materials and how to make use of the new law. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 20 
LBA201 
GLOSSARY 
 
BIOSAFETY LEVEL (BL) - Associated risks with microorganisms (e.g., BL1_minimal 
disease in healthy adults such as Bacillus subtilis, BL2_moderate risk associated with 
human diseases such as hepatitis B virus, BL3_microorganisms that may cause serious 
diseases such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and BL4_microorganisms that are high 
risk and considered lethal such as Lassa fever virus). 
 
BLOOD - Human blood, human blood components, and products made from human 
blood. 
 
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS - Microorganisms that are present in human blood and 
that can cause disease in humans. These pathogens include hepatitis B virus (HBV) and 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 
 
CJD - Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease 
 
CLINICAL LABORATORY - A workplace where diagnostic or other screening 
procedures are performed on blood or other potentially infectious materials. 
 
CONTAMINATED - Marked by the presence or the reasonably anticipated presence of 
blood or other potentially infectious materials on an item or surface. 
 
CONTAMINATED LAUNDRY - laundry that has been soiled with blood or other 
potentially infectious materials or that may contain sharps. 
 
CONTAMINATED SHARPS - Any contaminated object that can penetrate the skin, 
including, but not limited to, needles, scalpels, broken glass, broken capillary tubes, and 
exposed ends of dental wires. 
 
DECONTAMINATION - The use of physical or chemical means to remove, inactivate, 
or destroy blood borne pathogens on a surface or item to the point where they are no 
longer capable of transmitting infectious particles and the surface or item is rendered safe 
for handling, use, or disposal. 
 
ENGINEERING CONTROLS - Devices or equipment for isolating or removing 
hazards from the workplace. 
 
EXPOSURE INCIDENT - A specific eye, mouth, other mucous membrane, non-intact 
skin, or parenteral contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials that results 
from an employee performing his or her duties. 
 
HANDWASHING FACILITIES - Locations that provide an adequate supply of 
running potable water, soap, and single-use towels or hot-air drying machines. 
 
HBV - Hepatitis B virus OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 20 
LBA201 
HEPA FILTERS - High-efficiency particulate air filters 
 
HIV - Human immunodeficiency virus 
 
LICENSED HEALTH-CARE PROFESSIONAL - A person whose legally permitted 
scope of practice allows him or her to independently perform the activities required for 
hepatitis B vaccination and post-exposure evaluation and follow-up. 
 
OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE - Reasonably anticipated skin, eye, mucous 
membrane, or parenteral contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials that 
may result from employees performing their duties.  
 
OTHER POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS MATERIALS (OPIM): 
 
1. The following body fluids: semen, vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial 
fluid, pleural fluid, pericardial fluid, peritoneal fluid, amniotic fluid, saliva in dental 
procedures, and any body fluid that is visibly contaminated with blood. 
 
2. Any unfixed tissue or organ (other than intact skin) from a human (living or dead). 
 
3. HIV-containing cell  or tissue cultures, organ cultures, and HIV - or 
HBV-contaminated culture media or other solutions; and blood, organs, or other 
tissues from experimental animals infected with HIV or HBV. 
 
PARENTERAL - Exposure occurring as a result of piercing the skin barrier (e.g., 
subcutaneous, intramuscular, intravenous routes) through such events as needle-sticks, 
bites, cuts, and abrasions. 
 
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT - Specialized clothing or equipment worn by 
an employee to protect against a hazard. 
 
PRODUCTION FACILITY - A facility engaged in industrial-scale, large-volume, or 
high-concentration production of HIV or HBV. 
 
REGULATED WASTE - Liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious 
materials; contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially infectious 
materials in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items that are caked with dried 
blood or other potentially infectious materials and are capable of releasing these materials 
during handling; contaminated sharps; and pathological and microbiological wastes 
containing blood or other potentially infectious materials. 
 
RESEARCH LABORATORY - A laboratory producing or using small but significant 
amounts of HIV or HBV. Research laboratories may produce high concentrations of HIV or 
HBV but not in the volume found in production facilities. 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 20 
LBA201 
SHARPS - Any object that can penetrate the skin, including, but not limited to, needles, 
scalpels, and broken capillary tubes. 
 
SOP - Standard operating procedures 
 
SOURCE INDIVIDUAL - Any individual, living or dead, whose blood or other 
potentially infectious materials may be a source of occupational exposure to the 
employee. Examples include, but are not limited to, hospital and clinic patients, clients in 
institutions for the developmentally disabled, trauma victims, clients of drug and alcohol 
treatment facilities, residents of hospices and nursing homes, human remains, and 
individuals who donate or sell blood or blood components. 
 
STERILIZE - To use a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all microbial life, 
including highly resistant material endospores. 
 
TB - Mycobacterium tuberculosis  
 
STANDARD PRECAUTIONS - An approach to infection control in which all human 
blood and certain human body fluids are treated as if known to be infectious for HIV, 
HBV, and other blood borne pathogens. 
 
WORK PRACTICE CONTROLS - Mandated procedures or policies that reduce the 
likelihood of exposure by altering the manner in which a task is performed (e.g., by 
prohibiting recapping of needles using a two-handed technique). 
 
 
EXPOSURE DETERMINATION 
 
All job classifications within the laboratory are assessed for occupational exposure to blood 
borne pathogens. An attached list identifies those job classifications. 
 
  
 Job 
 Classification 
 Regular 
 Exposure 
 Some 
 Exposure 
 No 
 Exposure 
Technologist  *   
MLA  *   
Phlebotomist                   *   
Laboratory Clerk   *  
Secretary    * 
 
 
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 5 of 20 
LBA201 
 
ENGINEERING AND WORK PRACTICE CONTROLS 
(STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES) 
 
Because few laboratory tasks are without potential exposure to infectious materials, general 
precautions for handling all such materials have been adopted to minimize exposure. 
 
Standard Precautions are observed throughout the laboratory to prevent contact with blood 
and other potentially infectious materials. All body fluids are considered potent ially 
infectious. 
 
Engineering controls are examined, maintained, and replaced on a regular schedule to ensure 
their effectiveness. This includes an annual inspection and certification of biohazard hoods. 
 
Employees wash their hands immediately (or as soon as possible) after removing gloves or 
other personal protective equipment and after hand contact with blood or other potentially 
infectious materials. Hands are washed between all patient contacts; before eating, drinking, 
smoking, applying cosmetics, lip balm, changing contact lenses, and after using lavatory 
facilities. Facilities for hand washing are provided and are separate from those used for 
washing equipment or for waste disposal. Where this option is not available, thorough 
cleaning of the sink and surrounding area with an intermediate disinfectant after chemical 
and/or biohazard waste disposal is required before hand washing is allowed. Antiseptic hand 
cleaner or towelettes are used whenever clean running water is not available; however, they 
are not used as a substitute for hand washing. Hands are washed with soap and water as soon 
as possible. Wearing gloves does not mean you do not have to wash your hands! 
All personal protective equipment is removed before leaving the work area.  If overtly  
contaminated, items are removed and placed in an appropriately designated area or container 
for storage, washing, decontamination, or disposal. (Please see Section V.) 
 
Used needles and other sharps are not bent, broken, recapped, or re -sheathed by hand. 
Contaminated needles are not sheared or broken. Used needles are not removed from 
disposable syringes. Needles and sharps are disposed of in impervious disposable containers 
located near the point of use.  
 
Eating, drinking, smoking, applying cosmetics, li p balm, or handling contact lenses are 
prohibited in work areas where there is a potential for occupational exposure.  
 
Food and drink are not stored in refrigerators, freezers, or cabinets, or on shelves, countertops, 
or bench tops where blood or other potentially infectious materials are stored or in other areas 
of possible contamination. 
 
All procedures involving blood or other potentially infectious materials are performed to 
minimize splashing, spraying, spattering, and generating droplets of these substances (e.g., 
blood specimens are opened using a gauze square to minimize contamination of skin and 
clothing, or plastic shields or hoods are used to reduce splashing. Specimens are centrifuged 
with the lid firmly latched to reduce the risk of infection by creating aerosols). OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 6 of 20 
LBA201 
Mechanical pipetting devices are used for all liquids. Mouth pipetting/suctioning is 
prohibited. Pipette tips are disposed of in biohazard containers. Needles are not used for 
sampling unless no alternative exists (e.g., blood culture bottles). 
 
All specimens from patients are kept in clean and dry outside containers with a secure lid. All 
specimens are transported in a secondary container (e.g., impervious plastic bag) that prevents 
leakage during handling, processing, storage, transport, or shipping. The container is labeled 
or color-coded appropriately. If the specimen could cause a puncture, then a secondary 
container that is puncture-resistant is used. If specimens are transported via a pneumatic tube 
system, the primary and secondary containers in the system are tested to ensure they remain 
leak-proof. The pneumatic system is disinfected properly when it becomes contaminated. 
 
Unfixed or unstained slides are considered infectious and treated appropriately.  
 
Laboratory surfaces are made of impervious materials to facilitate disinfection. 
 
Only authorized personnel are allowed in the laboratory. Casual visitors (e.g., family 
members, tour groups) are discouraged. Non-laboratory personnel are closely supervised, 
and appropriate protective measures (e.g., clothing) are used to ensure that they do not 
cause a hazard to themselves or to the laboratory staff. 
 
Service and maintenance personnel are not permitted to enter a biohazard area until the 
laboratory's safety requirements are reviewed, the instrument to be serviced is 
decontaminated, and appropriate personal protective equipment is issued and worn. 
  
Phlebotomy 
 
● Tourniquets used for phlebotomy are for single use and discarded following each 
patient use.   
 
● Needle holders (e.g., Vacutainer) for use with evacuated blood tubes are discarded 
following each patient use. 
 
● Single use retractable skin puncture devices are to be used for dermal punctures. 
 
● Plastic Vacuette Tubes are substituted for glass tubes when available.  
 
Hematology 
 
● Non-glass capillary tubes for micro-hematocrit are to be used. 
 
● The sealant for hematocrit tubes is used once and not reformed for reuse. 
 
● Sedimentation racks are decontaminated frequently by EPA approved 
   disinfectant. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 7 of 20 
LBA201 
● Cell sorters (excluding flow-cytometer) are operated behind a shield to prevent 
splattering. 
 
Microbiology 
 
● Mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB) cultures are handled in a Class II, Biosafety Level 3 
Biological Safety Cabinet. 
 
● Blood culture bottles are secured by a rack to hold the bottle, allowing for easy entry 
and removal of the needle. 
 
● A gauze square is placed on the stopper of inoculated media to contain any  
    spray that might develop. 
 
Chemistry 
 
● Sample probes may deliver a fine spray of sample. Shields around the probe are 
recommended. The equipment is decontaminated at the end of each shift by 1% bleach.   
 
● Waste from analyzers is considered contaminated and discarded in Biohazard 
containers. 
 
● Contaminated needles and other contaminated sharps are not recapped or removed 
except where no alternative is feasible and the medical procedure requires it. 
  
● When recapping is necessary, it is accomplished by using a mechanical device or a 
one-handed (scoop) technique. 
 
Transfusion Services, Blood Donor, & Blood Distribution 
 
Gloves are required when performing the following activities:  
 
● ABO& Rh, antibody screens, compatibility testing, and other immuno-hematological 
procedures. 
 
● Component preparation procedures.  Specifically during removal of units from 
centrifuge, inserting cups, and sealing tubes. 
 
Pathology 
 
● Freezing propellants under pressure are not used for frozen sections of known or 
suspected TB tissue. TB and Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) tissue blocks are wrapped 
in cellophane or sealable bags before filing. 
 
● Paraffin blocks and covered slides are not considered infectious. 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 8 of 20 
LBA201 
• The cryostat is decontaminated daily with at least a 70% ethanol Solution and defrosted 
and decontaminated weekly with a TB disinfectant. Trimmings and sections of tissue are 
considered infectious. Stainless steel mesh gloves are worn when changing knife blades. 
Solutions used for staining frozen sections are considered contaminated and are disposed 
of by incineration. 
 
• Reusable sharps (e.g., histology knife blades or scalpels) are not stored or processed 
so that an employee must reach into a container where they are placed. They are 
contained in puncture-resistant, labeled or color-coded, leak-proof containers. 
 
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 
 
Personal protective equipment in appropriate sizes is readily available to employees. Personal 
protective equipment is assigned based on the task assessment which does not allow blood or 
other potentially infectious materials to pass through or otherwise reach the employee's work 
clothes (e.g., scrubs), street clothes, undergarments, skin, eyes, mouth, or other mucous 
membranes under normal conditions of use and for the time that the protective equipment is 
used.  
 
Employees are required to wear disposable, single-use gloves when they have the potential 
for direct skin contact with blood and infectious materials, mucous membranes, and non-intact 
skin when touching or handling contaminated items or surfaces.  
 
Gloves are removed inside out aseptically and are replaced as soon as possible when visibly 
soiled, torn, or punctured or any time their ability to function as a barrier is compromised. 
They are not washed in disinfectant for reuse. Hypoallergenic gloves, glove liners, or powder-
less gloves are provided to employees who are allergic to the regularly provided gloves. [Note: 
Employees with contact dermatitis caused by gloves may find protective skin creams (e.g., 
DermaShieldTM*) helpful in preventing further irritation.] 
 
Laboratory coats with long sleeves are to be worn only in the laboratory area and are to be 
closed (e.g., buttoned, snapped) to protect skin and clothing.  They are to be worn when the 
procedure being performed may be reasonably anticipated to spray or splash blood, other 
potentially infectious materials, or other hazardous materials. Aprons are worn in addition to 
the laboratory coat when the laboratory coat cannot provide adequate protection (e.g., during 
pregnancy) or when fluid contamination is likely.  Aprons are not substitutes for laboratory 
coats but serve as additional protection. Laboratory coats are worn only in the work area and 
removed prior to going on rest br eaks or in any public areas (e.g., cafeteria, lobby, or gift 
shop). Laboratory coats are provided by the employer at no cost to the employee. 
 
Soiled laboratory coats are removed immediately after leaving the work area (or as soon as 
possible) and discarded.   
 
Masks and eye protection or chin-length face shields are worn to prevent splashes, sprays, 
spatter, or droplets of blood or infectious materials if there is a potential for eye, nose, or 
mouth contamination. This equipment is located in each section.  Particulate filter respirators OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 9 of 20 
LBA201 
of appropriate sizes (e.g., T.B. or respiratory isolation patients) are issued to lab personnel 
after the complete fit testing and respirator training. Employees are to adhere to Medical 
Center Patient Isolation Policies/Procedures.   
 
Safety Glasses meet OSHA standards and come in various sizes to accommodate the 
wearer. Adjustable nose pads and temples are preferred. Lenses are optically correct in 
both plain or prescription versions, and Anti-fog, scratch-resistant, and polycarbonate 
lenses are recommended.  
 
Tinting of lenses is not recommended. Side shields may be attached permanently or may be 
detachable. The employer upon employment at no cost provides Safety Glasses to the 
employee. Replacement and repair caused by normal wear and tear are also the employer's 
responsibility.  
 
Prescription lenses or replacement because of loss are the responsibility of the employee. 
Safety glasses should be appropriately cleaned before using and whenever splashes or 
contamination are visible. When not in use, safety glasses should be kept in a sanitizing 
cabinet or decontaminated and in an individual case in the employee's locker. 
 
Personal protective equipment (e.g., gloves, laboratory coat, or goggles) is required to be worn 
by all outside service and maintenance personnel when there is a potential exposure to blood 
and body fluids. This equipment is provided by the laboratory.   
 
 
TASK ASSESSMENT 
 
The Laboratory Section Supervisor makes assessment of all laboratory operations without 
regard to the use of personal protective equipment. Safety policies are established for each 
task performed, and engineering controls and personal protective equipment are assigned. As 
a minimum, all employees wear laboratory coats, gloves, and appropriate eye protection when 
dealing with blood and body fluids. The attached list identifies tasks in the laboratory 
requiring additional protective equipment and engineering controls. 
 
 
 Task 
 Additional Protective 
 Equipment 
 Engineering 
 Controls 
Removing blood tube tops  None  Splash shield/2X2 Gauze 
Phlebotomy  TB Mask as indicated  Sharps containers 
Safety device for needles and 
transfer devices 
Processing samples    Splash shield/2X2 Gauze 
Plating TB cultures  Gown, mask, and goggles  Biohazard safety hoods 
 
    
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 10 of 20 
LBA201 
ANTISEPTICS/DISINFECTANTS 
 
Antiseptics and disinfectants are used throughout the laboratory in a variety of ways. 
Antiseptics are chemical germicides formulated for use on skin or tissue. Disinfectants are 
agents that inactivate viruses, bacteria, and fungi on surfaces. Hospital disinfectants used are 
registered by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and are cla ssified as high -, 
intermediate-, or low -level-depending on their ability to kill germs. The following are 
examples only and do not exclude other uses: 
 
Antiseptic Laboratory Use 
Alcohol Phlebotomy 
Chlorhexidine gluconate Hand-washing 
Para-chloro-meta-xylenol Hand-washing 
Iodophores Blood donor collection/apheresis 
  
Disinfectant Laboratory Use 
Quaternary ammonias  Cleaning floors/walls 
ammonium chlorides Cleaning countertops 
Glutaraldehyde  Disinfecting rubber tubing 
 
 
HOUSEKEEPING/SPILL CLEANUP 
 
The Laboratory in cooperation with Housekeeping determines and implements an appropriate 
written schedule for cleaning and decontaminating. All equipment and work surfaces are 
decontaminated with an appropriate disinfectant (e.g., Super Sani-Cloth Germicidal Wipes or 
other intermediate-level disinfectant is used): 
 
• After completing procedures 
• When surfaces are overtly contaminated 
• Immediately after any spill of blood or other potentially infectious materials 
• At the end of the work shift  
 
If the Creutzfeldt-Jakob virus is suspected or confirmed, soaking the affected area with a 1 to 
10 solution of bleach for 1 hour is recommended. All floors in the laboratory are wet-mopped 
daily by housekeeping personnel. 
 
Equipment that is contaminated with blood or other potentially infectious materials is checked 
routinely and before servicing or shipping and is decontaminated as necessary according to 
manufacturers' recommendations, which may include certification of the biosafety level (e.g., 
BL1, BL2, BL3, or BL4). 
 
All receptacles intended for reuse that have a potential for becoming contaminated with 
blood or other potentially infectious materials are inspected and decontaminated 
following contamination. 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 11 of 20 
LBA201 
Specimens of blood or other potentially infectious materials are placed in a closable, 
leak-proof container and labeled before being stored or transported. If outside 
contamination of the primary container is likely, then a second leak-proof container is 
placed over the outside of the first and closed to prevent leakage during handling, storage, 
or transport. If puncture of the primary container is likely, it is placed in a secondary 
container that is leak-proof and puncture-resistant. 
 
Broken glassware that may be contaminated is not picked up directly with the hands. It is 
handled by using mechanical means, such as a brush and dust pan, tongs, or forceps. 
 
Spills of body fluids are decontaminated as soon as possible by using the supplied body fluid 
spill kits or by absorbing the spilled material with disposable absorbent materials (e.g., paper 
towels or gauze pads), flooding the spill site or wiping the site with disposable towels soaked 
in disinfectant, then wiping the site with clean, dry paper towels or gauze pads, placing all 
contaminated items in a biohazard bag, and disposing of the bag according to laboratory 
policy. Spill cleanup requires using protective equipment (e.g., gloves, laboratory coat, shoe 
covers).  
 
LAUNDRY 
 
Contaminated laundry is bagged at the location where it is used and is not sorted or rinsed in 
the laboratory. 
 
Contaminated laundry is placed and transported in bags that are labeled with the biohazard 
symbol or that are red. These bags are stored in the Exam Room storage cabinet. Whenever 
this laundry is wet and presents a reasonable likelihood that the bag will soak through or leak, 
the laundry is placed and transported in another bag that prevents fluid from leaking to the 
exterior. These bags are stored in each laboratory section. 
 
Laundry workers wear protective gloves and other appropriate personal protective equipment 
to prevent occupational exposure during handling or sorting. 
 
Clean linen and disposable laboratory coats are stored assigned areas. No soiled linen comes 
in contact with clean linen.   
 
 
 
SIGNS AND LABELS 
 
Signs that bear the following legend are posted at the entrance to work areas: 
 
BIOHAZARD 
(Special requirements for entering the area) 
  
 Warning labels are affixed to: 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 12 of 20 
LBA201 
● Designate “Dirty Work Area”           
  
●           Containers of regulated waste 
 
● Refrigerators and freezers containing blood and other potentially infectious materials 
such as: Lab equipment, telephones, computers, and bench tops. 
 
● Containers used to store, transport, or ship blood or other potentially infectious 
materials. 
  
 Labels required by this section must include the following legend: 
 
BIOHAZARD:  These labels are fluorescent orange or orange-red, or predominantly so, with 
lettering or symbols in a contrasting color. 
 
Labels are either an integral part of the container or are affixed as close as feasible to the 
container by string, wire, adhesive, or other methods that prevent them from being lost or 
unintentionally removed. 
 
Red bags or red containers may be substituted for labels. 
 
Containers of blood, blood components, or blood products that are labeled with their contents 
and have been released for transfusion or other clinical use are exempt from the labeling 
requirements. 
 
Individual containers of blood or other potentially infectious materials that are placed in a 
labeled container during storage, transport, shipment, or disposal are exempt from the labeling 
requirement. 
 
Labels required for contaminated equipment state which portions of the equipment remain 
contaminated. 
 
Regulated waste that has been decontaminated is not labeled or color-coded. 
 
Areas where food is stored or prepared (e.g., lounge, Supervisor's office) are labeled as 
non-biohazard areas. 
 
WASTE DISPOSAL 
 
Infectious waste in the state of Louisiana and the city of Baton Rouge is described as:  
Infectious Medical Waste. 
 
 
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 13 of 20 
LBA201 
Laboratory waste is segregated at the point of use into categories that include but are not 
limited to:      
 
  1. Pathological Waste/Biohazard 
  2. Medical Waste/Biohazard 
  3. Chemical waste (see Chemical Hygiene Plan) 
  4. Recycled waste (e.g., paper, aluminum) 
  5. Regular trash 
 
Biohazard containers are kept upright throughout use and are routinely checked by laboratory 
technical personnel and disposed of by Stericycle or housekeeping personnel. 
 
All infectious waste is placed in leak-proof biohazard containers marked Biohazard and are 
stored in the Biohazard dumpster in the Soiled Utility Storage room and disposed of by 
incineration by Stericycle Corporation at its Regional Incinerators. 
 
All sharps and glassware are disposed of immediately (or as soon as possible) in containers 
that are closable, puncture-resistant, leak-proof on the sides and bottom, and appropriately 
labeled with a biohazard label . These containers are placed in the immediate area of use 
ideally no more than 100 feet away from the user. When containers of sharps are moved from 
the area of use, the containers are closed, placed in a secondary container if they may leak, 
and removed from the laboratory in Bio-hazard carts by Stericycle staff. 
 
Reusable containers are not opened, emptied, or cleaned manually or in any other manner that 
would expose employees to the risk of percutaneous injury. 
 
Regulated waste is placed in containers that are closable and constructed to contain all 
contents and to prevent fluids from leaking during handling, storage, transport, or shipping. 
The containers are closed before removal to prevent the contents from spilling or protruding 
during handling, storage, transport, or shipping. Containers will have an absorbent material 
placed in each container with liquid waste in the event liquid is released inside the container. 
If outside contamination of the regulated waste container occurs, it is placed in a second 
container that has the same qualities as the first (e.g., closable, leak-proof) and is handled in 
the same manner. 
 
Regular trash includes the remainder of waste in the laboratory that poses no health or 
environmental risk. This is disposed of through routine facility waste streams in appropriate 
containers. 
 
  
 
TRAINING 
 
All employees with occupational exposure to blood borne pathogens participate in a training 
program at no cost to the employee and that is held during working hours. Training is provided 
at the time of initial employment and annually thereafter. Additional training is offered OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 14 of 20 
LBA201 
whenever new or modified tasks or procedures affect the employee's occupational exposure. 
Material appropriate in content and vocabulary to educational level, literacy, and language 
background of employees is used. 
 
The training program contains the following elements: 
 
1. A general explanation of the epidemiology and symptoms of blood borne diseases. 
 
3. An explanation of the modes of transmission of blood borne pathogens. 
 
4. An explanation of the employer's Exposure Control Plan and a means by which the 
employee can obtain a copy of the written plan. 
 
5. An explanation of the appropriate methods for recognizing tasks and other activities 
that may involve exposure to blood and other potentially infectious materials. 
 
6. An explanation of the use and limitations of methods that will prevent or reduce 
exposure, including appropriate engineering controls, work practices, and personal 
protective equipment. 
 
7. Information on the types, proper use, location, removal, handling, decontamination, 
and disposal of personal protective equipment. 
 
8. An explanation of the basis for selecting personal protective equipment, including 
glove fitting, laboratory coat use, and eye protection equipment.  
 
9. Information on the hepatitis B vaccine, including information on its efficacy, safety, 
method of administration, and benefits. The vaccination will be offered free of charge. 
 
10. Information on the appropriate actions to take and the people to contact in an 
emergency involving blood or other potentially infectious materials. 
 
11. An explanation of the procedure to follow if an exposure incident occurs, including 
the method of reporting the incident and the medical follow -up that will be made 
available. Also information on the medical counseling that the employer is providing 
for exposed individuals. 
 
12. An explanation of the signs, labels, and/or color-coding required. 
 
 
13. An opportunity for interactive questions and answers with the person conducting the 
training session. The person(s) conducting the training is knowledgeable in the subject 
matter covered by the elements contained in the training program as it relates to Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center. 
 
Adherence to recommended protective measures is monitored regularly. When monitoring OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 15 of 20 
LBA201 
reveals a failure to follow recommended precautions, counseling and retraining are provided 
and, if necessary, appropriate disciplinary action is considered. 
 
 
MEDICAL EXAMINATION 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center makes hepatitis B vaccinations available to 
all employees who have occupational exposure and provides post-exposure follow-up for all 
employees with an occupational exposure incident through the Employee Health Department.   
 
All medical evaluations and procedures are performed by or under the supervision of a 
licensed physician or another licensed health-care professional, and all laboratory tests are 
performed at no cost to the employee. 
 
All evaluations, procedures, vaccinations, and post-exposure management are provided to the 
employee at a reasonable time and place at no cost to the employee and according to standard 
recommendations for medical practice. 
 
HBV vaccination is offered within 10 working days of initial assignment to all employees 
occupationally exposed to blood or other potentially infectious materials, unless the employee 
has a previous HBV vaccination or unless antibody testing has revealed that the employee is 
immune or the vaccine is contraindicated for medical reasons. Participation in a prescreening 
program is not a prerequisite for receiving HBV vaccination. If the employee initially declines 
HBV vaccination but at a later date while still covered under the standard decides to accept 
the HBV vaccine, the vaccine is provided at that time. Should a booster dose(s) be 
recommended at a future date, such booster dose(s) will be provided according to standard 
recommendations for medical practice at no cost to the employee. Any employee  who 
declines HBV vaccination must sign a statement refusing the vaccination.   
 
HBV antibody testing is made available to an employee who desires such testing before 
deciding whether to receive HBV vaccination. If the employee is found to be immune to HBV 
by virtue of adequate antibody titer, then HBV vaccine need not be offered to that employee. 
 
Following a report of an exposure incident, each employee receives a confidential medical 
evaluation and follow-up, including at least the following elements: 
 
1. Documentation of the route(s) of exposure and the circumstances under which the 
exposure occurred. 
 
2. Identification and documentation of the source individual are done, unless 
identification is infeasible or prohibited by state or local law. 
 
3. The source individual's blood is tested as soon as possible and after consent is obtained 
to determine HCV and HIV infectivity. If consent is not obtained, documentation that 
legally required consent cannot be obtained is needed. When the source individual's 
consent is not required by law, the source individual's blood, if available, is tested and OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 16 of 20 
LBA201 
the results documented. 
 
4. When the source individual is already known to be infected with HCV or HIV, testing 
for the source individual's known HCV or HIV status need not be repeated. 
 
5. Results of the source individual's testing are made available to the exposed employee, 
and the employee is informed of applicable laws and regulations concerning 
disclosure of the identity and infectious status of the source individual. 
 
6. The exposed employee's blood is collected as soon as feasible and tested after consent 
is obtained.  
 
7. High-risk exposures involve patient's blood or body fluids introduced through intact 
skin or splashed onto mucous membranes or broken or abraded skin of the employee. 
Any employee sustaining a high -risk exposure notifies his/her Supervisor 
immediately. Emergency counseling and treatment are available in the Employee 
Health Department or Emergency Care Unit during off hours.   
 
8.       Follow-up of the exposed employee, including antibody or antigen testing, 
counseling, illness reporting and saf e and effective post -exposure prophylaxis, is 
conducted according to standard recommendations for medical practice. 
 
Please refer to Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Employee Health Department 
for specific information on how testing and results  are communicated to the exposed 
employee and their health care provider.   
 
 
 
RECORD-KEEPING 
 
Medical records are kept on all laboratory employees in the Employee Health Department and 
include the following: 
 
• Employee name 
 
• Employee Social Security number 
 
• Hepatitis B vaccination record/eligibility 
 
• Results of physical exams, testing, and follow-up procedures related to vaccination 
and past exposures 
 
• Medical consultation, physical and written opinion report (if necessary because of 
exposure). 
 
All medical records are kept for the required amount of time set forth by the health system OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 17 of 20 
LBA201 
and regulations.   
 
Training records are kept on all laboratory employees in their Employee Files, and include:  
 
• Dates of training sessions 
 
• Contents or a summary of training  
 
• Names and qualifications of instructors 
 
• Attendance roster, including names and job titles. 
 
All records are kept and transferred in accordance with 29 CFR 1910.20. 
 
If Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center ceases to do business and there is no 
successor employer to receive and retain the records for the prescribed period, Our Lady of 
the Lake Regional Medical Center will notify the area's OSSA Director and transfer the 
records to the Director within 3 months. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
  
1. Brown P et al. Sodium Hydroxide Decontamination of Creutzfeldt -Jakob Disease 
Virus. New England Journal of Medicine, 1984;310(11):727.  
 
2. Centers for Disease Control. Recommendations for Prevention of HIV Transmission 
in Health -Care Settings. Morbidity & Mortality Weekly Report, August 
1987;36(supplement no. 2s):35-185. 
 
3. Forseter G et al. Blood Contamination of Tourniquets Used in Routine Phlebotomy. 
American Journal of Infection Control, 1990;18(6):386-390. 
 
4. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards. Procedures for the Collection 
of Diagnostic Blood Specimens by Venipuncture_Second Edition, NCCLS Approved 
Standard H3-A2. Villanova, PA: NCCLS, 1991. 
 
5. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards. Protection of Laboratory 
Workers from Infectious Disease Transmitted by Blood, Body Fluids and T issue, 
NCCLS Tentative Guideline M29-T2. Villanova, PA: NCCLS, 1991. 
 
6. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards. Protection of Laboratory 
Workers from Instrument Biohazards, NCCLS Proposed Guideline 117-P. Villanova, 
PA: NCCLS, 1991. 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 18 of 20 
LBA201 
7. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (Department of Labor). Occupational 
Exposure to Blood borne Pathogens; Final Rule. Federal Register, 29 CFR Part 
1910.1030, December 6, 1991;56(235):64003-64182. 
 
8. Rutala WA. APIC Guideline for Selection and Use of Disinfectants. American Journal 
of Infection Control,  1990;18(2):99-117. 
 
9. Weinstein SA et al. Blood Contamination of Reusable Needle Holders. Paper 
presented at the 18th Annual Educational Conference of the Association for 
Practitioners in Infection Control, Nashville, Tennessee, May 1991. 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 Appendix A  
AUTOPSY SUITE 
 
The autopsy suite is part of the Laboratory Department and is therefore covered in the 
Exposure Control Plan. 
 
All autopsies are considered infectious and Standard Precautions are followed. The autopsy 
suite is designated as a biohazard area and appropriate signs are posted regarding the 
biohazards and required precautions.  
 
Personal protective equipment is essential during an autopsy. Caps or hoods that completely 
cover the hair are used. A face shield is preferred; however, safety goggles with a cushion seal 
are acceptable, and respirators are available. Safety glasses or ordinary prescription glasses 
are not used because they do not offer adequate protection. Contact lenses are not manipulated 
in the autopsy room. 
 
A long-sleeved, fluid-resistant jump suit that covers the body from neck to feet is preferred. 
Fluid-resistant surgical gowns with surgical scrub shirts and pants are adequate. A fluid-proof 
apron is worn over any fluid-resistant clothing. 
 
Double gloves are worn and are changed at regular intervals during the autopsy. The outer 
glove covers the cuff of the sleeve. An outer glove of stainless steel mesh that resists punctures 
may be worn as well as heavyweight utility gloves of the type used for home cleaning. 
 
All tissues and contaminated instruments are retained on the autopsy table. Any tissue that is 
removed from the autopsy table is placed into a tray for transport within the morgue or placed 
into a container for storage or disposal. 
 
Tissue specimens are placed into fixative on the autopsy table. The outside of all specimen OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 19 of 20 
LBA201 
containers is decontaminated by a hospital approved disinfectant before the containers are 
removed from the autopsy table. Any unfixed tissue or other specimen sent from the morgue 
to the laboratory for testing (e.g., culture or chemistry) is placed into a sealed, leak proof 
container, which is placed into a sealable secondary container for transport. The specimen is 
labeled as a biohazard. 
 
Ten percent formalin in 10 times the volume of tissue is used to inactivate infectious agents 
except TB and CJD. A 1:10 dilution of bleach is used for CJD and 10% formalin in 50% ethyl 
alcohol is used for TB. 
 
Bone surfaces are wet with water before being cut to minimize dispersal of bone dust. A 
vacuum attachment for the bone saw helps to eliminate fine droplets. A personal respirator is 
worn to prevent infectious particles (e.g., TB) from being inhaled. To contain bone dust and 
spray, the entire skull is enclosed in a large plastic bag or box. The saw and hands are 
introduced through a large hole made in the bottom of the bag/box. 
Organs and tissues that are retained unfixed are placed into sealed leak proof containers or 
sealable plastic bags. These, in turn, are placed into a secondary, sealable, leak proof 
container. All unfixed, retained material is conspicuously labeled as a biohazard. When 
retained tissues have served their purpose, they are shipped to a licensed off-site incineration 
facility. 
 
The body is washed with a detergent solution, followed by an antiseptic solution or diluted 
household bleach, and rinsed with water before being covered with a leak proof shroud or 
body bag.  
 
Both the body tag and the shroud/bag are labeled with a biohazard label stating the nature of 
the specific risk to alert the mortician to any potential biohazard. When autopsies are done on 
patients known to harbor blood borne pathogens, the mortician should be notified directly.  
 
Instruments are washed with a detergent solution, rinsed with water, and decontaminated with 
a 1 to 10 or 1 to 100 dilution of household bleach or other suitable chemical germicide for 10 
minutes.  Aluminum instruments are autoclaved. 
 
All contaminated disposable clothing and supplies are placed into a biohazard container for 
subsequent disposal or are autoclaved before disposal. If reusable clothing, towels, etc. have 
been soaked with blood or are wet, they are placed in a leak proof biohazard bag for transport. 
Dry, contaminated, reusable clothing is placed in a labeled or color-coded bag and sent to the 
institutional laundry. 
 
All surfaces adjacent to work areas, including floors, are cleaned and decontaminated with a 
detergent solution, and flushed with water at the conclusion of the autopsy.  
 
After the body has been removed by the mortician, the morgue cooler tray is decontaminated 
with 1:10 bleach solution. 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 20 of 20 
LBA201 
 
REVISIONS 
5/1992 (created), 3/2015, 8/2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    By    Date 
 Prepared/Revised D. Leger 8/23/17 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 10/3/2017 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 10/2/2017 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 10/4/2017 
Medical Director Review A Harton 10/1/2017 
 Effective Date 10/6/2017 
 Origination Date May 1992 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 