OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 18 
LBA200 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA200 
LAB SAFETY PLAN 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 8/2/2023 9/1/2023 9/1/2023 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 8/25/2023 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 8/26/2023 8/2009 
 
I. PURPOSE 
The laboratory shall eliminate or minimize hazards to staff, patients, and visitors.  All 
laboratory procedures should include basic safety precautions.  Laboratory safety 
policies and procedures supplement the facility's safety policies and procedures. The 
lab environment shall meet the safety requirements of the facility, state, and 
regulatory agencies. 
 
II. GENERAL LABORATORY SAFETY 
The Safety Lab Safety Officer, Lab Manager, Lab Supervisor or designee ensures 
each laboratory employee is knowledgeable of the potential hazards/safety exposure 
by documented attendance of Laboratory Orientation.  
All laboratory personnel shall comply with the facility’s safety policies and 
procedures.  OLOL Laboratory is under the OLOLRMC Environment of Care/Safety 
Program.  All policies and procedures established for the facility will be enforced and 
followed by all lab staff.     
Working safely in a laboratory requires having the proper containment equipment and 
engineering controls, wearing appropriate personal protective equipment, using 
proper work practices, being aware of safety information for the materials and 
equipment used, and following safety instructions and laboratory protocols.   
Because each laboratory situation is different, judgment is required in interpreting 
general concepts for individual settings.  Policies and Procedures for individual 
laboratory sections provide specific safety information for those sections of the 
laboratory. The type of safety equipment will depend on the task and degree of 
exposure anticipated.   
Some laboratories contain more than one type of hazardous material.  For example, 
General Chemistry may work with chemicals, biological agents, and radioactive 
materials.  In such cases, the protective equipment and work practices to be used are 
those that provide protection against the most hazardous agent or meet the most 
stringent legal requirement. If you have any concerns about implementing general 
safety concepts or specific safety protocols consult your direct Supervisor or 
Laboratory Compliance Officer (Lab Safety Officer).   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 18 
LBA200 
More specific information regarding chemical and biological safety can be found in 
the laboratory Chemical Hygiene Plan and Exposure Control Plan.  
A. PRECAUTIONS TO PREVENT PHYSICAL INJURY TO PERSONNEL 
Personnel shall take caution to prevent physical injury through proper utilization 
of personal protective equipment, sharps containers, proper biohazard protocol, 
and engineering devices available to each employee. 
B. REPORTING SAFETY RELATED EVENTS 
Hazardous conditions or practices shall be reported to the lab safety officer and/or 
appropriate personnel.  All incidents and accidents shall be reported in the Safety 
Event System (RLDatix).  Refer to OrgOps/GN/019 for instruction. Events are 
reviewed immediately by all appropriate lab leadership and corrective action, 
where needed, is implemented immediately.  Events and follow-up are reported to 
Lab Medical Directors at least quarterly. 
The Laboratory complies with the FDA Medical Device Reporting 
Requirements in accordance with the hospital’s Safety Event Reporting Policy.  
Any laboratory device-related adverse patient event, which has or may have 
caused or contributed to a patient death or serious patient injury, must be reported 
as soon as medical personnel become aware of the event.  An “RLDatix Safety 
Event Report” is completed and immediately sent to Risk Management, who files 
the report with the FDA no later than 10 days from the time medical personnel 
become aware of the event.  The hospital will submit an annual report of device-
related deaths and serious injuries to FDA, if any such event was reported during 
the previous year. Annual reports must be submitted by January 1 of each year 
and records of MDR reports are kept by Risk Management for 2 years. 
Any piece of laboratory equipment or instrument hardware, reagents, specimen 
collection device, or other apparatus that was involved in the event must be 
removed from use and preserved.  Part numbers, lot numbers, expiration dates, 
and manufacturer information must all be recorded. Laboratory personnel are 
educated through mandatory annual hospital safety education.  Employees are 
also made aware of the reporting requirements through Laboratory Orientation, 
Compliance Training, and departmental staff meetings. 
C. MEDICAL DEVICE ALERTS/RECALLS 
The laboratory will be notified of a recall through direct notification by the 
supplier/manufacturer, through Recall Manager software used by the Health 
System to disseminate recalls received at the system level, or both. 
Upon notification of the Recall, the appropriate department or lab will: 
1. Investigate for affected product 
2. Follow instructions provided by the manufacturer 
3. Determine potential patient impact 
4. Consult with Compliance Officer and Medical Director to determine next 
steps if necessary.  Patient Chart Review or Physician notification letters may 
be implemented. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 18 
LBA200 
 
All Alerts/Recalls including any follow-up actions taken are forwarded to the Lab 
Compliance Officer who will report to Safety Committee and Quality Committee.   
 
III. RESTRICTED LABORATORY ACCESS 
For the safety of staff and visitors, routine laboratory access is restricted to authorized 
hospital personnel only by use of electronic badge entry.  Vendors will present to 
security/vendor check-in for a temporary vendor badge and will then check-in with 
the lab.  Contractors gain access through the Plant Management Department.  Visitors 
will present to security or lab outpatient area.  Visitors will be evaluated for potential 
entry into the lab.  Visitors, including children and pets, are not allowed in areas 
where hazardous substances are stored or in use or hazardous activities are in 
progress. Students occasionally may enter laboratories as part of educational 
programs under carefully controlled and supervised conditions.  Colleagues, 
prospective students, and others may be invited into laboratories for legitimate 
academic and research purposes.   
 
IV. FIRE PREVENTION, CONTROL, PROTOCOL 
Refer to Lab/Department Specific Fire (Code Red) Response Plans for the 
location of fire alarm pulls, fire extinguishers, exits/evacuation routes. 
It is essential that laboratory employees realize the danger of fire and explosion, and 
that they observe safe fire prevention practices. The most common ignition sources of 
flammable-liquid fires and explosions are open flames, electrical equipment sparks, 
overheating and friction.  Operations or equipment that creates ignition sources 
should be eliminated from flammable liquid areas.  Most flammable-liquids are toxic 
in some degree and require ventilation to safeguard the health of employees.  
Ventilation that is safe from a health standpoint will usually be more than adequate to 
overcome any explosions.  Friction due to poor lubrication or damaged moving parts 
of electrical equipment is a common cause of fire. Frequent inspection and good 
maintenance will prevent generation of high frictional heat caused by instruments.    
Laboratory staff shall comply with the facility’s policy for handling flammable 
substances.  The following precautions are emphasized:  
• Aerosol Containers: 
Ensure that aerosol containers are not punctured, nor the contents sprayed near a 
fire or open flame.  Do not incinerate aerosol containers under pressure. 
• Storage of Flammables: 
Do not store explosive or highly flammable substances in the department unless 
such storage is in an approved cabinet, segregated from combustible materials. Do 
not store flammables in refrigerators not designed for that purpose.   
• Flammable Waste:   
Waste will be labeled and dated for the date it is declared a waste, stored in an 
appropriate container, and placed in the hospital flammable storage room to be OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 18 
LBA200 
picked up and removed.  All flammable and Hazardous waste will be removed by 
the Medical Center’s Hazardous Waste Contractor. 
 
If a fire occurs in the Laboratory area shut off electrical equipment, Medical Gas, 
Vacuum, and Air valves.  
 
A. General Fire Protocol/Procedure:   
• Remain calm–do not panic. 
• Do not use elevators. 
• For a fire detected in the facility, but not in your immediate area remain in place 
until the all-clear is given or until it becomes necessary to move/evacuate. 
• For a fire detected in your immediate area f ollow the protocol noted in the 
acronym “RACE”. 
 
Rescue:   Remove patients or anyone in danger away from the 
area of the fire so there is a closed door between them 
and the fire. 
Alarm:   Pull the nearest fire alarm box and call the Code Red. 
Confine:   Close the doors to contain the smoke and fire. 
Extinguish/Evacuate:   Use a fire extinguisher to extinguish the fire or 
evacuate the area if necessary. 
  
B. Fire Extinguisher Use: 
Fire extinguishers are located in laboratories, corridors, public areas, and other 
locations indicated by building and life safety codes.  Plant management provides, 
inspects, and maintains fire extinguishers, and provides new and replacement 
extinguishers as indicated.  In the event of a fire, follow procedure outlined below 
(P.A.S.S.). 
  
Pull:   Remove the retaining bar from handle of extinguisher. 
Aim:   Direct nozzle of extinguisher at the base of the fire. 
Squeeze:   Depress the handle of extinguisher by squeezing handle. 
Sweep:   Move extinguisher nozzle from side to side to cover the base of fire. 
 
C. Methods of Fire and Smoke Containment  
The basic techniques are: 
• Extinguish or control fire using available firefighting equipment.  Never try to 
use a water hose.  Do not attempt to fight fire if it endangers your safety. 
• If it is impossible to subdue the fire, the door should be shut. 
• Place wet linens or blankets at t he base of the door to help confine smoke and 
fire. 
• In the event of intense smoke, lie down on the floor and have the patients do 
the same. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 5 of 18 
LBA200 
• Never open a door that feels hot to the touch. 
 
D. Laboratory Doors  
Fire and life safety codes require that laboratory  doors be kept closed at all times.  
Keeping doors closed also helps ensure that ventilation systems work properly and 
maintain contaminant-containing pressure differentials between labs and corridors.  
This is especially important in newer buildings with sensitive energy conservation 
systems.  
 
V. HYGIENE 
A. Personal hygiene is extremely important to persons working in a laboratory.  
Contamination of food, beverages, or smoking materials are routes of potential 
exposure to toxic chemicals or biological agents through ingestion.  Therefore, 
Laboratory personnel shall not prepare, store or consume food or beverages, 
pipette by mouth; smoke; apply lip balm or cosmetics; or handle contact lenses in 
the work area.  This familiar elementary safety rule shall be followed by everyone 
working in or visiting a laboratory.  
B. Hand Hygiene is a primary safeguard against inadvertent exposure to toxic 
chemicals or biological agents. Always perform Hand Hygiene after removing 
gloves (in patient care situations, before and after gloving), and before leaving 
the laboratory.  Wash your hands after removing protective clothing, and before 
eating, drinking, smoking, applying cosmetics, lip balm, contact lenses, and using 
the restroom. Perform Hand Hygiene periodically during the day at intervals 
indicated by the nature of your work.  Use alcohol-based Hand Sanitizer or wash 
with soap and running water, with hands held downward to flush the 
contamination off the hands.  Turn the water off with a clean paper towel to 
prevent recontamination and dry your hands with clean towels. Follow CDC, 
WHO and hospital policy regarding hand washing.  
C. Confine long hair and loose clothing when needed in the laboratory to keep them 
from catching fire, dipping into chemicals, biohazards, or becoming entangled in 
moving machinery.   
  
VI. PERSONAL PROTECTIVE CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT 
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) protects you from injury due to absorbing, 
inhaling or coming into physical contact with hazardous materials.  You have a 
responsibility to dress sensibly for laboratory work.  Although not required, a 
“Laboratory Uniform” of scrubs and dedicated work shoes will protect your other 
clothing from becoming contaminated or ruined.  You are responsible for using any 
additional Personal Protective Equipment provided when they are required for safety.   
 
All Personal Protective Equipment shall be used and maintained in a sanitary and 
reliable condition and shall be cleaned or replaced regularly to avoid spreading 
contamination.   
 
PPE may include laboratory coats, aprons, gloves, shoe covers, eye protection, masks 
and respirators.  PPE are selected based on the nature of the hazardous agent.  Annual OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 6 of 18 
LBA200 
PPE Hazard Assessments are performed in each Laboratory or Department to 
determine which items should be utilized to perform laboratory tasks. 
 
A. Coats 
Lab Coats are essential to protect street clothing and scrub uniforms from biological 
agent aerosols or chemical splashes and spills, vapors, or dusts.  Lab coats are to be 
worn when the task being performed may be reasonably anticipated to splash or 
spray hazardous materials, blood or other potentially infectious materials.  While 
performing the aforementioned tasks, lab coats should be worn fully buttoned with 
the sleeves down.  Lab coats should not be altered from their original form.   
Disposable Lab coats are supplied by the lab.  They should be replaced when they 
are visibly soiled or once they begin to exhibit signs of excessive wear such as holes 
and tears.  Lab coats shall not be altered in any way that will inhibit the 
effectiveness of the protection they are meant to provide. 
 
B. Clothing 
Suitable clothing shall be worn in the laboratory. Cover unprotected skin whenever 
possible, as clothing may absorb liquid spills that would otherwise come in contact 
with your skin.  
Confine loose clothing when needed in the laboratory to keep them from catching 
fire, dipping into chemicals, biohazards, or becoming entangled in moving 
machinery.   
Regular clothing that is suspected of being contaminated shall be evaluated to 
determine a proper decontamination or disposal method. 
 
C. Footwear  
To protect against splashes or broken glass, do not wear sandals, open-toed shoes, 
or perforated shoes in the laboratory. If performing a task that includes a reasonable 
expectation of excessive splash or spill, such as performing autopsy, you may need 
the added protection of disposable shoe covers. 
Shoes suspected of being contaminated shall be evaluated to determine a proper 
decontamination or disposal method. 
 
D. Eye protection/Face Protection   
Eye and face protection devices shall be worn, or work shall be completed behind 
an effective barrier protection whenever splashes, spray, spatter, or droplets of 
blood, chemical, or other potentially infectious materials (OPIM) may be generated 
and eye, nose, o r mouth contamination can be reasonably anticipated.  Eyes are 
very vascular and can quickly absorb many hazardous agents. Eye protection 
devices are available in each section for staff where eye contamination may occur.   
 
Safety glasses with clear side s hields are adequate protection for general 
laboratory use.  Goggles shall be worn when there is danger of splashing chemicals 
or flying particles; such as when chemicals are poured, or glassware is used under OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 7 of 18 
LBA200 
elevated or reduced pressure.  A face shield wi th goggles  offers maximum 
protection (for example, with vacuum systems that may implode).   
Corrective lenses in spectacles do not in themselves provide sufficient protection.  
Regulations require that persons whose vision requires corrective lenses, and w ho 
are required to wear eye protection, shall wear goggles over their eyeglasses, 
prescription safety glasses, or goggles with prescription lenses.   
 
E. Wearing of Contact Lenses in Laboratories  
While there is no prohibition against  the wearing of contact lenses in labs , staff 
should understand that lenses may be difficult to remove in case of a splash.  In the 
event of a splash to an individual wearing contact lenses, act as you would for any 
splash.  Copiously irrigate the eye with water, hold the eyelids apart while keeping 
the eye open as wide as possible, and do not worry about losing the lens. 
 
F. Gloves 
Gloves are worn to prevent contact with toxic or biological agents, burns from hot 
or extremely cold surfaces or corrosives, or cuts from sharp objects.  Skin contact 
is a source of exposure to infectious agents and toxic chemicals, including 
carcinogens. Many gloves are made for specific uses.   
For adequate protection, select the correct glove for the hazard in question.  
1. A leather glove provides good protection for picking up broken glass, handling 
objects with sharp edges, and inserting glass tubing int o stoppers.  However, 
because they absorb liquid, leather gloves do not provide protection from 
chemicals, nor are they adequate for handling extremely hot surfaces.   
2. Gloves designed to insulate against hot/cold surfaces and dry ice are not suitable 
for handling chemicals.   
3. The chemical resistance of rubber or plastic gloves varies greatly according to 
the glove material and the chemical handled.  If you are unsure if your gloves 
are compatible with the chemical you are working with, you should review the 
SDS or contact the manufacturer  of the chemical and/or the chemical . (Most 
SDS sheets will recommend the most protective glove material in their 
Protective Equipment section.) 
Chemicals can eventually permeate all glove materials.  Select glove materials 
resistant to the chemical being used and change gloves periodically to minimize 
penetration.   
Inspect gloves for punctures or tears before putting them on.   To prevent 
contamination of your hands or work surfaces  from grossly contaminated gloves , 
you may  wash rubber or plastic gloves thoroughly with water before removing 
them.  Disposable gloves should not be re-used. Pull off disposable gloves inside 
out and dispose of them according to the contamination hazard. Always remove 
contaminated gloves before leaving the laboratory.  Always wash your hands after 
removing gloves, leaving the work area and before eating, drinking, smoking, using OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 8 of 18 
LBA200 
the restroom, or applying cosmetics.  (See Exposure Control Plan for additional 
information.) 
 
G. Latex Gloves 
Due to the prevalence of allergies to natural latex prote ins, all FMOLHS facilities 
have restricted the use of latex as much as possible.  The Laboratory has replaced 
all latex gloves with the exception of gloves in the Histology Frozen Section Room, 
the Histology Grossing Room, and the Autopsy Suite where there is no possibility 
of patient sensitization. Powdered gloves in all forms, both latex and non-latex, are 
banned under the FDA’s Banned Medical Device ruling.  Powdered gloves are 
prohibited in this facility. 
 
VII. HOUSEKEEPING   
Keeping things clean and organized helps provide a safe laboratory.  Keep drawers and 
cabinet doors closed and electrical cords off the floor to avoid tripping hazards.  Keep 
aisles clear of obstacles such as boxes, chemical containers, and o ther storage items 
that might be put there even temporarily.  Avoid slipping hazards by cleaning up spilled 
liquids promptly and keeping the floor free of stirring rods, glass beads, stoppers, and 
other such items.  Never block or even partially block the path to an exit or to safety 
equipment such as a fire extinguisher or safety shower.   
A. Storage 
Make sure that supplies and equipment on shelves provide sufficient clearance so 
the fire sprinkler heads operate correctly.  There shall not be any storage within 18 
inches of the ceiling or a sprinkler head.  Patient supplies should be stored at least 
6 inches off the floor.  Heavy objects and chemicals should be stored below 5 feet. 
No items should be stored beneath sinks. 
 
B. Lab Personnel Cleaning Duties 
Cleaning duties that are the specific responsibility of laboratory personnel shall be 
conducted on a regular basis to prevent accidental contact with hazards and to 
reduce clutter in the lab space.  Laboratory equipment, including refrigerators, 
freezers and work surfaces, shall be cleaned by laboratory staff.   
 
C. Facility Cleaning   
A custodial service has been contracted to clean floors, bathrooms, and empty non-
biohazard trash on a routine basis. Custodians shall not be expected to mop any 
floors that have not been properly decontaminated after a spill.  In preparation for 
the cleaning service, the laboratory staff shall remove hazards that the custodians 
might encounter during their activities.  Chemical containers on the floor and all 
containers of bio-hazardous waste shall be moved by laboratory occupants to a safe 
and secure location before custodians enter the lab.  In the event that testing being 
performed requires that a particular laboratory or department not be disturbed, 
custodial floor cleaning can be suspended or re-scheduled on request of laboratory 
area occupants.   
 
D. Facility Maintenance   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 9 of 18 
LBA200 
Likewise, if maintenance is required on any component of the laboratory, such as a 
sink or piece of equipment, the same principles of preparation apply.  The 
supervisor shall ensure that the immediate area is decontaminated, and any 
infectious agents or chemicals removed to another secure area prior to initiation of 
work.  The laboratory supervisor shall inform maintenance personnel of the 
presence of any hazardous materials to which they might become exposed. 
 
E. Spills and Clean-up 
Clean/contain all spills i mmediately using an antiviral agent or spill kit as 
applicable.  Facility maintenance personnel are available to help clean up larger 
chemical and biological spills and dispose of chemical waste.   
 
VIII.     WASTE DISPOSAL 
Laboratory waste is segregated at the point of use into categories that include but are not 
limited to: 
• Medical Waste/Biohazard 
• Medical Waste/Biohazard sharps 
• Chemical waste (see Chemical Hygiene Plan) 
• Recycled waste (e.g., paper, aluminum) 
• Regular trash 
 
A. General Disposal 
Place all waste in appropriate containers designated for waste containment. Do not 
allow waste to spill over.  Clean/contain spills immediately using an antiviral agent 
or spill kit as applicable. 
 
B. Biohazard Containers  
Biohazard containers are kept upright throughout use and are routinely checked by 
laboratory technical personnel.  All infectious waste is placed in leakproof biohazard 
containers marked Biohazard and are stored in a Soiled Utilities Storage Room.  Full 
Biohazard bags are placed inside of a larger biohazard can by laboratory staff.  Staff 
moving full biohazard bags should do so in a safe manner.  To prevent accidental 
tears, bags should never be dragged on the floor.  Cans are retrieved by 
housekeeping staff or Stericycle representatives and disposed of by incineration at 
Stericycle Regional Incinerators.   
 
C. Biohazard sharps containers are closeable, puncture-resistant, and leakproof on 
the sides and bottom.  All sharps and glassware are disposed of immediately (or as 
soon as possible).  These containers are placed in the immediate area of use ideally 
no more than 100 feet away from the user.  Containers should not be filled over ¾ 
full and should be utilized appropriately by staff. 
 
Reusable Biohazard sharps containers are picked up by Stericycle staff from 
individual departments on a scheduled basis.  Stericycle staff swap out full 
containers for empty containers and dispose of them in the proper fashion as stated OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 10 of 18 
LBA200 
above.  Reusable containers are not opened, emptied, or cleaned manually or in any 
other manner that would expose employees to the risk of percutaneous injury.  
Reusable biohazard sharps containers are not to be placed with disposable biohazard 
bags or inside of the larger biohazard cans. 
 
D. Regular trash includes the remainder of waste in the laboratory that poses no health 
or environmental risk. This is disposed of through routine facility waste streams in 
appropriate containers. 
Put ordinary wastepaper in a wastepaper basket separate from chemical wastes.  
Broken glass and other sharp items shall be disposed of in rigid, puncture resistant 
containers to protect persons collecting the waste materials.  Needles and syringes 
that are not contaminated may be sealed in a rigid, puncture-resistant container 
and placed in a regular waste receptacle.  When discarding empty boxes or other 
containers bearing hazardous materials labels, the labels should be defaced or 
removed before disposal.  Contaminated boxes or containers shall not be disposed 
of in the regular trash. 
 
E. Chemical wastes and unwanted chemicals shall be disposed of promptly and 
appropriately according to manufacturer’s instructions and SDS.  Chemical waste 
should not be left to clutter a laboratory.  Follow the Medical Center’s Chemical 
Disposal Protocol when removing waste and chemicals from inventory.  
Additional information on disposal of human body fluids or other potentially 
infectious materials appears in the Laboratory’s Exposure Control Plan.   
 
IX. TRANSPORTATION OF DIAGNOSTIC/INFECTIOUS SPECIMENS 
The laboratory prepares infectious material for shipment in accordance with 
applicable federal, state, and local regulations.  All personnel involved in the 
packaging and shipping of infectious substances have completed certified training 
according to the regulations, and recurrent training must occur every two years.  
Training is provided online by Mayo Medical Laboratories, Transportation 
Department, 3050 Superior Drive NW, Rochester, MN 55901.  Records including 
individuals name, date of training, copy of training materials used, and a copy of 
certification issued showing successful completion of the training are maintained in 
the employee’s departmental file.   
 
The lab follows all CDC and state guidelines for safe handling and processing of 
specimens suspected of containing avian influenza virus, SARS coronavirus, Ebola or 
other similar emerging pathogens and communicable diseases.  Please refer to lab 
policy-LBA203 and infection controls policy- IC2013 for specific guidelines.  There 
are also department specific procedures covering this practice of handling Category A 
substances.   
 
A personal vehicle s hall not be used to transport hazardous materials.  The U.S. 
Department of Transportation (DOT) requires that a licensed hazardous materials 
transporter be employed if hazardous material is transported on a public highway or by 
air or water.  DOT also requ ires that all individuals offering a hazardous material for OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 11 of 18 
LBA200 
transport receive training. The material to be shipped shall be properly packaged in 
accordance with all applicable regulations and appropriate shipping papers shall be 
provided. 
 
Biological materials shall be shipped in compliance with DOT and Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention regulations.  Transport of regulated plant or animal pathogens 
shall comply with U.S. Department of Agriculture and Louisiana Department of 
Agriculture regulations.   
 
X. LABORATORY EQUIPMENT 
The laboratory shall maintain information on the operation, maintenance, and 
inspection of equipment and devices.  Operator instruction manuals are maintained in 
the individual lab department. Equipment and devices covered by this policy shall be 
inspected to assure operational qualifications before initial use and in accordance with 
manufacturer’s recommendation and regulatory standards thereafter. 
A. General Maintenance Equipment 
• Assure that equipment is operating properly.  Remove equipment from service 
and contact technical service/biomedical engineering immediately when 
problems arise.  
• New equipment is inventoried by the Bio-Medical Department upon receipt 
by the medical center, evaluated, and scheduled for periodic service as 
indicated. 
• A list of equipment maintained by individual laboratories are filed in that 
section. 
• Maintenance and quality control records are also filed in the sections where the 
equipment is allocated.  
• Routine Preventive maintenance is performed on equipment in order to ensure 
accurate and reliable laboratory results as well as a safe work environment.   
 
B. Centrifuges 
Centrifuges should be placed in a location where vibration will not cause supplies 
to fall or cause interference in testing.  To prevent droplet or aerosol exposure, 
centrifuges should remain closed until the rotor stops spinning completely.  The lab 
should make every effort to purchase centrifuges with built-in locking mechanisms.  
Centrifuge rotors shall be balanced each time they are used.  Centrifuges should be 
cleaned in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.  Always close the 
centrifuge lid during operation, and do not leave the centrifuge until full operating 
speed is attained and the machine appears to be running safely  without vibration.  
Stop the centrifuge immediately and check the load balances if vibration occurs.  
Check swing-out buckets for clearance and support.  
 
C. Electrical Equipment  
Electrical equipment shall be inspected and approved for service by the Bio-
Medical Department prior to initial use. Electrical grounding for laboratory 
equipment is adequate and checked for current leakage before initial use, after OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 12 of 18 
LBA200 
repair or modification, and when a problem is suspected.  If manufacturer’s 
recommendations for grounding are available, they must be followed. 
 
Electrical extension cords should be avoided, where practical, by installing 
additional electrical outlets. When extension cords  or power strips  are used, they 
will be medical grade and supplied by the Plant Mana gement department.  Power 
strips will be mounted off the floor and extension cords will be kept as short as 
practical to avoid tripping hazard and tangles.  Electrical cords on equipment shall 
be discarded or repaired if frayed or damaged.   
 
Electrical equipment should be placed so as to minimize the possibility that water, 
or chemicals could spill on it or that water could condense and enter the motor or 
controls.  Electrical equipment should not be placed by safety showers.   
 
Only qualified individuals are permitted to make electrical repairs to any kind 
of electrical equipment. If a worker receives an electrical shock and is in contact 
with the energized device, use nonconductive gloves or a non-conducting device to 
pull or push the victim free from the electrical source.  Help victims only if you are 
certain that you will not endanger your own safety.  Turn off or disconnect the 
power source if possible.  Report a Code Blue for that laboratory section. If a trained 
person is available, start CPR if necessary.   Get medical assistance at once.   
 
D. Syringes and Scalpel Blades 
Syringes used with hazardous agents shall have needle -locking or equivalent tips 
to assure that the needles cannot separate during use.  Disposal of needles and 
syringes contaminated with infectious agents are to be discarded into a 
biohazardous sharps container. Recapping of needles potentially contaminated with 
human blood, blood products or other potentially infectious materials is prohibited.  
 
E. Glassware  
All attempts shall be made to procure and use disposable glassware.   Defer to 
manufacturer recommendations/specifications for obtaining any needed glassware 
for testing. 
Because it can be damaged in shipping, handling, or storage inspect glassware 
carefully before using to be sure it does not have hairline cracks or chips.  Even the 
smallest flaw renders glassware unacceptable and possibly dangerous.  Flawed 
glassware shall be discarded in rigid, puncture-resistant sharps containers.   
 
When cleaning laboratory glassware, wear appropriate gloves that have been 
checked for tears or ho les.  Handle glassware carefully and watch out for broken 
glass at the bottom of the sink.  A rubber or plastic mat in the sink may help 
minimize breakage.  
 
 
XI. LABORATORY VENTILATION   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 13 of 18 
LBA200 
Laboratories shall be provided with general ventilation adequate for employee comfort 
and sufficient to supply air for chemical fume hoods and other local ventilation devices.  
Because the general air supply is not adequate for manipulating hazardous materials on 
an open lab bench, volatile or toxic chemicals shall be handled in a chemical fume hood 
or other appropriate containment device.  
 
A. General Ventilation 
Laboratory ventilation shall change the air at least 10 times per hour, depending on 
the nature of the laboratory work.  In special circumstances, air in laboratories shall 
be at a negative pressure with respect to the rest of the building. Air diffusers or 
grills shall be so designed and located as to direct the air over the laboratory 
personnel and sweep the contaminated air away from their breathing zone.  To 
promote uniform distribution and mixing of air in large laboratories, the supply 
registers shall deliver the air in all directions, at a typical velocity of 20 linear feet 
per minute.  
 
Problems with general ventilation shall be reported promptly to Plant Management.  
Adjustments or alterations to the general ventilation equipment of a laboratory shall 
be performed only under the supervision of Plant Management.  On occasion, Plant 
Management will issue notices of intent to perform maintenance work on the 
ventilation system.  These notices shall be heeded, and chemical fume hoods shall 
not be used when Plant Management is involved in repairing or adjusting the 
ventilation system.  The supervisor of that laboratory area is responsible for 
ensuring that the Plant Manag ement crew is informed of the hazards in the area.  
The chemical fume hood shall be clear of toxic materials and properly 
decontaminated before the work begins. An inventory list of chemicals removed 
from the chemical fume hood should be available if needed. 
 
B. Chemical Fume Hoods  
A chemical fume hood is an important engineering control for preventing exposure 
to hazardous materials.  In conjunction with sound laboratory techniques, a 
chemical fume hood serves as an effective means for capturing toxic, carcinogenic, 
offensive and/ o r flammable vapors, or other airborne contaminates that would 
otherwise enter the general laboratory atmosphere.  With the sash lowered, the 
chemical fume hood also forms a physical barrier to protect workers from hazards 
such as chemical splashes or spray s, fires, and minor explosions.  Chemical fume 
hoods may also provide effective containment for accidental spills of chemicals, 
although this is not their primary purpose.  The deliberate release and venting of 
chemicals (i.e. evaporation) in chemical fume hoods shall never be used as a means 
of disposal. 
 
Turbulence is the greatest enemy to proper chemical fume hood operation. 
Turbulence can lead to back spill of contaminates out of the chemical fume hood.  
The operator has significant control over the fac tors that cause turbulence and, 
consequently, the chemical fume hood’s capture efficiency.   For example, 
chemical fume hoods are not meant for storage of chemicals.  Storing chemical OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 14 of 18 
LBA200 
containers and equipment in a chemical fume hood impairs its performance .  The 
containers and equipment create turbulence as airflow is diverted around them. 
Volatile, odorous chemicals and highly toxic gases shall be stored in ventilated 
cabinets.  Turbulence is also created at the face of the chemical fume hood when 
obstacles to air flow such as containers and equipment are too close to the sash.  
Containers and equipment should always be moved six inches back from the inner 
edge of the air sill. This practice can reduce vapor concentrations at the chemical 
fume hood face by about 90 percent.  
 
Even the movement of one’s hands can interrupt air flow patterns and disturb proper 
circulation of exhaust air.  When reaching into the chemical fume hood, take care 
to move your hand slowly with smooth gestures and no jerking.  If work ing at a 
chemical fume hood with a horizontal sash, use one of the panes as a barrier to 
splashes. Position the pane directly in front of you and move your hands on opposite 
sides of the pane.   
 
Chemical fume hood performance is also dependent on the room’s air flow pattern, 
including air flow generated by drafts and persons working nearby.  Minimize 
traffic and opening and closing of doors near the chemical fume hood.  When the 
chemical fume hood is in use, the sashes should be pulled down as far as workable 
for minimal external airflow interference and maximum barrier protection. 
Chemical fume hoods shall be evaluated for performance upon installation and 
following any alterations.  Any problems with hood ventilation or air flow should 
be reported to Plant Management for inspection and evaluation.  Refer to the 
Chemical Hygiene Plan  for further information regarding the operation of fume 
hoods.  
 
XII. SAFETY SHOWERS   
Safety sho wers shall be installed in all areas where employees may be exposed to 
splashes or spills of materials that may be injurious to the eyes and body.  As a general 
rule, new shower installations shall adhere to the recommendation for shower location 
and minimum performance requirements established in American National Standards 
Institute Z-358.15.5.2.  Showers shall be placed as close to the hazard as possible, but 
in no case more than 10 seconds travel time from the hazard.  Plant Management shall 
ensure that safety showers are installed in the department where needed.  
Every laboratory employee shall be instructed in the location(s) and use of a safety 
shower.  Ideally, a person should be able to find the shower with his or her eyes closed.  
Safety showers shall provide a minimum of 20 gallons of water per minute and deliver 
the volume at a low velocity; a high -velocity shower could further damage injured 
tissue.  Ideally, the water temperature of the shower should be tepid to prevent pain or 
shock to a person standing under it for 1 5 minutes. Showers shall have quick opening 
valves with a delta bar or large ring within easy reach, but not so low as to be in the 
way.  
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 15 of 18 
LBA200 
Flammable–liquid cabinets or other hazardous equipment or material shall not be 
placed near a safety shower, and access to the shower or the activating handle shall not 
be impeded.  The floor shall be clear in a 3-inch diameter area under the shower.  
Plumbed safety showers and eye wash stations shall be tested and inspected on a routine 
schedule.  Showers require monthl y activation whereas eyewash stations require 
weekly activation and checks.  Inspection includes a visual check of visible plumbing 
and verification of proper operation.  Specific departmental staff perform these routine 
checks.  Lab Safety coordinator maintains the related records.  
 
XIII. EYEWASH FOUNTAIN  
Eyewash fountains providing a continuous, low pressure stream of aerated water shall 
be provided in each laboratory in which chemical or biological agents are used or 
stored. The eyewash shall be easily acces sible from any part of the laboratory.  If 
possible, the eyewash should be located near the safety shower so that, if necessary, 
the eyes can be washed while the body is showered.  Gravity -feed eyewash devices 
(wall-mounted or on mobile carts) are not recommended unless they provide adequate 
water supply for 15 minutes of eye washing and the stored water is treated so that it 
does not become contaminated.  For such units, a documented monthly maintenance 
program shall be established to ensure that the water supply remains in satisfactory and 
usable conditions.  Bottle -type portable eyewashes are not acceptable, as they do not 
have the capacity to deliver 0.4 gallons of water per minute. Eyewash stations are 
located next to safety showers.   
 
XIV. LABORATORY SINKS AND DRAIN TRAPS  
Every laboratory using chemical or biological agents shall have at least one sink, 
preferably located near the room exit, available for hand washing.  This sink will not 
be used for any other laboratory purpose such as glassware cleaning or waste disposal.  
The sink shall be cleaned regularly to eliminate contamination, and soap shall be 
supplied for hand washing.   
 
Drain traps in sinks, floors, and other places will dry out if they are not used regularly, 
allowing odors and contamination to back up into the room.  Drain traps shall be kept 
filled with water to prevent backup.  Also fill cup sinks on benches and in chemical 
fume hoods.  
 
XV. ULTRAVIOLET LIGHT 
Germicidal lamps using ultraviolet light are common fixtures in biolo gical safety 
cabinets; where they serve to destroy bacteria and molds.  These lamps are considered 
a high-level source of UV radiation; exposure to the lamps without adequate personal 
protection could result in skin or eye injury. 
Acute skin effects due to  direct UV exposure vary with dose.  Dermal effect s include 
erythema (sunburn), increase in pigmentation (sun tanning), and hyperplasia (increase 
in epidermal cell growth, resulting in enlargement of tissue).  UV radiation may also 
increase the cutaneous effects of certain solvents and photosensitizing chemicals.   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 16 of 18 
LBA200 
A great concern with UV eye exposure is that the victim is often unaware that damage 
is occurring.  Usually, no pain develops from the eye injury until four to six hours after 
the exposure.  The only way to prevent injury is to minimize eye exposure to UV light.  
Appropriate protection against UV exposure includes long sleeves and laboratory 
gloves.  For individuals particularly sensitive to UV light, suntan lotion on the exposed 
skin of the face is recommended.  ANSI approved shaded eye protection with side 
enclosures should be worn in the vicinity of a UV light fixture not shielded by a 
physical barrier.  
 
XVI. EXCESSIVE NOISE 
Laboratory equipment and instruments have associated noises from gears and blowers 
to motors and alarms.  If excessive noise levels are indicated (for example, people must 
shout to be heard) or i n the event of any complaint, the laboratory will contact pla nt 
services to measure the sound levels . If sound levels equal or exceed an 8 -hour time-
weighted average of 85 decibels, the laboratory will implement a corrective action plan.  
The facility may be required to supply ear plugs or install sound barriers if available. 
 
XVII. ERGONOMICS 
The laboratory will be a workplace that is designed to provide a safe environment with 
available support and information.  Staff activities and education are performed to 
reduce the risk of injury and improve the comfort of the work environment.  Ergonomic 
activities are under the direction of each lab manager, supervisor, and lab compliance 
officer.  It is the responsibility of the employees, the laboratory, and the facility to 
follow good ergonomic practices and to make improvements  in the workplace.  
Employees are provided with  initial and ongoing education/information in 
recommended ergonomic practices.  Employees reporting discomfort or pain will be 
referred to Employee Health and Risk Management.  Risk Management will schedule 
an ergonomic assessment to be performed by the Acute Physical Management 
Department.  The lab will make any recommended changes needed and will 
accommodate all work restrictions for employees under medical supervision.  The 
organization will provide employee health support if needed and will provide medical 
treatment if needed.  See LBA200-A for Lab Ergonomic Tips. 
 
XVIII. LOSS OF UTILITIES AND COMMUNICATION 
A Laboratory Administrator or after -hours charge tech  will organize communication 
between sections and nursin g service utilizing clerks, secretaries, phlebotomy 
technicians and other available employees as needed. 
• Electricity  
OLOLRMC maintains back-up power supply at all times by gas generators, which 
are tested monthly .  A  short delay should be followed by powering up of the 
facility’s back-up generator power.  All instrumentation should be plugged into the 
red emergency outlets available in each section.    
 
A. Water and Fuel Shortage   
Turn off equipment requiring an adequate water supply.  Make arrangements with 
Plant Management for water requirements.    OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 17 of 18 
LBA200 
 
B. Communications  
When systems fail, then one or a combination of the following systems may 
accomplish communication: 
a. Cellular telephones 
b. Laboratory/Hospital computer system including voalte phones 
c. Fax machines 
d. Laboratory courier 
 
XIX. TRAINING 
Each individual working in a laboratory where hazardous materials are used shall 
know and comply with laboratory and medical center safety rules and follow both 
written and oral instructions from supervisory staff.  Training is required under the 
OSHA Hazard Communication Standard, the OSHA Bloodborne Pathogens Standard, 
and various general industry standards such as OSHA Respiratory Protection 
Standard.  Medical center policy prohibits persons without appropriate training from 
working in laboratories and other areas where hazardous chemical and biological 
agents are used.  Federal law mandates training at the time of initial assignment to a 
laboratory or work area where exposure to these hazards is possible.   Additional 
training is required on introduction of a new chemical or biological exposure hazard 
or new or modified task and procedures which affect occupational exposure. 
Refresher training shall be conducted annually for employees working in areas of 
potential exposure to chemical hazards and bloodborne pathogens. Employees are to 
report any unsafe condition and any accident or exposure to chemicals or biological 
agents.  If the employee receives no responses or an unsatisfactory response, (s)he 
shall contact the Laboratory Safety Coordinator or Laboratory Compliance Officer, 
who will ensure confidentiality for the employee.  
Supervisors shall ensure that laboratory personnel are properly trained and shall 
verify that training is complete on the Employee training transcripts, initial training 
checklists, and competency assessment checklists where applicable. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
OSHA General Industry Standards, 29 CFR 1910.  Prudent Practices in the laboratory,  
Handling and Disposal of Chemicals (published by the National Research Council) 
 
ASSOCIATED POLICIES 
MIC.GEN.II.B.1 – Biosafety 
LBA034 - Laboratory Quality Control and Quality Assurance 
LBA030 – Laboratory Personnel Dress Code 
LBA202 - Chemical Hygiene Plan 
LBA201 - Exposure Control Plan 
LBA204 – Lab Emergency Preparedness 
CHMP-C-004 – Glassware Cleaning 
LBA413 - Transport of Biohazardous/Non-Biohazard Materials – Contract Services 
LBA414 - Transport of Biohazardous/Non-Biohazard Materials – LLS Personnel 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 18 of 18 
LBA200 
REVISIONS 
8/2009 (created), 3/2015, 8/25/17, 11/21/19, 3/10/2022,8/2/2023. 
 