OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R2 
Page 1 of 3 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA204-R6 
FIRE (CODE RED) RESPONSE PLAN– CHILDREN’S HOSPITAL LAB 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 9/12/19 7/30/2021 7/30/2021 
Supervisory Review D Leger 4/21/2021 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review T Rauch 7/30/2021 5/1/18 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of Lab Administration or designee. 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
If a Fire occurs in the Laboratory: 
• Perform RACE and Pass.   
• Evacuation will proceed as outlined below.   
  If the Fire occurs in an area other than lab, remain in place: 
• Until given the all-clear or 
• Instructed to evacuate or 
• It becomes apparent that evacuation is necessary (smoke compartment has been breached). OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R2 
Page 2 of 3 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Sign Locations: 
o Front of Laboratory  
▪ Front door by Central Processing 
▪ Front door in Transfusion Services 
o Back of Laboratory 
▪ Back double doors at the back of Core Lab 
▪ Back door by Venipuncture staging area 
• Adjacent smoke compartments are Located: 
o Through double doors toward Imaging 
o Through double doors toward the Kitchen 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
NOTE:  The Laboratory operates 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.  Responses during evening and night 
shifts will be performed by the Section designee. 
• Outpatient Laboratory Staff  
o Will assist in moving any patients and visitors to safety, explaining the situation.  Any 
Laboratory Team Member may assist with a patient or visitor.   
o Will ensure that all registered lab patients are accounted for 
o Will pay special attention to those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities. 
o Any Lab Team Member performing a procedure on an outpatient will remain with 
the patient and any visitors and will assist them to safety. 
o Lab Supervisory Staff or designee will check the Outpatient Waiting area to ensure 
that it is empty after hours. 
• Venipuncture staff or designee will move any Phlebotomy carts out of the walking path in the 
Venipuncture Staging area room.  
• Phlebotomists, MT/MLT, and MLA’s will close any open doors or windows nearest to them at 
the time that the Code Red is announced. 
• Laboratory Manager, Supervisor, Senior Technologist, or after-hours Charge Tech will 
ensure that all employees are accounted for. 
 
Location of Fire Pull Stations – There are no pull stations inside of the Laboratory.  The nearest 
pull station is located: 
• By the Clean Sharps Storage Room next to the double exit doors at the loading dock (exit the 
double doors at the back of the lab, turn right, turn left). 
 
Location of Fire Extinguishers: 
• Near Urinalysis 
• Outside the department across from the Blood Bank 
• Outside the department close to the entrance to Materials Management 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Instruments do not need to be turned off OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R2 
Page 3 of 3 
• Combustible products: 
o All Lab Departments have flammable Reagents/Chemicals used in testing 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o Exit the back of the laboratory through double doors or venipuncture staging area and 
turn Left. Pass through double doors into the next smoke compartment. If needed, turn 
Right and exit the building into the Team Member Parking Lot. 
o Team Members outside of the Laboratory when a Code Red is called will shelter in 
place and will not attempt to return to the laboratory until an all-clear is given.   If it 
becomes necessary to evacuate from the current location, Lab Team Members should 
attempt to make their way to the Lab Rendezvous point if it is safe to do so.     
 
• Secondary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o If the primary evacuation route is inaccessible, All Lab Team Members will evacuate 
from the front of the lab.  Exit the front of the laboratory through the doors in 
Transfusion Services or Central Processing and turn Right. At the end of the hallway 
turn Right then Left and continue out of the building through the Emergency Room.   
 
 
 
 
RELATED POLICIES 
LBA204-Emergency Preparedness 
ECEP001-Emergency Operations Plan  
ECEP007-OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan  
ECLS-012-Department Specific Code Red Response Plan (Template) 
 
REVISIONS 
9/12/19 (created) 