OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R4 
Page 1 of 3 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA204-R4 
FIRE (CODE RED) RESPONSE PLAN– NORTH BATON ROUGE LAB 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 9/30/2022 3/16/2023 3/16/2023 
Supervisory Review K. Coots 3/8/2023 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 2/11/2023 11/3/2017 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of Lab Administration or designee. 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
If a Fire occurs in the Laboratory: 
• Perform RACE and Pass.   
• Evacuation will proceed as outlined below.   
  If the Fire occurs in an area other than lab, remain in place: 
• Until given the all-clear or 
• Instructed to evacuate or 
• It becomes apparent that evacuation is necessary (smoke compartment has been breached). OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R4 
Page 2 of 3 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exit Locations: 
o Back Exit - Out of the laboratory by the employee restroom.  
o Front Exit - Out of the laboratory through the Outpatient draw site. 
• Smoke Compartments: 
o Laboratory does not contain any smoke compartments. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
NOTE:  The Laboratory operates 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.  Responses during evening and night 
shifts will be performed by the Section designee. 
• Laboratory Manager, Supervisor, Senior Technologist, or after-hours Charge Tech: 
o Will move any items out of the walking path of the exit routes 
o Will close any open doors or windows 
o Will ensure that all employees are accounted for. 
 
Location of Fire Pull Stations – There are no pull stations inside of the Laboratory.  The nearest 
pull stations are located: 
• Outside of the laboratory located next to both front and back stairwell exits (near radiology and 
near back exit of lab) 
 
 Location of Fire Extinguishers: 
• In the laboratory, in the back hallway near the employee restroom.  
  
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Instruments do not need to be turned off 
• Combustible products: 
o All Lab Departments have flammable Reagents/Chemicals used in testing 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o Team Members will proceed out of the laboratory by the employee restroom, turn left 
toward stairwell, proceed down to the first floor, and exit to outside from the door 
inside the stairwell. Lab Rendezvous point will be the back of the building at the back 
of the employee parking lot. 
o Team Members outside of the Laboratory when a Code Red is called will shelter in 
place and will not attempt to return to the laboratory until an all-clear is given.   If it 
becomes necessary to evacuate from the current location, Lab Team Members should 
attempt to make their way to the Lab Rendezvous point if it is safe to do so.     
• Secondary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
a. If the primary evacuation route is inaccessible, All Lab Team Members will 
evacuate from the front of the lab, out the laboratory through the Outpatient draw 
site, go straight toward radiology, turn right toward the stairwell, proceed down to 
the first floor, and exit stairwell, turn Left, and proceed down short hallway, turn 
Left and exit from front of building. Lab Rendezvous point will be the front of the 
building in the visitor parking lot. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R4 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
RELATED POLICIES 
LBA204-Emergency Preparedness 
ECEP001-Emergency Operations Plan  
ECEP007-OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan  
ECLS-012-Department Specific Code Red Response Plan (Template) 
 
REVISIONS 
 11/3/2017(created – NBR.POL-8), 9/30/2022 