OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R7 
Page 1 of 3 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA204-R7 
FIRE (CODE RED) RESPONSE PLAN– BLOOD DONOR CENTER 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 6/11/19 8/27/2019 8/27/2019 
Blood Donor Service  and Core Lab Director Review J Teague 6/26/2019 Origination Date 
Blood Donor Service Medical Director Review T Rauch 6/29/2019 5/1/18 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 7/30/2019  
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of Lab Administration or designee. 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
If a Fire occurs in the Blood Donor Center: 
• Perform RACE and Pass.   
• Evacuation will proceed as outlined below.   
  If the Fire occurs in an area other than Blood Donor Center, remain in place: 
• Until given the all-clear or OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R7 
Page 2 of 3 
• Instructed to evacuate or 
• It becomes apparent that evacuation is necessary (smoke compartment has been breached). 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exit Locations: 
o Front Door of Blood Donor Center waiting room – exits to front of the hospital between 
elevator D and CC’s Coffee House. 
o Side of Blood Donor Center – exits to the Administration Hallway. 
• Smoke Compartments: 
o Blood Donor Center does not contain any smoke compartments. 
o The nearest smoke compartment can be reached by moving toward the back of the 
hospital.  Follow the hallway between the Laboratory and the Treatment Center and 
continue into the Information Services area. 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
NOTE:  The Blood Donor Center operates Monday – Thursday 8a-6p, Friday 8a-430p, and Saturday 
10a-2p. 
• Blood Donor Center Manager, Operations Coordinator, or designee in charge will close 
any open doors. 
• Blood Donor Center Manager, Operations Coordinator, or designee in charge will 
instruct Blood Donor Techs to turn off and unplug Blood/Blood Product Collection 
equipment if necessary. 
• Blood Donor Center Manager, Operations Coordinator, Blood Donor Techs, and LSR’s 
will assist in moving all Donors and visitors in the Blood Donor Center to safety explaining, 
“The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety”.   
o Any Blood Donor Center employee performing a procedure on a Donor will remain 
with the Donor and will assist them to safety. 
• Blood Donor Center Manager, Operations Coordinator, or designee in charge will ensure 
that all employees and Donors in the Blood Donor Center are accounted for. 
• Blood Donor Center Manager, Operations Coordinator, or designee in charge will ensure 
that each room is empty. 
• There are no automatic Fire Doors, elevators, carts and equipment blocking the hallway, 
located in the Blood Donor Center. 
 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves: 
  There are no medical gas shut off valves located in the Blood Donor Center 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments (horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• The Blood Donor Center does not house patients and there is no transport equipment available. 
• All Donors and visitors in the Blood Donor Center will be at least partially ambulatory.   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
LBA204-R7 
Page 3 of 3 
• Any Donors and visitors in the Blood Donor Center will be assisted by the Blood Donor Center 
Staff. 
 
Location of Fire Pull Stations – There are no pull stations inside of the Laboratory.  The nearest 
pull stations are located: 
• On the wall between CC’s Coffee House and the Front Door of the Blood Donor Center 
• On west side of administrative hall across from Laboratory Waiting Room. 
 
Location of Fire Extinguishers: 
• Inside of the Blood Donor Center next to the Check-in desk in the administrative desk area. 
• Across from Outpatient Laboratory Waiting Room on West side of Administration hallway 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Blood/Blood Product Collection Equipment will be turned off as designated in the specific 
employee response section. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o The Blood Donor Center will evacuate through the front exit of the Blood Donor 
Center, and turn right to exit out of the front of the hospital.  Proceed across Hennessy 
Blvd to rendezvous in Employee Parking Lot A (behind Walgreens). 
o Team Members outside of the Blood Donor Center when a Code Red is called will 
shelter in place and will not attempt to return to the Blood Donor Center until an all-
clear is given.   If it becomes necessary to evacuate from the current location, Blood 
Donor Center team members should attempt to make their way to the Blood Donor 
Center Rendezvous point if it is safe to do so.     
 
• Secondary Horizontal Evacuation Route and Destination: 
o If the primary evacuation route is inaccessible, the Blood Donor Center will proceed to 
the nearest Smoke Compartment Located in the Information Services Hallway.  Team 
Members will follow the hallway out of the building, through the Mary Bird Perkins 
Parking Garage, and across the service road to rendezvous on the canal side of the 
service road.  
 
 
 
RELATED POLICIES 
LBA204-Emergency Preparedness 
ECEP001-Emergency Operations Plan  
ECEP007-OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan  
ECLS-012-Department Specific Code Red Response Plan (Template) 
 
REVISIONS 
5/1/18 (created), 6/11/19 