OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 8 
LBA203 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA203 
 
 
GUIDANCE FOR SPECIMEN COLLECTION, TRANSPORT, TESTING AND 
SUBMISSION FOR PATIENTS WITH SUSPECTED INFECTION WITH 
EBOLA VIRUS DISEASE or other Special Communicable Diseases 
 
 
PURPOSE 
To define the proper handling of specimens from patients suspected of being infected 
with Ebola Virus or other Special Communicable Disease. 
 
Please refer to the Infection Control Departmental Page on TeamLink and the IC policy 
IC2013 for specific guidance on patient handling and CDC information.   
 
As things rapidly change in regards to emerging infectious diseases the CDC website 
offers the most current and up to date information available.   
http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/laboratories/safe-specimen-
management.html 
 
 
PRINICIPLE 
Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) is one of numerous viral hemorrhagic fevers (VHF). It is a 
severe, often fatal disease in human and nonhuman primates. Ebola virus is spread by 
direct contact with the blood or body fluids (such as urine, saliva, feces, vomit and 
semen) of an infected person or by being exposed to objects that have been contaminated 
with infected blood or body fluids. The incubation period is usually 8–10 days (rarely 
ranging from 2 to 21 days). Patients can transmit the virus once symptoms appear and 
through the later stages of disease, as well as postmortem. 
 
The hospital can safely manage a patient with EVD by using all recommended isolation 
and infection control procedures. Standard, contact, and droplet precautions are 
recommended for management of hospitalized patients with known or suspected EVD. 
Similarly, the clinical laboratory can safely handle specimens from these patients by strict 
adherence to precautions and practices specifically designed for bloodborne pathogens in 
the laboratory environment. However, Ebola has an apparent low infectious dose, the 
potential of high virus titers in the blood of ill patients, and can result in severe disease.  
 
Following these guidelines hospitals and clinical laboratories have safely managed a 
number of VHF patients including cases of Lassa fever and Marburg virus (a closely 
related virus to Ebola). Potentially infectious diagnostic specimens are routinely handled 
and tested in laboratories in a safe manner, by closely following the standard safety 
precautions defined below. 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 8 
LBA203 
PROCEDURE 
A.  All laboratorians and other healthcare personnel collecting or handling specimens  
      must follow established standards compliant with the OSHA bloodborne pathogens  
      standard, which includes blood and other potentially infectious materials. These  
      standards include wearing appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) and  
      following all safety rules for all specimens regardless of whether they are identified  
      as being infectious.  
 
• Specimen Transport:  
o NEVER use a pneumatic tube system to transport suspected VHF 
specimens. 
o Specimens should only be packed and transported by those trained 
to handle Category A substances. 
 
B.  Recommendations for risk assessment to staff:  
 Risk assessments are conducted by each laboratory director, safety officer, or  
 other responsible personnel to determine the potential for sprays, splashes, or  
 aerosols generated from laboratory procedures. They should adjust, as needed,  
 PPE requirements, practices, and safety equipment controls to protect the  
 laboratorian’s skin, eyes, and mucous membranes.  
 
C.  Recommendations for specimen collection by staff:  
 Any person collecting specimens from a patient with a case of suspected Ebola  
 virus disease should wear gloves, water-resistant gowns, full face shield or  
 goggles, and masks to cover all of nose and mouth. Additional PPE may be  
 required in certain situations.  
 
D.  Recommendations for laboratory testing by staff:  
 Any person testing specimens from a patient with a suspected case of Ebola virus  
 disease should wear gloves, water-resistant gowns, full face shield or goggles, and  
 masks to cover all of nose and mouth, and as an added precaution use a certified  
 class II Biosafety cabinet or Plexiglass splash guard with PPE to protect skin and  
 mucous membranes. All manufacturer-installed safety features for laboratory  
 instruments should be used.  
 
E.  Specimen Handling for Routine Laboratory Testing (not for Ebola Diagnosis)  
 Routine laboratory testing includes traditional chemistry, hematology, and other  
 laboratory testing used to support and treat patients. Precautions as described  
 above offer appropriate protection for healthcare personnel performing laboratory  
 testing on specimens from patients with suspected infection with Ebola virus.  
 These precautions include both manufacturer installed safety features for  
 instruments and the laboratory environment as well as PPE specified above.  
 
o Keep lab testing to a minimum and include only those tests critical 
for patient care that cannot be obtained from Point-of-Care (POC) 
testing systems. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 8 
LBA203 
► OLOL Transfusion Services will forgo pretransfusion 
testing (type, antibody screen and crossmatch) and use 
group O RBCs (and presumably “universal” platelets and 
plasma) for the transfusion needs of patients suspected or 
known to have EVD. Emergency Release procedure will be 
used.  Including contacting Pathologist if the designated 
number of units have been released.   
o Wear appropriate PPE and don it correctly (lab PPE will likely not 
be the same as PPE used for direct patient care). 
o All lab procedures should be performed in such a way as to prevent 
the creation of aerosols. Centrifugation, cap removal, cap piercing, 
and vortexing are actions that create an aerosol. 
o If centrifugation is necessary use rotor covers as for AFB 
processing. 
o Carry out all specimen manipulations within a Biological Safety 
Cabinet in the laboratory. 
o Cover specimen with gauze wipe or equivalent pad to uncap. 
o Run a “clean cycle” and decontaminate racks as able when 
specimens are tested on analyzers. 
o Make blood smears inside BSC, fix in methanol and air dry before 
removing slide for staining. 
o Doff PPE in the correct order to prevent contamination. 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
• All transport containers should be wiped down with a hospital approved bleach wipe 
prior to leaving the patient’s room. 
• Specimens are walked to the lab by a designated caregiver.  The carrier is opened and 
the double-bagged specimen is handed off to the Support personnel who is wearing 
appropriate PPE (gloves and lab coat).   Verbal confirmation of “Suspected Ebola’ is 
relayed to the lab support personnel. 
• The lab support personnel will NOT open the bags, but will log in the specimen, carry it 
to the Microbiology Dept, and place it under the AFB hood.  
TEST   RECOMMENDATION 
Chemistry, Coagulation, 
Hematology 
 
• Testing is performed only if required and with minimal blood 
draws. 
• Lab staff performing testing will wear disposable PPE and 
practicing Universal Precautions.   
• Decontamination of equipment is performed as detailed by 
instrument manufacturer. 
Malaria Testing 1. Collect at least one ml in a lavender (EDTA) tube. 
2. Wipe the outside of the blood tube with bleach prior to 
removing from the patient room, being careful to not 
remove the patient ID information.  Double bag and send 
to lab as described above. 
3. For malaria, lab will prepare slides and send for referral 
testing: OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 8 
LBA203 
a. Slides are made under hood.  Use a gauze 
soaked in bleach to prevent aerosol formation. 
b. Prepare thin blood films, fix in methanol for 30 
minutes, then place in dry heat at 95 degrees C. 
for 1 hour or 65 degrees C. for 2 hours to 
inactivate the specimen. 
c. Refer for malaria testing. 
Blood cultures 
 
Perform only if required 
and minimize blood draws 
for blood cultures. 
Wipe the outside and check for breakage or positivity before 
loading in instrument.  If positive, unload and double bag then a 
rigid container and process as described above. 
1. Prepare slides, allow to dry. 
2. See above for fixation. 
Do not perform any direct tests on positive blood 
cultures. 
3. Smears can be stained and read as usual. 
4. Innoculate…see WHO guidelines. With shrinkwrap. 
5. Examine 2 times per day. 
6. Perform spot testing per WHO guidelines. 
Other specimens for 
culture: 
Unless critically needed, 
do not perform. 
See WHO guidelines 
 
Referral to CDC 
The Ebola virus is a classified as a Category A infectious 
substance.  Lab staff must have a current DOT certificate to be 
able to pkg these for shipping.  This will be done under the 
designated hood. 
 
Suspected Ebola specimens must be sent by World Carriers.  
FedEx will not transport these.   
 
Specimen Storage 
All specimen containers should be wiped with bleach, placed in a 
double bag and a rigid container and isolated under the hood until 
they can be disposed of in an appropriate manner.  See below.  
Long term storage is not permitted for any known HFV patient. 
Specimen 
decontamination and 
disposal 
Disinfectant:   Use a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA)-registered hospital disinfectant with a label claim for a non-
enveloped virus (e.g., norovirus, rotavirus, adenovirus, poliovirus) 
to disinfect environmental surfaces in rooms of patients with 
suspected or confirmed Ebola virus infection. 
 
Spills:   CDC guidelines recommend removal of bulk spill matter, 
cleaning the site, and then disinfecting the site.  For large spills, a 
chemical disinfectant with sufficient potency is needed.  An EPA-
registered hospital disinfectant with label claims for non-
enveloped viruses (e.g., norovirus, rotavirus, adenovirus, 
poliovirus) and instructions for cleaning and decontaminating 
surfaces or objects soiled with blood or body fluids should be 
used according to those instructions. 
Disposal:   All specimens, gauze, should be autoclaved prior to 
disposal and discarded per hospital protocol.    
 
 
F.  Environmental Cleaning and Disinfection  
 See the attached Interim Guidance for Environmental Infection Control in  
 Hospitals for Ebola Virus for recommendations regarding the cleaning and  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 5 of 8 
LBA203 
 disinfection of patient care area surfaces including the management of blood and  
 body fluid spills.  
 
 These recommendations also apply to cleaning and disinfecting in a laboratory  
 where specimens are being processed from persons under investigation, or with  
 probable or confirmed Ebola virus infections.  
 
 In the case of a spill in the laboratory, the basic principles for blood or body  
   substance spill management are outlined in the OSHA Blood Borne Pathogens  
 Standards.  
 
 There are no disinfection products with specific label claims against the Ebola  
 virus. Enveloped viruses such as Ebola are susceptible to a broad range of hospital  
 disinfectants used to disinfect hard, non-porous surfaces. In contrast, non- 
 enveloped viruses are more resistant to disinfectants. As an added precaution,  
 use a disinfectant with a higher potency than what is normally required for an  
 enveloped virus to disinfect potentially Ebola-contaminated surfaces. EPA- 
 registered hospital disinfectants with label claims against non-enveloped viruses  
 (e.g., norovirus, rotavirus, adenovirus, poliovirus) are broadly antiviral and  
 capable of inactivating both enveloped and non-enveloped viruses.  
 
G.  Management of Laboratory Waste  
 Waste generated during laboratory testing should be placed in leak-proof 
 containment and discarded as regulated medical waste. To minimize 
 contamination of the exterior of the waste bag, place this bag in a rigid waste 
 container designed for this use. If available, steam sterilization (autoclave) or 
 incineration as a waste treatment process can inactivate the virus and reduces 
 waste volume.  
 
 For equipment that drains directly into the sewer system, the United States 
 sanitary sewer system handling processes (e.g., anaerobic digestion, composting, 
 disinfection) are designed to safely inactivate infectious agents.  
 
 CDC Division of Select Agents and Toxins (DSAT) Considerations: 
 If these guidelines for the collection, transport, and testing of specimens from 
 suspected or confirmed Ebola patients are followed, waste generated during the 
 handling and testing of such specimens and which is properly disposed would not 
 be subject to Federal select agent regulations (See the exclusion provision 42 CFR 
 § 73.3(d)(1)). However, this exclusion would not apply to any facility or 
 laboratory that intentionally collected or otherwise extracted the Ebola virus from 
 waste generated during the delivery of patient care.  
 
H.  Transporting Specimens within the Hospital / Institution  
 In compliance with 29 CFR 1910.1030, specimens should be placed in a durable, 
 leak-proof secondary container for transport within a facility. To reduce the risk OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 6 of 8 
LBA203 
 of breakage or leaks, do not use any pneumatic tube system for transporting 
 suspected EVD specimens.  
 
I.  Hospitals are REQUIRED to contact the Office of Public Health Infectious  
 Disease Epidemiology Section On-Call number at 1-800-256-2748 if EVD is  
 suspected.  
J.  Packaging and Shipping Clinical Specimens to CDC  
 Specimens collected for EVD testing should be packaged and shipped without 
 attempting to open collection tubes or aliquot specimens.  
 
 If it is determined in consult with ID Epi that the specimen meets the  
 requirements for Ebola testing, CDC must be contacted for consultation before a  
 specimen can be submitted. After OPH ID Epi’s consultation with CDC, if testing  
 is still warranted, the following steps should be used by your facility in submitting  
 samples to CDC:  
  1.  Email tracking number to EOCEVENT246@CDC.GOV.  
  2.  Do not ship for weekend delivery unless instructed by CDC.  
  3.  Ship to:  
   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  
   ATTN STAT LAB: VSPB UNIT #70  
   1600 Clifton Road NE  
   Atlanta, GA 30333  
    
  4.  Include the following information: your name, the patient's name,  
       test(s) requested, date of collection, laboratory or accession number,  
       and the type of specimen being shipped.  
  5.  Include the CDC Infectious Disease (CDC Form 50.34) and Viral  
       Special Pathogens Branch specimen submission forms.  
  6.  On the outside of the box, specify how the specimen should be stored:  
       Refrigerated.  
  7.  Specimens for shipment should be packaged following the basic triple  
       packaging system which consists of a primary container (a sealable  
       specimen bag) wrapped with absorbent material, secondary container  
       (watertight, leak-proof), and an outer shipping package. All applicable  
       requirements of the U.S. Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR)  
       issued by the U.S. Department of Transportation (U.S. DOT) can be  
       found on the DOT website. For questions on (packaging) transportation  
       regulations, contact the U.S. DOT HazMat Information Center at 1- 
       800-467-4922.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
A.  Potential exposures to blood, body fluids and other infectious materials must be  
      reported immediately according to your institution’s policies and procedures.  
 
B.  All specimens that are sent to CDC for Ebola testing are considered Category A. Our  
      routine carrier, FedEx, has determined they will not transport a specimen suspected of  
      containing Ebola.  Use the alternate carrier company: OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 7 of 8 
LBA203 
 World Courier (http://www.worldcourier.com/) or 1-800-221-6600)  
 (An account has been set up for shipments.  See supervisor for details.) 
 
C.  OPH Contacts 
 
• OPH Infectious Disease Epidemiology:  
On-Call phone at 1-800-256-2748 
 
• OPH Laboratory: 
1209 Leesville Avenue 
 Baton Rouge, LA 70802 
(225) 219-5200 / (504) 458-9537 
http://www.dhh.louisiana.gov/index.cfm/page/483 
 
• CDC is available for consultation 24/7 at 770-488-7100. Hospitals should 
contact their state and/or local health department before contacting CDC.  
 
 
REFERENCE 
 DHH Memo to Sentinel Laboratories 
 
 
ATTACHMENTS 
A.  DHH Memo to Sentinel Laboratories-  
 Re: Guidance for Clinical Laboratories for Specimen Collection, Transport,   
        Testing and submission for patients with suspected infection with Ebola  
        Virus Disease. 
 
B.  CDC Interim Guidance for Environmental Infection Control in Hospitals for Ebola  
      Virus. 
 
C.  Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Hospitalized Patients with  
      Known or Suspected Ebola Virus Disease in U.S. Hospitals. 
 
D.  CDC Test Order Information 
 
E.  CDC Specimen Submission Form (CDC 50.34) 
 
F.  Viral Special Pathogens Branch Diagnostic Specimen Submission Form  
 
REVISIONS 
10/2014 (created), 3/2015, 8/2017 
 
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 8 of 8 
LBA203 
    By    Date 
 Prepared/Revised D. Leger 8/23/17 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 10/3/2017 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 10/2/2017 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 10/4/2017 
Medical Director Review A Harton 10/1/2017 
 Effective Date 10/6/2017 
 Origination Date 10/6/14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 