OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 5 
LBA300 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA300 
 
LABORATORY INFORMATION SYSTEM 
 
 
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
 
The Information System (IS) used by Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health 
Systems (FMOLHS) is EPIC. The primary Lab Information System (LIS) consists of 
Beaker, the Lab Module within the EPIC system.  Data Innovations (Instrument 
Manager) is the middleware that is used to interface Lab Instrumentation with the EPIC 
system where applicable. EPIC does not include a Transfusion Medicine module.  HCLL 
is the approved LIS that is used for Transfusion Services and is interfaced with EPIC.  
Outreach clients without direct access to EPIC systems interface through Atlas into their 
respective interfaces. Miscellaneous interfaces include Ligo Lab (PGL), Mayo Medical 
Laboratory Reference Lab Services, and Louisiana Office of Public Health.  The 
laboratory information systems have been thoroughly validated for all patient test 
reporting including transfusion services.  Interfaces which populate data into another 
computer system use HL-7 encoding and transmission schemes.   
 
The laboratory director has deemed the functionality and reliability of the hardware and 
software of the computer system as adequate to meet the needs of patient care.  The 
laboratory director or a designee reviews laboratory computer policies and procedures at 
least biennially.   
 
All LIS and computer procedures are clearly documented, complete, and readily available 
to all authorized users.  All facility-wide computer related policies are available on 
TeamLink, OLOLRMC’s online website. 
 
 
COMPUTER FACILITIES 
 
The computer room meets standards brought forth by the College of American 
Pathologists (CAP) and is clean, well-maintained and adequately ventilated with 
appropriate environmental controls.  The computer room location is locked and secured 
and under video surveillance.  It is built up off the floor for cooling purposes and has 
halon fire extinguishers available for use in case of a fire.  All network cables are labeled 
adequately and well-maintained.  The labels show which devices use which specific 
ports. 
 
ABC fire extinguishers are in place within the computer facility.  This type of 
extinguisher is the appropriate type of extinguisher to be used for the electrical 
components which are in the computer room.  Also located within the computer room is a 
halon warning board and an automatic water sprinkler system.   
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 5 
LBA300 
All wires and cables are properly located and protected from traffic.  Wires within the 
computer room are located in the ceilings and under the flooring.  The computer system 
is adequately protected against electrical power interruptions by uninterrupted power 
supplies (UPS).  Emergency generators use surge strips locally in order to protect from 
power surges.  Emergency backup red power outlets are provided to ensure power 
required for uninterrupted testing.  Monthly generator tests are conducted in order to test 
the system’s protective equipment. 
 
OLOL’s software is maintained remotely by EPIC Systems Corporation in Verona, WI.  
EPIC complies with CAP requirements and regularly provides OLOL with updated 
conditions of its facilities. Further questions of compliance of the remote host may be 
directed to info@epic.com 
 
 
HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE MAINTENANCE 
 
The hardware and software comprising the laboratory information system are installed, 
serviced, and monitored through the FMOL IS Department.  Sub sections of this FMOL 
IS are responsible for various components of the information system.  Components 
include but are not limited to hardware, software, security, and technology infrastructure.  
Vendor support for the software system is provided by EPIC.  For hardware or software 
emergencies, contact the FMOLHS Help Desk at 225-765-4357.  The Help Desk will 
contact the appropriate department to address the issue. 
 
The installation of new software into the production environment is preceded by change 
control documentation and approval by the FMOL IS department, preproduction 
authorization request documentation, installation into test environments, and testing 
designed to address the interdependencies and certification methods.  Any major software 
installation, including customized programs, requires testing of all functions using a 
scripted test plan.  The lab database consisting of ordering, processing, resulting, 
charging, and date distribution functions was constructed by FMOL IS-EPIC teams and 
tested by laboratory supervisory personnel.  These functions are maintained and further 
developed by FMOL IS personnel.  Documentation of this testing can be found in the 
initial validation data or within the applicable department.  Unauthorized installation of 
software is prohibited on any computer used in the laboratory. 
 
A Change Control Access database is used to document reasons for requesting changes to 
the database.  It provides each requested change with a project number, defines the 
project and lists tasks and resources necessary to complete the project.  It accommodates 
the attachment of documentation (e-mails, EPIC documentation, etc.), assignment of 
tasks and plans the interaction required with other personnel and departments to 
accomplish the change.  It records the predicted effects of change on the system as a 
whole and on individual departments, and also establishes time lines.  It provides an 
email vehicle for receiving approval and for recording scheduled and completion dates 
for changes and formats the data for a printed report.  It maintains a record of the OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 3 of 5 
LBA300 
approvals and the steps scheduled and completed. IS footprints tickets generated by the 
Help Desk and TeamLink are documented using this system. 
 
All changes to the EPIC software occur during bi-monthly special update (SU) install.  
No changes are made outside of the SU install.  The persons who perform the install, and 
the dates the installs occur are tracked in the Release Authorization module in Sherlock.  
Sherlock is the EPIC system oversight module. 
 
Documentation for the initial computer system training of employees is located in 
HealthStream and can be provide upon request. All new employees must attend EPIC 
user training with a Laboratory Credentialed Trainer in order to receive their computer 
user ID.  Upon any system modification, a bulletin is sent out by the FMOL IS 
department to the individual laboratory departments.  Any new changes regarding the 
computer system are reviewed with all laboratory employees either by their immediate 
supervisors during departmental meetings or by FMOL IS personnel.   
 
 
COMPUTER SUPPORT RESOURCES 
 
In case of emergent software or hardware problems, users should contact FMOLHS Help 
Desk at (225) 765-4357 / 765-HELP. The HELP desk will generate an IS Support 
Footprint Ticket. 
 
For non-emergent problems, users may generate IS Support Footprint Tickets from the IS 
Support Center link on TeamLink. 
 
The IS Support Footprint Ticket will record and dispatch reported problems to proper 
troubleshooting personnel.  Provision is made for assigning point numbers, recording 
call-back numbers and the identity of researching previous similar problems, assigning 
responsibility for investigation and correction, and to record the corrective action.  It 
allows the user to prioritize and manage work order centrally through a Footprint ticket 
system.  This software also enables the help desk to improve its processes through on-
demand surveys and reports.  The user may also check the status of work orders 
submitted online, search a self-service knowledge base for existing solutions, chat with 
help desk representatives to resolve issues quickly.  The Help Desk will follow a 
schematic troubleshooting diagram to respond quickly to problems. 
 
 
SYSTEM SECURITY 
 
All electronic Protected Health Information (ePHI) must be encrypted before it is sent via 
any clear text network protocol outside of the FMOL network.  Where technology is not 
available for automatically encrypting ePHI, users are responsible for initiating the 
encrypting information.  Third parties that require access to, or transmission of ePHI, 
must enter into a business associate agreement with Our Lady of the Lake or FMOLHS 
prior to permitting access.  These guidelines meet HIPAA standards.   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 4 of 5 
LBA300 
 
Confidentiality is maintained when patient data is transmitted between two organizations.  
Release of information by facsimile transmission will comply with federal, state, and 
local laws.  Confidential information may be released only as specified by policy or 
patient authorization.  Out-going patient-related information for continuity of care may be 
faxed to the physician of record without patient authorization when the physician 
supports the request for expedited communication with a reasonable explanation of need.  
A faxed copy shall be deemed to have the same force and effect as an original document.  
 
Laboratory computer security is administered through the hospital information systems 
security officer.  Tasks are granted to individual users based on job class, need, and 
function.   
 
Computer access codes are maintained by the Information Systems Security Director and 
Information Systems Security Administrator.  Each employee is given a unique logon id 
and a password that should never be shared.  Access is obtained by the submission of an 
IS “footprint” and in most cases, upon completion of OLOL new employee orientation 
and training.   
 
Employees sign a confidentiality statement when they receive their login information, 
following orientation.  When an employee leaves OLOL, human resources will notify the 
security administrators via a termination list to delete the former employees from the 
system.   
 
The identity of all resulting personnel, as well as personnel who view a patient’s chart is 
traceable for each element of the patient report.  All individuals who have viewed, 
ordered, logged in, resulted, and/or modified or otherwise accessed data or control files 
are identifiable.   
 
 
DISASTER PREPAREDNESS OF COMPUTER SYSTEM AND FACILITIES 
 
The hospital has devised a Disaster Recovery Plan for its information systems, a copy of 
which can be found on TeamLink (Enterprise policies > FMOLHS> Information 
Technology). 
 
OLOL’s software is maintained remotely by EPIC in Verona, WI.  EPIC hosts a disaster 
recovery (DR) environment in Rochester, MN.  This environment is a live copy of EPIC.  
In case of a destructive event, EPIC will cut over to DR.  All users will be able to access 
EPIC via the DR environment. 
 
The OLOL computer system is adequately protected against electrical power 
interruptions by uninterrupted power supplies (UPS).  Emergency generators use surge 
strips locally in order to protect from power surges.  Emergency backup red power outlets 
are provided throughout the hospital in order to provide power required for uninterrupted OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 5 of 5 
LBA300 
testing.  Monthly generator tests are conducted in order to test the system’s protective 
equipment. 
 
 
REVISIONS 
10/4/17 (created)  
 
 
 
 
    By    Date 
 Prepared/Revised D. Leger 10/4/17 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 10/17/2017 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 10/12/2017 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 10/16/2017 
Medical Director Review A Harton 10/7/2017 
 Effective Date 10/17/2017 
 Origination Date 3/30/17 
 
 
 
 
 
 