OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 2 
LBA306 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA306 
AUTOVERIFICATION OF TEST RESULTS  
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 12/5/17 12/12/2017 12/12/2017 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 12/11/2017 Origination Date 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 12/11/2017 10/2009 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 12/11/2017  
Medical Director Review A Harton 12/12/2017  
 
PURPOSE 
To describe the autoverification process using the EPIC System at OLOL. 
 
 
POLICY  
Autoverification of laboratory instrument test results refers to computer processing and 
evaluation of test results for a given analyte from a given instrument when the result of 
said analyte falls within approved parameters.  When autoverification is first established, 
analytes are evaluated for autoverification processing.  All programming and testing is 
done in the testing environment before being moved to the production environment.  
Results are then monitored continuously in production to ensure proper performance. 
 
The criteria for autoverification are programmed according to the standards determined 
for each analyte by the appropriate laboratory sections.  Samples passing the following 
checks qualify for autoverification:  Delta, Linearity, Critical, Integrity, and logic (ie 
Male vs Female).  Results are also checked against reportable range and critical value 
criteria before each test is accepted and reported by the computer. 
 
Ongoing validation of testing processes is performed quarterly within the departments.  
Documentation is located within each respective department.  Validation will confirm 
that decision rules are functioning properly and will include results that challenge the 
algorithm. In addition, each time there is a change to the system that could affect 
autoverification logic, the parameters set up for each affected test must be re-evaluated to 
ensure that the system is releasing results appropriately. 
 
Tests set up for autoverification are approved of by the laboratory director as well as the 
supervisor of each department.  The supervisors and their designees ensure that 
applicable quality control samples are run within appropriate time periods, with 
appropriate results for all tests subject to autoverification. 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 2 
LBA306 
The computer system allows for an audit trail that provides the identification of test 
results that autoverified, including the time and date of autoverification.  Should a 
problem arise with a test that autoverifies due to quality control issues, instrument 
malfunction, or other unforeseen issue, rapid suspension of autoverification may be 
initiated by contacting the IS Help Desk at (5-4357) and should be alerted that the 
situation is emergent.  The affected test should be suspended for the affected analyzers 
until the issue can be resolved.  Results that autoverified before the problem was 
identified may need to be recalled and corrected according to departmental protocols, 
depending on the circumstances. 
 
REVISIONS 
10/2009 (CREATED), 3/15/15, 10/4/17, 12/5/17 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 