OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 2 
LBA413 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA413 
TRANSPORT OF BIOHAZARDOUS/NON-BIOHAZARD MATERIALS 
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 8/21/2023 9/1/2023 9/1/2023 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 8/25/2023 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 8/26/2023 11/2003 
 
 
PURPOSE 
To define the laboratory process for appropriate specimen transport and tracking as well 
as to identify the approved and contracted courier service utilized by OLOL Laboratory 
services and the adherence to their stated policies and procedures. 
POLICY 
OLOLRMC Main and Affiliate Labs utilize the courier services provided by LabCorp.  
LabCorp is the approved contracted company that provides primary referral services for 
the FMOL Health System.  Additional courier services are contracted through Blaze 
Courier Services.  All couriers will provide safe and appropriate packaging, transport, 
and delivery of materials (biohazardous/non-biohazardous) in accordance with federal, 
state, and local laws as well as agencies regulating the transport of biohazardous 
materials.   
Specimen Tracking - Labeling 
All specimens are properly packaged and labeled to indicate the general nature of the 
materials transported.  Universal precautions are observed at all times when handling 
specimens and appropriate personal protective equipment will be used to prevent contact 
with potentially infectious material.  
Specimens must be appropriately labeled prior to transport and placed inside a sealed 
biohazard specimen bag along with any ordering or shipping documents. The sealed 
biohazard specimen bag is then placed inside a secondary transport container equipped 
with appropriate materials to ensure specimen stability during transport.  The secondary 
transport container is labeled on the outside with a biohazard tag to indicate the general 
nature of the items contained. 
All deliveries/pickups of biohazardous and non-biohazardous materials are tracked and 
monitored.  OLOLRMC Main and Affiliate Labs utilize LIS generated specimen packing 
lists. 
Specimen Transport  
LabCorp provides routine pickups to identified locations throughout the day as well as 
STAT pickup/delivery services as needed.  Additional courier services are contracted 
through Blaze Courier Services.  All specimens are transported under controlled OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 2 
LBA413 
conditions to ensure specimen integrity and are in accordance with federal, state, local 
laws, and regulatory agencies. 
Transport Personnel Training 
Transport personnel are trained in appropriate safety and packaging procedures suitable 
to specimen type and distances transported, including training for personnel involved in 
packaging and shipping infectious substances.  Employees of OLOLRMC Main and 
Affiliate laboratories do not participate in any transport courier services.  Employees that 
participate in packing and shipping specimens complete the required Packing and 
Transport Safety training at least every 3 years or as needed. 
Specimen Tracking and Quality 
All specimens delivered to the laboratory are documented upon receipt.  Documentation 
for specimens delivered between OLOL laboratories will take place in the form of LIS 
generated specimen packing lists.  Outpatient specimens, received as part of the “reverse 
testing agreement” with LabCorp, are documented in the form of a tracking log.  This log 
includes the date and time of delivery, patient’s first and last name, and the name/initials 
of the courier delivering the specimen(s). 
Upon delivery of the specimens, the courier will sign in all samples.  Specimen 
acceptability and quality will be determined by laboratory personnel. If the specimen is 
deemed unacceptable the specimen will be rejected.  Refer to LBA076-Specimen 
Integrity for rejection criteria and process. Specimen testing will be completed using the 
first in first out (FIFO) process.  
Specimen Transport QM 
Rejected specimens are primarily tracked using LIS rejected specimen reports. Manual 
rejection forms, when used, are forwarded to the Lab Compliance Officer for review.  
Reports and rejection forms are used to monitor the quality of specimens received.  
LabCorp clients frequently submitting improper specimens will be contacted as needed 
for correction. 
                                 
ASSOCIATED POLICIES 
LBA076 – Specimen Integrity 
 
REFERENCES 
CAP Standards – GEN.40511, 40512, 40515, 40530, 40535 
 
REVISIONS 
11/2003 (created), 5/11/2015, 8/21/2023. 