OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 1 of 4 
LBA422 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA422 
Lake Lab Services One-Click Procedure  
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By A Dufrechou 2/25/19 4/29/2019 4/29/2019 
Blood Donor Service  and Core Lab Director Review J Teague 3/1/2019 Origination Date 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 3/12/2019  
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Harton 4/27/2019  
 
 
Purpose 
All patients coming into a patient service center (PSC) must be registered using One-Click registration 
in Epic. The One-Click registration procedure is to standardize the laboratory registration process for 
Outpatients ensuring correct patient information and laboratory orders. Patient orders placed in Epic can 
be viewed in order inquiry. If a paper laboratory order is presented, the LSR will enter the orders into 
Epic.  
 
Procedure  
 
I. Registration Process  
 
A. All patients must present with photo identification and insurance.  
1. If the patient is self-pay, payment must be arranged prior to draw.  
 
B. Open “Patient Station”.  
1. Search using the patient’s last name, first name, and date of birth.  If no patient found, 
use first 3 of last, first. 
2. For new patients, skip to step C.   
3. For existing patients, skip to step D. 
 
C. New Patient registration 
1. Using Patient Station search using the patient’s last name, first name, date of birth, SSN, 
and gender. Click New to create a new patient.  
2. Click One-Click to schedule the patient’s lab draw appointment.  
3. Select the earliest time slot available. 
4. Select the appropriate response for the My Chart sign up.  
5. From the interactive face sheet, verify the demographics, PCP, employment, and 
patient contacts fields by clicking on the hyperlinks.  
a. All yellow yield signs in the demographic section must be answered to proceed.  
b.If the patient does not have a contact, enter Contact, No for the name and all 
zeroes for the phone number. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 2 of 4 
LBA422 
c. If the patient is a minor, they must have a legal guardian listed as their primary 
emergency contact.  
d.If the patient does not have a PCP, choose the “No primary” option.  
6. From the interactive face sheet, click Guarantor Demographics. Select “Pull Info” to 
pull in the current patient’s demographics.  Use “All Information” for patients over 18.  
a. The guarantor’s employment status is required. 
b.If the patient is a minor, you can “Pull Info”, then “Other relationship” using the 
parent or guardian’s information.  
7. Click NEXT to move to the “Encounter Info tab” or “navigate to the “Encounter Info” 
tab and answer the accident related question.  
8. Using the NEXT button, navigate to the “Hospital Lab Info” tab.  If the submitter is a 
non-FMOL provider, enter the submitter.  
a. For a generic submitter, use Lake Lab Services Generic Account (1407).  
9. Using the NEXT button navigate to the “Coverage Info tab” 
a. To add insurance coverage click ADD.  
b.Search the insurance name and select the corresponding insurance from the 
provided list.  
c. Select the Subscriber.  
d.Complete the subscriber information form in the coverage wizard.  
e. Click SEND.  
f. Once the response is received, you will create coverage.  
g.Select the corresponding insurance from the provided list.  Use the address on the 
back of the insurance card to ensure that you have selected the correct one. 
10. If the patient does not have insurance, select Self-Pay. Click NEXT. Enter occurrence 
code with code 11 and today’s date. If the visit is pregnancy related, enter occupancy 
code 10 and the LMP date. If there is an existing occurrence code, do not update the 
code. Click NEXT.  
11. Using NEXT navigate to “documents” tab.  Scan the patient’s Photo ID, Insurance card 
and non-Epic orders. The patient will e-sign the hospital consent and Notice to Patient’s 
rights. Change the status for the documents to receive with today’s date.  
a. If a new HAR is created, the Notice to Patients Regarding Participating Provider 
Status will need to be e-signed. This form will pop-up automatically.  
12. Click NEXT two more times to return to the interactive face sheet.  
13. Click Verify Patient. If any required fields are missing, the face sheet will give an error 
message. Click on the update hyperlink to open the missing fields.  
a. Once the missing fields are fixed, click “Fixed, try again”.  
14. Click Verify Guarantor. If any required fields are missing, the face sheet will give an 
error message. Click on the update hyperlink to open the missing fields.  
a. Once the missing fields are fixed, click “Fixed, try again”.  
15. Click Check In.  
a. If the submitter field is left blank due to a FMOL submitter, click continue when 
the error message appears.  
 
D. Existing Patient registration 
1. Select the appropriate response for the My Chart sign up.  
2. From the interactive face sheet, verify the demographics, PCP, employment, and 
patient contacts fields by clicking on the hyperlinks.  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 3 of 4 
LBA422 
a. All yellow yield signs in the demographic section must be answered to proceed.  
b.If the patient does not have a contact, enter Contact, No for the name and all 
zeroes for the phone number.  
3. From the interactive face sheet, verify the Guarantor Demographics by clicking on the 
hyperlink.  
a. The guarantor’s employment status is required. 
b.If the patient is a minor, you can “Pull Info”  then “other relationship” using the 
parent or guardian’s information.  
4. Click NEXT and answer the accident related question.   
5. Click NEXT to navigate to the “Hospital Lab Info” tab.  If the submitter is a non-FMOL 
provider, enter the submitter.   
a. For a generic submitter, use Lake Lab Services Generic Account (1407).  
6. NEXT three more times.   Click NEXT to navigate to “Coverage Info” tab.  
a. To add insurance coverage click ADD.  
b.Search the insurance name and select the corresponding insurance from the 
provided list.  
c. Select the Subscriber.  
d.Complete the subscriber information form in the coverage wizard.  
e. Click SEND.  
f. Once the response is received, you will create coverage.  
g.Select the corresponding insurance from the provided list. Use the address on the 
back of the insurance card to ensure that you have selected the correct one. 
h.If there is an insurance error on the main demographic page, click the response 
history.  Within the history, there is an alert message which explains what is 
causing the error and how to correct it.  If you click the File Response button on 
the lower left corner, the EMR will autocorrect the insurance error.     
7. If the patient does not have insurance, select Self-Pay. Click NEXT. Enter occurrence 
code with code 11 and today’s date. If the visit is pregnancy related, enter occupancy 
code 10 and the LMP date. If there is an existing occurrence code, do not update the 
code..  
8. Click NEXT to navigate to Documents tab.  Scan the patient’s Photo ID, Insurance card 
and non-Epic orders. The patient will e-sign the hospital consent (if necessary) and 
Notice to Patient’s rights. Change the status for the documents to receive with today’s 
date.  
a. If a new HAR is created, the Notice to Patients Regarding Participating Provider 
Status will need to be e-signed. This form will pop-up automatically.  
9. Navigate back to Interactive Face Sheet.  
10. Click Verify Patient. If any required fields are missing, the face sheet will give an error 
message. Click on the update hyperlink to open the missing fields.  
a. Once the missing fields are fixed, click “Fixed, try again”.  
11. Click Verify Guarantor. If any required fields are missing, the face sheet will give an 
error message. Click on the update hyperlink to open the missing fields.  
a. Once the missing fields are fixed, click “Fixed, try again”.  
12. On the patient’s interactive face sheet located in the middle of the page, right hand side is 
an arrow. Click the arrow to expand the check list. 
a. Review check list to make sure all information is complete 
13. Click Check In. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
LAB ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 4 of 4 
LBA422 
a. If the submitter field is left blank due to a FMOL submitter, click continue when 
the error message appears.  
 
 
I. Entering Outpatient Laboratory Orders 
 
A. Entering Non Epic Orders: 
1. Paper orders must include the following information but not limited to: 
▪ Patient’s Name 
▪ Date of Birth  
▪ Lab tests requested  
▪ Diagnosis Codes  
▪ Ordering Physician’s signature  
2. Double click on the laboratory appointment.  
3. Select Order Entry.  
4. Enter all test codes or names for the paper order. 
a. Click on each test hyperlink to update the status, expected date, and priority. 
b. Specimen source and specimen type can be updated, if necessary.   
c. Use the test catalog to find tests or follow-up with the physician’s office or the 
laboratory departments to clarify orders.  
5. Enter the diagnosis codes and associate them with the tests.  
6. Sign orders using the physician’s name that has signed the paper order.  
7. If fax order results are requested, you can use CC results if the doctor is in epic 
a. Select CC results and type doctors name in CC recipients box and accept 
8. If faxed results are requested, and the doctor is not in epic, add the requestor using 
Specimen Inquiry. 
a. This is done after the specimens are collected.  
9. If a callback is requested, open Specimen Inquiry and add a follow-up task to the 
specimen.   
10. If an ABN is triggered, the phlebotomist will have the patient sign the form before 
collection. The LSR will scan the completed ABN into the patient’s chart.  
 
REVISIONS 
2/25/19 (created) 
 
 
  