OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 2 
LBA408 
 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LBA408 
PATIENT AMENDMENT PROCEDURE 
        Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By A Dufrechou 08/11/17 4/19/2018 4/19/2018 
Blood Donor Service Director Review D Gremillion 3/7/2018 Origination Date 
Core Lab Director Review J Teague 3/2/2018 6/2009 
Outreach Director Review E Landry 3/1/2018  
Medical Director Review A Harton 3/18/2018  
 
 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to define the Lake Lab Services (LLS) Outreach policy 
regarding the amendment of patient encounters when the incorrect patient is selected.   
 
 
POLICY 
All specimens delivered to LLS Outreach Department for lab testing should be registered 
and ordered according to the information given by the client and/or physician’s office.  
The patient must be selected or created using the 2ID and patient search procedure.  
When there is a breach in this procedure or the client/physician’s office has given 
incorrect information, an amendment must be performed to ensure that all patient records 
are documented correctly, the correct patient’s results are received, and the correct patient 
is billed for the procedure.  All employees who do not follow the 2ID procedure will be 
placed on immediate disciplinary action.  Since all employees are notified of this verbally 
upon hire, every infraction will cause a skip of discipline beginning at “written warning” 
and progressing in 2s thereafter.    
 
PROCEDURE 
1. Upon detection that the registration and order was placed on the incorrect patient. 
a. If the error is identified before the labs are resulted, cancel the tests and 
reorder on the correct patient.   
b. If the error is identified after the labs are resulted, a call center 
representative or supervisor must be notified. 
2. Outreach Staff or Department Supervisor will forward a completed amendment 
form to Outreach Supervisory staff. 
3. Find the correct patient in LIS 
a. If the correct patient is not available in LIS, mark the ‘new patient’ box on 
the form.  Create a req entry on patient only.  No orders to be placed. 
b. If the correct patient is available in LIS, write the correct MRN only on 
the amendment form.   OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 2 
LBA408 
4. Complete the patient amendment form along with the requisition. 
5. Outreach Supervisory staff will send the following email to the designated HIM 
team member. 
a. Brief description:  Patient amendment Last name, first initial for the 
incorrect patient. 
b. Description:   
i. Please move encounter (list the incorrect MRN here with dos) from 
incorrect patient to correct patient (list the correct MRN here and 
correct demographic information).  Registered in error. 
ii. Send newly assigned CSN when complete. 
c. HIM will complete the encounter reassignment 
d. Once completed, go into original req entry (RQ#) and update demographic 
information.  The move does NOT correct this. 
e. If the order sent from the client is also incorrect, contact a team member 
on the Beaker team to delete scanned doc.  Once completed, scan correct 
document. 
f. Add all information on “Registration Error spreadsheet on T drive”  
6. Once HIM has completed encounter reassignment, orders will be corrected to 
update patient ranges. 
7. Ordering personnel supervisor will then counsel employee  
8. All Atlas amendments need to be forwarded to the LLS ATLAS team after 
amendment is complete to update account in Atlas. 
 
REVISIONS 
6/2009 (created), 3/2015, 8/11/17 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 