ECLS-012 4800 LSU Administration 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: LSU Health Baton Rouge Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for LSU Health Perkins 
Surgical Center: Administration 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 4800 LSU 
Administration 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/13/17 Review Date: 6/3/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(Locations/Directions based on looking at the facility from Front Entrance inward) 
• Location of Exits 
o Through Front Entrance 
o Through Right Hallway, Away from Conference Center and out of Side Entrance  
o Through Conference Room to Eye Clinic and Out of Side Entrance 
• Location of Adjacent Smoke Compartments ECLS-012 4800 LSU Administration 
Page 2 of 3 
o None 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Normal Operating Hours are Monday through Friday 8am to 5pm. In the case of the assigned staff 
member being unavailable, a designee will be assigned to perform the tasks of the original staff 
member. 
 
• The administration staff or designee will close all doors  
• The Unit Manager(s) and supervisor(s) or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed. 
• The administration staff or designee will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The 
hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• All available staff or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Unit Manager(s) or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• Unit Supervisor(s) or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for 
• Unit Leadership or designee will ensure each room is empty.  (This position will mark the 
door/door frame with chalk, or for the clinic all indicator flags extended, to indicate the room is 
empty.) 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• Unit Manager, Supervisor, Charge Nurse, Respiratory or designee are the only staff members 
with authority to shut off the gas valves in all units 
• Location of Gas Shut Off Valve 
o None 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments  
• All departments with available staff are required to evacuate the fully, partially and non-
ambulatory patients.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Alarm Pull 
o Front Entrance Lobby beside Main Entrance 
o Side Entrance Lobby In Front of Social Worker Office 
o Side Entrance Lobby before Clinic Manager Office 
• Fire Extinguisher 
o Conference Room by Eye Clinic Entrance 
o Right Hall, Across from Clinic Manager’s Office 
o Back Right Hall, Outside of Social Worker’s Office and Physicians’ Offices 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Identify any types of equipment that would need to be turned off – None 
• Identify any used/stored combustible products – None 
• Identify any types of special patient populations, especially those non-ambulatory – None 
• Identify any secured area that would require a special badge access or door key.  Explain how ECLS-012 4800 LSU Administration 
Page 3 of 3 
the Code RED Response Team would have access. – Those with offices in Administration 
Building have keys to their respective rooms. Keypad access to Employee Breakroom by 
Physicians’ Offices that all employees know code to. 
 
The location of the horizontal evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Evacuation Route: 
o Out through the Main Entrance 
o Down Right Hallway, past Clinic Manager’s Office and through Administration Side 
Entrance (2 doors) 
o Through Conference Room, into the Eye Clinic and Out of the Eye Clinic Side Exit 
• Gathering Destination: 
o Staff and patients will gather in field in front of Administration building when exiting 
from main entrance  
o Staff and patients will gather in front patient parking lot when exiting from Back of 
Right Hall exits and Eye Clinic Side Exit. 
 
 
 