ECLS-012 4841 LSU Ophthalmology Clinic 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: LSU Health Baton Rouge Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for LSU Health Perkins 
Surgical Center: Ophthalmology Clinic 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 4841 LSU 
Ophthalmology Clinic 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/13/17 Review Date: 6/3/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(Locations/Directions based on looking at the facility from Front Entrance inward) 
• Location of Exits 
o Front Entrance of Clinic/Back Entrance of Administration Building 
o Through the Side Door in Middle of Hall Leading to Administration Conference Room 
• Location of Illuminated Signs 
o Front Entrance of Clinic/Back Entrance of Administration Building ECLS-012 4841 LSU Ophthalmology Clinic 
Page 2 of 3 
o Before Nurses’ Station Double Doors 
o Middle of Hallway Pointing Left Toward Side Exit 
o Above Side Exit Door 
• Location of Adjacent Smoke Compartments 
o None 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Normal Operating Hours are Monday through Friday 7am to 5pm. In the case of the assigned staff 
member being unavailable, a designee will be assigned to perform the tasks of the original staff 
member. 
 
• The nurse (RN/LPN), OT Tech, CSR, resident/physician or designee is responsible for clearing 
the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving them to the nearest empty room.  
• The nurse (RN/LPN), OT Tech, CSR, resident/physician or designee will close all doors  
• The Unit Manager(s) and supervisor(s) or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed. 
• The nurse (RN/LPN), OT Tech, CSR, resident/physician or designee will move patients and 
visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your 
safety” 
• All available staff or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Unit Manager(s) or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• Unit Supervisor(s) or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for 
• Unit Leadership or designee will ensure each room is empty.  (This position will mark the 
door/door frame with chalk, or for the clinic all indicator flags extended, to indicate the room is 
empty.) 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• Unit Manager, Supervisor, Charge Nurse, Respiratory or designee are the only staff members 
with authority to shut off the gas valves in all units 
• Location of Gas Shut Off Valve 
o None 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments  
• Wheelchairs and stretchers are available for use of transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments when necessary.  
• All departments with available staff are required to evacuate the fully, partially and non-
ambulatory patients.  
• There is one wheelchair located in registration office. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Alarm Pull 
o Beside Side Exit Door 
o Beside Main/Front Exit Door 
• Fire Extinguisher ECLS-012 4841 LSU Ophthalmology Clinic 
Page 3 of 3 
• Located on the Side Hallway leading to Side Entrance 
• Located at the Front of the Hall next to Access Service Sign 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Identify any types of equipment that would need to be turned off – None 
• Identify any used/stored combustible products – There are 2 Full Oxygen Cylinders located on 
the crash cart at the Front of the Hallway 
• Identify any types of special patient populations, especially those non-ambulatory – None 
• Identify any secured area that would require a special badge access or door key.  Explain how 
the Code RED Response Team would have access. – There are 2 supply rooms located in the 
front portion of the Hallway with Key Access only, all Ophthalmology staff have access to 
keys  
 
The location of the horizontal evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Evacuation Route: 
o Staff and patients located in front Lobby will exit Front Main Entrance and gather in 
front patient parking lot 
o Staff and patients located in exam room will exit Side Entrance and gather in front 
patient parking lot. 
• Gathering Destination: 
o Staff and patients will gather at Surgery Clinic building when exiting from main 
entrance  
o Staff and patients will gather in front patient parking lot when exiting from side 
entrance. 
 
 
 