ECLS-012 4865 LSU Radiology 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: LSU Health Baton Rouge Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for LSU Health Perkins 
Surgical Center: Radiology Department 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 4865 LSU 
Radiology 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/13/17 Review Date: 6/3/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(Locations/Directions based on looking at the facility from Front Entrance inward) 
• Location of Exits with Illuminated Signs  
o Exits & Signs 
o Front Hall at Secured Door 
o Beside MRI 
o Beside Oral Maxillofacial Surgery (OMFS) Office ECLS-012 4865 LSU Radiology 
Page 2 of 3 
• Location of Adjacent Smoke Compartments 
o Radiology 
o Back Hall Leading from OMFS/Radiology to Front Desk/OR 
• CE .1.1.1A/ CE .1.1.1B 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Normal Operating Hours are Monday through Friday 5am to 5:30 pm. In the case of the assigned staff 
member being unavailable, a designee will be assigned to perform the tasks of the original staff 
member. 
 
• The radiology technologist (RT) or designee is responsible for clearing the hallway of any carts 
or equipment by moving them to the nearest empty room.  
• RT or designee will close all doors. 
• RTs or designee will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting 
an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• All available staff or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities. 
• Unit Manager(s) or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for. 
• Unit Supervisor(s) or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for. 
• Unit Leadership or designee will ensure each room is empty.  (This position will mark the 
door/door frame with chalk, or for the clinic all indicator flags extended, to indicate the room is 
empty.) 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• Unit Manager, Supervisor, Charge Nurse, Respiratory or designee are the only staff members 
with authority to shut off the gas valves in all units. 
• Radiology 
o Front Hall between two X-Ray rooms 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke 
Compartments  
• Wheelchairs and stretchers may be available for use of transporting patients between 
Fire/Smoke Compartments when necessary 
• There is one wheelchair stored in the Fluoroscopy Room and one MRI compatible wheelchair, 
stored in MRI. Clinic wheelchairs are stored in the front triage area when not in use and 
stretchers are available in rooms 14-21. 
• All departments with available staff are required to evacuate the fully, partially and non-
ambulatory patients.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Radiology 
o Alarm Pull 
▪ Outside MRI 
▪ Beside OMFS Office ECLS-012 4865 LSU Radiology 
Page 3 of 3 
 
o Fire Extinguisher 
▪ Front Hall Beside Ultrasound 
▪ Front Hall Beside MRI (MRI compatible) 
▪ Between OMFS Rooms 1 and 2 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• There is a single full oxygen cylinder stored in the supply closet of the Radiology Manager/IS 
office.  
• There is a single partial oxygen cylinder located in the supply closet of the Radiology 
Manager/IS office. 
• Oxygen and Vacuum shut off valves are located in the Front Hall between the two X-Ray 
Rooms. 
• Badge access is required to enter Nuclear Medicine and all imaging staff have access. The Hot 
Lab is badge access only. Guests never enter this area, and designated personnel have badge 
access to this area.   
• Keypad access is required to enter the Radiology Manager/IS office & the Radiology 
Workroom. Guests never enter this area, and all imaging staff have access.   
• The MRI suite is closed and locked at all times, when not in use.  MRI technologist and 
designated personnel have key access. The MRI technologist will be responsible for evacuating 
the patient in the MRI suite.  Once the technologist has evacuated the patient, the door to the 
suite will be closed and locked as long as the fire is not in the MRI suite.  If the fire is in the 
MRI suite, the magnet will be quenched by the MRI technologist or designee.  This is 
accomplished by depressing the red stop button behind the control panel.  The magnet will be 
quenched to allow emergency personnel to safely enter the room with their equipment. 
 
The location of the horizontal evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Radiology 
o Exit at end of Radiology Hallway, Door by MRI 
o Exit at end of OMFS/PARC Hallway, Door By OMFS Office 
• Staff and patients will gather in front patient parking lot when exiting from MRI exit door. 
• Staff and patients will gather by bench on top of hill behind surgical center when exiting from 
OMFS exit. 
 
 