ECLS-012 4849 LSU SDS 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: LSU Health Baton Rouge Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for LSU Health Perkins 
Surgical Center: Same Day Surgery (SDS) 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 4849 LSU SDS 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/13/17 Review Date: 7/16/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(Locations/Directions based on looking at the facility from Front Entrance inward) 
• Location of Exits 
o Same Day Surgery (SDS) 
o Side Entrance between Surgery Clinic and SDS 
o SDS Back Hall 
o Hall between SDS and Central Supply ECLS-012 4849 LSU SDS 
Page 2 of 3 
• Illuminated Signs 
o Before SDS Back Hall Exit Located Next to Nurse Manager’s Office and Code Secured 
Housekeeping Hallway 
o In Code Secured Housekeeping Hallway Pointing Left 
o Between Back Hall and SDS Main Hall, Outside of Storage Room Pointing Right  
o Inside SDS Badge Access Entrance Indicating Exit 
o Outside of Same Day Surgery (SDS) Badge Access Entrance Pointing Left (When 
Viewed from Surgery Clinic Nurses’ Station) 
o Before SDS Side Entrance 
• Location of Adjacent Smoke Compartments 
o Compartment Door at Badge Access SDS Entrance 
• Fire Door: A.1.1.7 
• Badge Access Required 
• 2 hour Fire and Smoke Barrier 90 min Opening Protection 
o Compartment Doors from Hallway Between SDS and Central Supply 
• Fire Doors: AB .1.1.1A/ AB .1.1.1B 
• Badge Access Required When Shut 
• Smoke Barrier Doors with 20 min Opening Protection 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Normal Operating Hours are Monday through Friday 5am to 5pm. In the case of the assigned staff 
member being unavailable, a designee will be assigned to perform the tasks of the original staff 
member. 
 
• The nurse, CNA, CSR or designee is responsible for clearing the hallway of any carts or 
equipment by moving them to the nearest empty room.  
• The nurse, CNA, CSR or designee will close all doors  
• The Unit Manager(s) and supervisor(s) or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed. 
• The nurse, CNA, CSR or designee will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The 
hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• All available staff or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Unit Manager(s) or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• Unit Supervisor(s) or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for 
• Unit Leadership or designee will ensure each room is empty.  (This position will mark the 
door/door frame with chalk, or for the clinic all indicator flags extended, to indicate the room is 
empty.) 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• Unit Manager, Supervisor, Charge Nurse, Respiratory or designee are the only staff members 
with authority to shut off the gas valves in all units 
• Location of Gas Shut Off Valve 
• Nurses’ Station 
 ECLS-012 4849 LSU SDS 
Page 3 of 3 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments  
• Wheelchairs and stretchers may be available for use of transporting patients between 
Fire/Smoke Compartments when necessary 
• Stretchers are available in rooms 14-21 
• SDS wheelchairs are stored in the SDS storage  
• All departments with available staff are required to evacuate the fully, partially and non-
ambulatory patients.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Alarm Pull 
o Nurses’ Station 
o Back Hall by Exit and Nurse Manager’s Office 
• Fire Extinguisher 
o Between Room 7 and Room 9 
o Back Hall Between Restroom and Exit near Nurse Manager’s Office 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Identify any types of equipment that would need to be turned off – O2 and gas 
• Identify any used/stored combustible products – O2 tanks 
• Identify any types of special patient populations, especially those non-ambulatory – patients 
under anesthesia 
• Identify any secured area that would require a special badge access or door key.  Explain how 
the Code RED Response Team would have access. – Badge Access to SDS Hallway as well as 
Codes to Supply Rooms. All Team Members have Badge Access and know the Codes to the 
Supply Rooms. 
 
The location of the horizontal evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Evacuation Route: 
o Side Entrance between SDS and Surgery Clinic 
o Back Exit beside Nurse Manager’s Office 
• Gathering Destination: 
o Staff and patients will gather at eye clinic building when exiting from side entrance 
between SDS and Surgery Clinic 
o Staff and patients will gather behind warehouse located behind surgical center when 
exiting from back exit beside dirty linen room. 
 
 
 