ECLS-012 4848 LSU PACU 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: LSU Health Baton Rouge Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for LSU Health Perkins 
Surgical Center: Post Anesthesia Care 
Unit (PACU) 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 4848 LSU 
PACU 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/13/17 Review Date: 6/3/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(Locations/Directions based on looking at the facility from Front Entrance inward) 
• Location of Exits 
o Through Double Doors Leading From Endo to Front Desk and Out the Main Entrance 
o Through the OR Back Hall Exit Across from OR Room 4 
• Location of Illuminated Signs ECLS-012 4848 LSU PACU 
Page 2 of 3 
o Inside PACU Room Entrance Leading to OR Hallway 
o At OR/Endo Crossing Pointing Right down OR Hallway Toward OR Room 4 
o Outside of OR Room 4 Pointing Right to Exit 
o Above OR Hallway Exit Across from OR Room 4 
• Location of Adjacent Smoke Compartments 
o Compartment Doors in Hallway Between SDS and Central Supply 
• Fire Doors: AB .1.1.1A/ AB .1.1.1B 
• Badge Access Required When Shut 
• Smoke Barrier Doors with 20 min Opening Protection 
o Compartment Doors from ENDO/Front Desk  
• Fire Doors: CD .1.1.1A/ CD .1.1.1B 
• Badge Access Required When Shut 
• Smoke Barrier Doors with 20 min Opening Protection 
o Compartment Door in Sterile Core 
• Fire Door: D.1.1.47, D.1.1.48 and D.1.1.33 
• One Hour Fire Barrier Doors with 45 min Opening Protection 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Normal Operating Hours are Monday through Friday 8am to 5pm. In the case of the assigned staff 
member being unavailable, a designee will be assigned to perform the tasks of the original staff 
member. 
 
• The nurse, CNA or designee is responsible for clearing the hallway of any carts or equipment by 
moving them to the nearest empty room.  
• The nurse, CNA or designee will close all doors  
• The Unit Manager(s) and supervisor(s) or designee will confirm automatic fire doors closed. 
• The nurse, CNA or designee will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• All available staff or designee will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Unit Manager(s) or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• Unit Supervisor(s) or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for 
• Unit Leadership or designee will ensure each room is empty.  (This position will mark the 
door/door frame with chalk, or for the clinic all indicator flags extended, to indicate the room is 
empty.) 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• Unit Manager, Supervisor, Charge Nurse, Respiratory or designee are the only staff members 
with authority to shut off the gas valves in all units 
• Location of Gas Shut Off Valve 
o Outside PACU Entrance Leading from the OR Hallway 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments  
• Wheelchairs and stretchers may be available for use of transporting patients between ECLS-012 4848 LSU PACU 
Page 3 of 3 
Fire/Smoke Compartments when necessary  
• Clinic wheelchairs are stored in the front triage area when not in use 
• All departments with available staff are required to evacuate the fully, partially and non-
ambulatory patients.  
o Non-ambulatory patients of the OR will be escorted by Anesthesia to prevent 
complications. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Alarm Pull 
o OR Back Hall Beside Exit Door 
• Fire Extinguisher 
o Endo Hallway, Outside PACU Exit Leading to Endo Hallway 
o OR Back Hall Opposite OR Room 1  
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Identify any types of equipment that would need to be turned off – O2 and gas 
• Identify any used/stored combustible products – O2 tanks 
• Identify any types of special patient populations, especially those non-ambulatory – pts under 
anesthesia 
 
The location of the horizontal evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Evacuation Route: 
o Through Endo/Main Entrance Fire Doors and Exit through Main Entrance 
o Exit PACU into OR Hallway, Turn Right and Exit through OR Back Door across from 
OR Room 4 
• Gathering Destination: 
o Staff and patients will gather in front patient parking lot when exiting from Main 
Entrance/Main Lobby. 
o Staff and patients will gather by bench on top of hill behind surgical center when 
exiting from OR exit. 
 
 
 