ECLS-012 (SMAU, cost center 6217) 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: St. Mary’s Admission Unit 
(SMAU) Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for SMAU 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 6217 
SMAU 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 01/25/2018 Review Date: 06/03/2024 
Revision Date: 06/03/2020 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• The exit sign with arrow located outside Bay 25.  
• Exit sign by Bay 12 and 13 
• The adjacent smoke compartments door is accessible by Bay 12 and Bay 13 and another by Bay 
25 to SMAU waiting room.   
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response ECLS-012 (SMAU, cost center 6217) 
Page 2 of 3 
The hours of operation are Monday-Friday, 500am to 2130pm and Saturday and Sundays 5a to 
1730pm.  
 
• The CNA will clear the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving them to the Clean Utility 
room, medicine room and/or SMAU nurse’s lounge.  
• The CSR will close doors.  
• The charge nurse will confirm automatic fire doors closed (doors held open by magnetic locks 
are to release and close upon activation of the alarm) 
• The nurses working on SMAU will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital 
is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety.” 
•  The charge nurse will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities 
o The Manager or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
o The Supervisor or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for  
o The Manager or designee will ensure each room is empty 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
The Medical Gas shut off valves are located: 
• Outside Bay 25 and controls Bay 23 and 25. 
• Wall across from Bay 25 controls Bays 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 11, & 12. 
• Located outside Bay 23 controls Bays 4, 5, 7, 10, 13-22, & 24. 
• Any staff person has the authority to shut off the valves if instructed to by Plant Services or 
Respiratory. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• For horizontal evacuations, we will use wheelchairs and stretchers for those that are not 
ambulatory.  
• For vertical evacuations, we will use equipment such as stretcher mattresses and sheets. 
Additional sheets are located on the linen cart in the Supply hallway. 
• We anticipate most patients to be partially ambulatory. If assistance is needed, the Manager or 
designee will seek help from the OR. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguishers are located:   
o Across from Bay 20 
o Outside of Bay 4 
o Outside of Bay 10 
o Across from Bay 14 
• Manual pull station is located on wall by Bay 13. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Special patient populations may include non-ambulatory patients due to anesthesia, specific 
surgery, or pain medication.  ECLS-012 (SMAU, cost center 6217) 
Page 3 of 3 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route will be towards St. Mary’s Admission’s Area 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route will be by Bays 12 and 13.  
• The primary vertical evacuation route is to exit the building via bridge to Parking Garage 2. 
• The secondary vertical evacuation route is to exit the building via Parking Garage 3. 