ECLS-012 (Post Op SMAU, cost center 6217) 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 2SA Hall Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for SMAU Post Op 
(2SA Hall) 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 6217 
SMAU Post Op 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 01/25/2018 Review Date: 06/03/2024 
Revision Date: 06/03/2020 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• The exit sign on 2SA hall is located across from the Director’s office.  
• The adjacent smoke compartments door is accessible by the Director’s office. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
The hours of operation are Monday-Friday, 7am to 1330pm.  
 ECLS-012 (Post Op SMAU, cost center 6217) 
Page 2 of 2 
• The CNA will clear the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving them to the Clean Utility 
room.  
• The CSR will close doors/windows.  
• The charge nurse will confirm automatic fire doors closed (doors held open by magnetic locks 
are to release and close upon activation of the alarm) 
• The nurses working on post op will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital 
is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety.” 
• The charge nurse will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities 
o The Manager or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
o The Supervisor or designee will ensure all patients are accounted for  
o The Manager or designee will ensure each room is empty 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
The Medical Gas shut off valves are located: 
• In the nurse’s station in the old PCU.  
• Any staff person has the authority to shut off the valves if instructed to by Plant Services or 
Respiratory. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• For horizontal evacuations, we will use wheelchairs and stretchers for those that are not 
ambulatory.  
• For vertical evacuations, we will use equipment such as stretcher mattresses and sheets. 
Additional sheets are in the linen cart in the Clean Supply room. 
• We anticipate most patients to be partially ambulatory. If assistance is needed, the Manager or 
designee will seek help from the OR. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguisher is located:   
o In 2SA Hall nursing station, and one is located across the hall from the Director’s office. 
• Manual pull station is located across the hall from the Director’s office. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Special patient populations may include non-ambulatory patients due to anesthesia, specific 
surgery, or pain medication.  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route will be towards the Tower waiting area.  
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route will be towards the old PCU and TNCC waiting 
room.  
• The primary vertical evacuation route is to exit the building via bridge to Parking Garage 2. 
• The secondary vertical evacuation route is to exit the building via the stairwell by the old PCU.  