ECLS-012 6252 Main 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Main Sterile Processing 
Department Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Main Sterile Processing 
Department 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 6252 Main 
SPD 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 12/17/2019 Review Date: 06/03/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exits are located in Decontam, Prep and Pack, and by cart washer 
• This location does not have smoke compartments. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• Sterile Processing Tech or designee clears the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving 
them to wall to ensure exit pathway is clear. ECLS-012 6252 Main 
Page 2 of 2 
• Sterile Processing Tech or designee closes doors. 
• The manager/supervisor or designee ensures all employees are accounted for 
• The manager/supervisor or designee ensures each area is empty.  
• Any employees or patients with disabilities or language barriers will be properly assisted by an 
available employee 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire pull stations: 
o On wall by prep and pack exit door 
o On wall next to cart washer exit door 
o On wall next to Surgical Materials pass through door 
• There is one fire extinguisher: 
o In prep and pack on wall across from sterilizer 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• After hours: Badge access can be granted by and SPD technician or supervisor.  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Location will only have horizontal evacuation, evacuation routes are: 
From Prep and Pack 
o Primary: Out exit door to hospital entrance adjacent to gift shop 
o Secondary: Out exit door and down back hall towards parking Garage 4 
From Decontam or cart washer exit 
o Primary: Out exit door and down back hall towards parking Garage 4 
o Secondary: Out exit door to hospital entrance adjacent to gift shop 
 
 