ECLS-012 (2028) 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Med1 Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Med1 (2028) 
Policy 
Reference #: 2028 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 02/13/2018 Review Date:  
Revision Date: 01/10/2019, 6/24/24 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Location of Exits include 
o Across from Nurse Director office  
o End of A hall (rooms 4250-4260,4265) 
o End of B hall (rooms 4266-4277) 
o End of C hall (rooms 4278-4288) 
 ECLS-012 (2028) 
Page 2 of 3 
• Location of Smoke Compartment  
o Behind double doors at unit entry from front (near Nurse Director office) and back hall 
(near staff bathroom)  
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• All available Nurses, Certified Nursing Assistant (CNA) and/or Clinical Service Representative 
(CSR) will clear all hallways of any carts or equipment by moving them to the equipment room. 
• All available Nurses and CNAs will ensure all windows and doors are closed. 
• The charge nurse or designee will ensure that all automatic fire doors are closed. 
• All available staff members will move all patients and visitors to safety explaining “The hospital 
is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety.” 
• The CSR or designee will prevent people from using the elevators.   
• The Nurses will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with sensory or 
mobility disabilities. 
• The Charge Nurse and/or Nurse Director will ensure all employees are accounted for.  
• The Charge Nurse and/or Nurse Director will ensure all patients are accounted for.  
• The Charge Nurse and/or Nurse Director will ensure each room is empty.  
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off. 
• Location of Medical Gas Shut Off Valves  
o Entry to the nurses station between the CSR & charge nurse desk. 
o Wall in Nurses station (C hall Entry)  
• Unit Director, Charge Nurse, House Manager, Respiratory, and/or Plant Management (or anyone 
designated by the forementioned) have the authority to shut off medical gas valves. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• For horizontal evacuation, non-ambulatory and partially ambulatory patients will be assisted to 
the next smoke compartment using wheelchairs, stretchers and/or beds.  
• For vertical evacuation, non-ambulatory and partially ambulatory patients will be assisted down 
the stairs with linens and mattresses.  
o Linens are stored on A, B&C Halls. Oxygen tanks are stored in the clean supply room.       
• Patient population anticipated to include a mix of ambulatory and non-ambulatory patients. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Location of Fire Extinguishers   
o Across from Nurse Director office 
o End of A- hall  
o B -hall (1 mid hall and 1 near stairwell)  
o C hall (1 mid hall and 1 near stairwell) 
 
• Location of Manual Pull Stations  
o End of A, B and C hall 
o 2 in Nurses Station  ECLS-012 (2028) 
Page 3 of 3 
o Back entry wall of unit (across from nurses station)  
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• The department has med gases that would need to be turned off. 
• The department has e-cylinders that are combustible. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
•  Primary horizontal evacuation route is to exit unit towards Surg 2 Unit.  
• Secondary horizontal evacuation route is to exit unit towards Surg 2 Unit down the A hall (4200-
4211) towards the Medical 5 unit.  
• Primary vertical evacuation route is to exit down the stairwells at the end of A, B, and C hall to 
the parking lot near the Medical Office Building.   
•  Secondary vertical evacuation is to exit using the stairwell across from the Family Waiting Area 
on Sur2 to the 1st floor out towards Garage 2.   
 
 
 