1 
 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Srvs. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   
Subject:  Care and Observation Monitoring of Behavioral 
Health Patients within the Emergency Department  
Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  May 17, 2005 Supersedes: MH3; MH4 
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed: 
June 5, 2024 
January 9, 2025 
Serial Code:  MH-02 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish a process for the safe care of the mental behavioral health patients, and those under legal holds, 
who are being treated in the Emergency Department. (ED) 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS:  
A. Triage – Identifying & managing patients at potential risk for suicide/homicide or experiencing psychotic 
symptom 
B. Nursing Guidelines – Outlining nursing roles & responsibilities when caring for these patients 
C. Safety – Describing safety precautions to minimize patient’s potential for self-harm and/or elopement and to 
ensure his/her and team member safety 
D. Competency for Observation Monitoring – Defining required competency for team members performing 
observation monitoring 
E. Observation Monitoring – Implementing Observation Monitoring of 1:1 Observation & Line of Sight 
Observation 
F. Personal Belongings – Safe keeping of patient belongings, valuables & home medications 
G. Family/Visitor Considerations – Family & Visitor Considerations 
H. Discharge/Transfer – To protect and plan appropriate care for individuals at risk for suicide while receiving 
care and after discharge by identifying individuals with suspected or known suicidal ideations. 
I. References  
 
 
DEFINITIONS:  
 
Legal holds: 
Physician Emergency Certificate (PEC) State of Louisiana - legal form used to place involuntary hold on 
patient with mental illness who is a danger to self or others, or gravely disabled, for the purpose of observation, 
diagnosis, and treatment; implemented by any physician; good for 72 hours. 
 
Coroner’s Emergency Certificate (CEC) State of Louisiana - legal form to be completed by the coroner 
within 72 hours after the PEC has been implemented; must be completed by the coroner or his deputy; CEC and 
PEC together are good for a period not to exceed 15 days. 
 2 
 
 
Judicial Commitment - Any person of legal age may file with the court a petition which asserts his belief that 
a person is suffering from mental illness which contributes or causes that person to be a danger to himself or 
others or to be gravely disabled or is suffering from substance abuse which contributes or causes that person to 
be a danger to himself or others or to be gravely disabled and may thereby request a hearing.  
 
Order of Protective Custody (OPC) – is completed by the coroner or judge of a court of competent 
jurisdiction of the State of Louisiana when a peace officer or other credible person executes a statement under 
private signature specifying that, to the best of his knowledge and belief, a person is mentally ill or suffering 
from substance abuse and is in need of immediate treatment to protect the person or others from physical harm. 
 
Peace Officer’s Hold – A peace officer or a peace officer accompanied by an emergency medical service 
trained technician may take a person into protective custody and transport him to a treatment facility for a 
medical evaluation when, as a result of his personal observation, the peace officer or emergency medical service 
technician has reasonable grounds to believe the person is a proper subject for involuntary admission to a 
treatment facility because the person is acting in a manner dangerous to himself or dangerous to others, is 
gravely disabled, and is in need of immediate hospitalization to protect such a person or others from physical 
harm. 
 
Voluntary Hold/Commitment – the act or practice of a competent person admitting themself to a psychiatric 
hospital, or other mental health facility, voluntarily 
 
Behavioral Health Patients:  
Suicidal Patients – Any individual who is brought to the Emergency Department for treatment of attempted 
overdose, self-destructive behavior and/or ideations, suicidal behavior, or threats. Any patient within our 
hospital that verbalizes a plan to end his/her life, threatens or attempts to harm self.   
 
Homicidal Patients – Any individual who verbalizes a desire and significant threats of bodily harm towards 
any person, in which the patient appears to be able to carry out. An actual physical attack (i.e., hit, slap, punch, 
kick, bite, grab, thrown object, etc.) towards another individual within our hospital or an unanticipated outburst 
of violent, angry, aggressive, impulsive, and/or destructive behavior that poses immediate danger. 
 
Psychotic Patients – Any individual whose thought process is altered as evidenced by hallucinations, 
delusions, paranoia, bizarre behavior, confusion, severe mania, and/or non-reality-based thinking. 
 
Emotional Crisis Patients– Any individual whose mood and reactions may result in danger to themselves or 
others. 
 
Observation Monitoring: 
1:1 Observation – Observation of High-Risk Patients, implemented when clinical assessment indicates a high 
level for immediate or impulsive behavior that may be harmful to self or others. One observer who maintains 
visual contact with only one patient and can immediately intervene.  
 
Line of Sight Observation – Observation of one or more patients per staff member. Less restrictive than 1:1 
Observation, always requires the observer be in visual contact with the patient. Staff/patient ratio determined by 
the RN per patient and unit needs. 
 3 
 
 
 
 
POLICY: 
 
A. Triage: 
1. All patients who present to the Emergency Department with an emotional, mental, or behavioral complaint, 
or arrive under a legal hold will be triaged as an ESI Level 2/emergent patient and may be detained by staff 
if attempting to leave prior to provider evaluation. Efforts by the staff should be focused on keeping the 
patient safely on the unit.  
2. Patients who can be placed in a safe room, will be placed under continuous line of sight observation, until 
deemed otherwise by a physician/midlevel provider. 
3. Patients who require placement in a medical room due to unit capacity and/or require monitoring and/or 
medical equipment, will be placed under 1:1 observation and follow safety and observation guidelines as 
outlined in Section E, below.   
4. A Suicide Risk Screening Assessment will be completed by a Registered Nurse during triage, on all 
patients age 12 and above to identify patients at risk for suicide and/or the need for behavioral health 
services.  
a. OLOL Emergency Departments use the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS)  
i. Completion of the C-SSRS produces a rating of low, moderate, or high suicide risk to 
determine level of care needed to ensure patient safety.  
1. Low or moderate risk – Nurse should anticipate a behavioral health evaluation & 
implement patient safety precautions, until instructed they are no longer needed 
by the provider 
2. High – Nurse should implement suicide risk precautions/observation and 
immediately notify the physician. 
5. Upon arrival of a patient that has an active OPC, the law enforcement officer who has physical custody 
of the OPC patient will remain with the OPC patient until the emergency nurse confirms that the OPC 
paperwork is properly completed.  
 
B. Nursing Guidelines: 
1. Observation monitoring and documentation are delegated from Registered Nurse (RN) to appropriate 
unlicensed staff with the RN retaining accountability and supervision. 
2. RN documentation should include:  
a. Purpose and level of observation  
b. Suicide screening risk level every 12 hours 
c. Patient Legal Status 
d. Focused psychosocial assessment every 4 hours 
e. Home medication reconciliation, both prescribed /non-prescribed. 
f. On-going assessment, reevaluation & vital signs will be completed every 4-hours or as the 
patient’s condition warrants, including but not limited to changes in expression of behavior 
(harm to others, additional self- harm gestures). This should include:  
i. Response to interventions (medications/restraints etc.)  
ii. Safety Rounds  
iii. Patient, family/visitor’s behavior  
iv. Observer assigned to monitor patient 
v. ADL’s and meals provided  4 
 
 
 
3. Patients should be observed when taking medication to assure they have swallowed all oral medications. 
4. The nurse helps assure the patient’s right to privacy and personal space is respected at all times. Care or 
treatment, such as a physical examination or assessment, plan of care discussions, or medical treatment, 
will be offered in an area that provides for privacy of the patient. 
5. Patients should be educated on the PEC/transfer process and kept informed throughout their stay.  
6. Encourage family/significant other to participate in care of patient when such support promotes positive 
outcomes and does not escalate the behavior of the patient. 
 
C. Safety 
1. Patients who are identified as at risk for suicide or presented to the Emergency Department under a legal 
hold, or for emotional/ mental/behavioral complaints, shall be placed in a safe environment to receive 
medical care. 
2. To create a safe environment, team members should follow the Initial Safety Observation Checklist to 
remove all objects that pose a risk for self-harm and to reduce ligature risk. This includes, but is not limited 
to:  
a. Use of a handheld metal detector/wand on all MBH patients where available 
b. Placing patient in paper scrubs or designated gown  
c. Removing belongings, valuables, and home medications  
i. When wanding a patient, removing patient belongings/clothing, staff must be aware of any 
sharps/contraband that maybe found.  
3. If unit exceeds safe room capacity or the patient requires placement in a medical treatment room, the nurse 
will follow unit specific ligature risk protocols to remove all unnecessary equipment from room.  
a. This patient will remain on 1:1 Observation until they can be placed in a safe room and removed 
from all medical equipment. 
b. Team members should pay special attention to permanent ligature risk such as stretcher, 
overhead lights, sink fixtures, Hand Soap, Hand Sanitizer, Space Lab monitor/cables, cabinet 
handles, sharps containers (assure locked), glove box holder, electric outlets, computer cabinets, 
thermostat, dry erase board and marker holder, ceiling, and vent tiles during patient monitoring. 
4. Justice involved MBH patients will be placed in private room.  Law Enforcement will maintain custody 
of patient.  Law Enforcement will assure gun locked in safe prior to entering ED MBH locked area.  
Patient’s may remain in appropriate secure devices such as handcuffs or zip-ties.  All justice involved 
MBH patients will be transported in wheelchair with sheet covering any secure devices.  OLOL staff 
members will not assume custody of any justice involved patient.  
5. The patient and family must be informed of the need to remove all personal belongings and objects that 
might be potentially harmful. 
6. The patient will be restricted to his/her room. 
7. When the patient is required to leave the unit for testing or being transported/transferred to another unit 
or out of the facility, 2 observers will always remain with the patient. 
8. To identify patients that have a Physicians Emergency Certificate or Coroner’s Emergency Certificate, 
patients will be placed in green paper scrubs (preferred) if unavailable, a hospital gown may be used. . 
(Policy OC018) 
9. Meals are provided on the unit and in the company of staff. 
a. Meals should be provided on disposable tray with no metal/aluminum/glass utensils or serve 
ware.  
b. Observer must account for all items when removing tray. 5 
 
 
10. In the event a patient becomes verbally or physically abusive and disruptive to the staff, a Code White 
will be initiated. 
a. Non-physical/violent intervention strategies should be used when dealing with anxious, hostile, 
or violent patients. 
11. Any person entering the patients room needs to be aware of items carried by staff members that can be 
used as a weapon by the patient. (i.e., Stethoscope, trauma scissors, hemostats, pens/pencils). 
 
D. Competency for Observation Monitoring: 
1. All team members assigned for observation monitoring are required to have completed the crisis 
prevention training/competency and/or such training which focuses on techniques surrounding non-
physical/violent intervention strategies for safely defusing anxious, hostile, or violent behavior at the 
earliest possible stage. 
2. All team members assigned for observation monitoring are required to have initial training and then 
ongoing training at least every 2 years focused on the care, safety, observation & documentation, 
organizational policies, and best practices surrounding mental behavioral health patients.  
  
E. Observation Monitoring: 
1. Behavioral patients in the ED under suicide precautions, legal holds, or elopement precautions, will be 
assigned either 1:1 Observation or Line of Sight Observation status initiated depending on patient status, 
behavior, treatment plan or placement in the emergency department.  
2. Observation monitoring is initiated once patient presents to the Emergency Department with an 
emotional, mental, or behavioral complaint, legal hold, is identified for risk of suicide through suicide 
risk assessment in triage or through clinical observations/conversations at any point throughout patient 
stay. 
3. Observation of patients in the Emergency Department will be performed by a staff member deemed 
competent to perform 1:1 Observation and Line of Sight Observation. 
4. The staff member assigned to perform observation should be of the same sex as the patient, as the 
staffing pattern allows. If this is not possible, arrangements should be made for same sex staff to 
accompany the patient during times of personal hygiene, toileting, and other self-care needs.  
5. Observation personnel will be responsible for:  
a. Notifying the Nurse of changes in patient’s condition, verbalizations and/or behaviors suggesting 
any ideas or intentions to harm themselves, others, or possibly elope. 
b. Providing a “hand-off” report to the person relieving him/her: 
i. In sight of the patient 
ii. Including a summary of patient’s behavior and level of cooperation throughout the 
observation period 
c. Complete all aspects of ADL’s and vital signs, based on competency validation. 
d. Documentation of Observation Monitoring  
6. Documentation of 1:1 Observation and Line of Sight Observation will be recorded on the Behavior 
Observation Record (#91817 to include: 
a. The patient’s location, activity, and behavior every 15 minutes 
b. The purpose and the level of observation as indicated by the RN 
c. Handoff from one observer to another 
d. Initial Safety Observation Checklist & MBH Environment of Care Observation Checklist 
e. Legal Status (nurse) 
7. Guidelines for 1:1 Observation & Line of Sight Observation are outlined as follows: 6 
 
 
a. Always requires the observer be in visual contact with the patient. 
b. 1:1 staff should accompany the patient at all times, including times for personal hygiene, 
toileting, and other self-care needs. (ex: during toileting, the team member must be inside the 
bathroom with the patient or keep the door open for observation.)  
8. Distinguishing Characteristics of Level 1 Observation (1:1 Observation) from Level 2 (Line of Sight 
Observation) are as follows:  
 
Level 1 – 1:1 Observation Level 2 – Line of Sight Observation 
• Requires a 1:1 staff/patient ratio. 
 
• 1:1 observation patient means there can never be 
more than one patient watched by one observer.  
 
• Patient in non-psych safe/ligature risk free exam 
room due to medical needs  
• Observer can monitor more than one patient at a 
time. 
• Staff/patient ratio determined by the RN per 
patient and unit needs. 
 
• Patient in psych safe room 
 
Children’s Hospital Emergency Department:  
In addition to the Columbia Suicide Screening tool, OLOL Children’s Emergency (CH) Department will assign an 
initial and ongoing behavioral level of red, yellow, or green on arrival to the CH E.D. mental behavioral health area 
to indicate safety level for use of the Children’s Hospital Activity Room.  (See Activity Room policy PADM-02). 
 
 
F. Personal Belongings: 
1. Patient valuables, belongings, and home meds will be taken from the patient and secured per policy 
(OrgClin – 022). 
2. With the patient's approval, family members are encouraged to take home any belongings, valuables, 
and home medications the patient has brought with him/her. 
3. Belongings, valuables, and home medications kept at the facility will be secured in a locked monitored 
area.  
a. Once removed, personal belongings, valuables & home medications will be inventoried, 
documented, and placed in their respective bags following (OrgClin - 022).  
i. Patient belongings inventoried in EMR or on form (#91507) 
ii. Valuables & home medications should be inventoried & documented in both the medical 
record and on the valuables form (#91688) home medication form (#91687) 
iii. Controlled substances must be counted and verified by two licensed personnel, placed in 
a tamper resistant bag, and stored in a locked monitored area 
4. If a weapon or other contraband (i.e., illicit drugs, drug paraphernalia) is found, notify the police 
immediately to remove the contraband. 
a. Utilize Risk Management’s Chain of Custody Form  
5. Patient valuables, belongings, and home meds that were inventoried and kept at the facility are returned 
to the family or giving to transporting agency at the time of discharge/transfer. 
 
G. Family/Visitor Considerations: 
1. Visitation is allowed based on individual patient situation, acuity, behavior, and the nurses’ clinical 
judgement.  
2. Patient must consent to each family/visitor.  
3. Visitation may not impede patient care or cause the patient to experience negative outcomes (escalating 7 
 
 
behavior, angry, uncooperative, risks to patient’s well-being). 
4. Visitation maybe limited when patients are in cluster observation based on safe environment of care and 
privacy concerns. 
5. Family members/significant others are requested to leave all personal belongings in their private vehicle. 
a. Family/Visitors are restricted from bringing personal items into the patient room. 
b. Food/beverages may be permitted with nurse inspection.  
6. With the patient’s approval the family should be educated on the PEC/transfer process and kept inform 
throughout the patient’s stay.  
 
H. Discharge/Transfer: 
1. Each discharge plan for a patient with a psychiatric issue identified by the provider in the problem list 
will include the number to the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline and location specific resources.  
2. Safety/Crisis Prevention planning and follow up care to be included at discharge for patients identified 
as at risk for suicide. 
3. The nurse shall ensure a copy of the legal paperwork (e: PEC, CEC, judicial commitment, etc.) remains 
in the chart to be scanned into the medical record and the original is sent to the next level of care with 
the patient.  
4. If the physician determines either through his/her own assessment or through a psychiatric consult that 
the patient is no longer a threat to self or others, the physician will document the change in the patient’s 
status in the medical record and the interventions outlined above may be discontinued.  If a Physician’s 
Emergency Certificate (PEC) has been completed prior to this assessment, the physician should write an 
order to discontinue the PEC/CEC or other applicable legal status.  
5. Transportation of MBH Patient to area outside of ED area or upon discharge will require Security and 
one additional BLS/Crisis Prevention Intervention (CPI) Trained staff member to escort.  The patient 
should be placed in wheelchair or on stretcher for the transfer.   8 
 
 
References:  
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention (2020). Suicide Facts and Figures: Louisiana 2020. 
https://www.datocms-assets.com/12810/1589486676-2020-state-fact-sheets-louisiana.png  
 
American Psychiatric Nurses Association (APNA) (2020). APNA Position Statement: Competencies for Nurse-
Assessment and Management of Inpatient Suicide Risk. 
https://www.apna.org/i4a/pages/index.cfm?pageid=5688  
 
Ballard, E., Cwik, M., Van Eck, K., Goldstein, M., Alfes, C., Wilson, M., Virden, J., Horowitz, L., Wilcox, H., 
Ballard, E. D., Wilson, M. E., Virden, J. M., Horowitz, L. M., & Wilcox, H. C. (2017). Identification of At-Risk 
Youth by Suicide Screening in a Pediatric Emergency Department. Prevention Science, 18(2), 174–182. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11121-016-0717-5  
 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention (2020). Suicide and Self-Inflicted Injury. 
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/suicide.htm  
 
EBSCO Dynamic Health (2020). Behavioral Health Care. Retrieved November 11, 2020, from 
https://www.dynahealth.com/skills/browse/Nursing%20Skills/Specialties/Psychiatric/Behavioral%20Health%2
0Care  
 
Frost, D.A., Snydeman, C.K., Lantieri, M.J., Wozniak, J., Bird, S., & Stern, T.A. (2020). Development and 
Implementation of a Suicide Prevention Checklist to Create a Safe Environment. Psychosomatics Journal, 
61(2), 154-160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psym.2019.10.008  
 
Gilboy N, Tanabe T, Travers D, Rosenau AM. Emergency Severity Index (ESI): A Triage Tool for Emergency 
Department Care, [4]. (2020). Schaumburg, IL: Emergency Nurses Association. Retrieved September 14, 2020, 
from https://www.ena.org/docs/default-source/education-document-library/esi-implementation-handbook-
2020.pdf?sfvrsn=fdc327df_2 
 
Manton, A. (2013). White paper: Care of the psychiatric patient in the emergency department. Retrieved 
November 11, 2020, from the Emergency Nurses Association website: https://www.ena.org/docs/default-
source/resource-library/practice-resources/white-papers/care-of-psychiatric-patient-in-the-
ed.pdf?sfvrsn=3fc76cda_4 
 
Posner, K., Brown, G. K., Stanley, B., Brent, D. A., Yershova, K. V., Oquendo, M. A., Currier, G. W., Melvin, 
G. A., Greenhill, L., Shen, S., & Mann, J. J. (2011). The Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale: Initial 
validity and internal consistency findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. The 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 168(12), 1266–1277. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.10111704 
 
State of Louisiana. (2017). Louisiana Department of Health Office of Behavioral Health. Order for Protective 
Custody. https://ldh.la.gov/assets/docs/BehavioralHealth/MentalHealthLawForms/ 
OBH%2020%20Order%20for%20Protective%20Custody.pdf  
 
 
 9 
 
 
The Joint Commission (2020). Suicide Prevention. Retrieved November 11, 2020, from 
https://www.jointcommission.org/resources/patient-safety-topics/suicide-prevention/ 
 
The Joint Commission. (2020). Suicide Prevention. https://www.jointcommission.org/resources/patient safety -
topics/suicide-prevention/#8f5bfd1c09cb4f9f8d75fa3fb7d7a4ab_ 06ee0199c92743a6bba62e237f79d613  
 
Veterans Administration and Department Defense Clinical Practice Guideline for the Assessment and 
Management of Patients at Risk for Suicide. https://www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/MH/srb/  
 
Williams, S.C., Schmaltz, S.P., Castro, G.M., & Baker, D.W. (2018). Incidence and Method of Suicide in 
Hospitals in the United States. The Joint Commission Journal on Quality and Patient Safety, 44, 643-650 
 10 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Safety Planning/Behavioral Health Resources 
 
National Suicide Hotline:  1-800-273-TALK (8255) 
 
Ascension Counseling 
1112 South East Ascension Complex Avenue 
Gonzales, LA  70737 
225-621-5775 or 225-450-1158 
Margaret Dumas BH Clinic 
3843 Harding Blvd.  BR 70807 
225-359-9315 
Children’s BH Services 
4615 Government St Building 1 
Baton Rouge, La 70806 
225-922-0596 
OLOL Cope Team 
225-765-8900 
 
Baton Rouge Mental Health 
3455 Florida Blvd. 
Baton Rouge, LA  70806 
225-925-1906 or 800-768-8824 
Rosenblum Mental Health (Livingston) 
15785 Medical Arts Plaza 
Hammond, LA 70403 
985-543-4080 or 4800 
Donaldsonville Mental Health Clinic 
225-474-2007 
 
THE PHONE (Baton Rouge Crisis 
Intervention Center)  
225-924-3900 
Family Services of Greater Baton Rouge 
4727 Revere Ave. 
Baton Rouge, LA  70808 
225-924-0123 
Center for Addictive Disorders 
3455 Florida Blvd. 
Baton Rouge, La 70806 
225-922-0050 
Gonzales Mental Health Center 
1112 South East Ascension Complex Avenue 
Gonzales, LA  70737 
225-621-5770 (Adults and children) 
Capitol Area Inpatient Recovery Program 
2455 Wooddale Blvd. 
Baton Rouge, La 70806 
225-922-3169 
 
 
 
RKM Behavioral Health 
29437 S Frost Rd.  
Livingston, La 70754  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 
 
 
 
 
COLUMBIA-SUICIDE SEVERITY RATING SCALE  
Screen with Triage Points for Emergency Department 
 
Ask questions that are bolded and underlined.   Past 
month 
Ask Questions 1 and 2 YES NO 
1)  Have you wished you were dead or wished you could go to sleep and not wake up?    
2)  Have you actually had any thoughts of killing yourself?    
If YES to 2, ask questions 3, 4, 5, and 6.  If NO to 2, go directly to question 6.  
3)  Have you been thinking about how you might do this?   
E.g. “I thought about taking an overdose, but I never made a specific plan as to when 
where or how I would actually do it….and I would never go through with it. ”  
  
4)  Have you had these thoughts and had some intention of acting on them?   
As opposed to “I have the thoughts, but I definitely will not do anything about them.”  
  
5)  Have you started to work out or worked out the details of how to kill yourself? 
Do you intend to carry out this plan?  
  
6)  Have you ever done anything, started to do anything, or prepared to do anything to 
end your life? 
Examples: Collected pills, obtained a gun, gave away valuables, wrote a will or suicide note, 
took out pills but didn’t swallow any, held a gun but changed your mind or it was grabbed 
from your hand, went to the roof but didn’t jump; or actually took pills, tried to shoot yourself, 
cut yourself, tried to hang yourself, etc. 
 
If YES, ask: Was this within the past three months?   
Lifetime 
  
Past 3 
Months 
  
 