POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Access Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:    
Subject:  Motor Vehicle Accident & Other 3 rd-Party Liability 
Registration Policy 
Section:    
Date of Origination:  June 2015 Supersedes: n/a 
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: June 15, 
2015, Jan 2018 
 Serial Code:    
 
PURPOSE: 
 
To define the process for registering patients who seek care immediately following a motor 
vehicle accident or other accident/injury caused by the potential liability of a third party.   
 
 
BACKGROUND (Louisiana Law): 
 
In Louisiana, LA RS 22:1874 (Billing by Contracted Health Care Providers) dictates how 
claims involving third-party liability are to be handled.   
 
[1874. Billing by contracted health care providers 
A.(1) A contracted health care provider shall be prohibited from discount billing, dual billing, attempting to collect 
from, or collecting from an enrollee or insured a health insurance issuer liability or any amount in excess of the 
contracted reimbursement rate for covered health care services. 
(2) No contracted health care provider shall bill, attempt to collect from, or collect from an enrollee or insured any 
amounts other than those representing coinsurance, copayments, deductibles, noncovered or noncontracted health 
care services, or other amounts identified by the health insurance issuer on an explanation of benefits as an amount 
for which the enrollee or insured is liable. 
(3) However, in the event that any billing, attempt to collect from, or the collection from an enrollee or insured of 
any amount other than those representing copayment, deductible, coinsurance, payment for noncovered or 
noncontracted health care services, or other amounts identified by the health insurance issuer as the liability of the 
enrollee or insured is based on information received from a health insurance issuer, the contracted health care 
provider shall not be in violation of this Subsection.] 
 
POLICY: 
Third-party liability can result from motor vehicle accidents, slips, falls, and the like.  Patient 
Access personnel will obtain the pertinent information regarding the patient’s health insurance 
and any available information relating to the facts and possible cause(s) of the patient’s 
injuries/conditions.  The patient’s admission record will be noted to reflect that the 
injuries/conditions were possibly caused by the fault of a third party.    
1. For patients having commercial health insurance, e.g. Blue Cross, the hospital must bill the 
patient’s health insurance.  The registrar will attempt to collect co-pays, deductibles, and 
co-insurance.  If the claim is denied by the patient’s health insurance, the account will be 
referred to legal counsel. 
 
2. For uninsured patients, the registrar will attempt to collect from the patient.  The registrar 
will make detailed notes about the patient’s liability insurance coverage (e.g. State Farm 
coverage) and the incident/injuries.  The account will be referred to legal counsel so that it 
may prepare a written notice of a privilege (pursuant to applicable Louisiana law) and seek 
payment from the 3rd-party liability carrier. 
 
 
3. For Medicare & Medicaid patients, the registrar will register the patient with his/her 
Medicare/Medicaid insurance and put detailed notes about the 3rd-party liability coverage and 
possible cause(s) of the patient’s injuries.  Medicare & Medicaid accounts will be sent to the 
hospital’s legal counsel to determine whether 3rd-party liability can be pursued. Hospital 
billing personnel will submit billing according to the advice of said legal counsel. 