Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 1 of 2 
 
 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
  
Our Lady of the Lake Cancer Institute 
Policy Manual: Policies and 
Procedures/Organizational Section: Oncology 
Title: Imaging: Rectal Cancer Staging and MRI 
Results 
Policy 
Reference #: 
NAPRC02 Imaging 
Standards 5.2 & 5.3 
Supersedes #: Standard 2.2; Standard 2.3 
Date of Origination: November 22, 2017 Review Date: March 25, 2024 
Revision Date: December 28, 2021 
 
PURPOSE:   
 
To provide guidelines for the staging of previously untreated rectal cancer patients before definitive treatment via 
imaging. To provide guidelines for the reading of MRI exams of previously untreated rectal cancer patients and 
the method for recording MRI exams in a standardized report. This policy addresses National Accreditation 
Program for Rectal Cancer (NAPRC) standard 5.2 and 5.3. 
 
POLICY:   
 
A. A minimum of 95% of all previously untreated rectal cancer patients are staged (systemic and local 
tumor) before definitive treatment. Patients with documented contraindications to CT, PET/CT, and or 
MRI scanning are exempt from the standard.  
 
B. A minimum of 90% of pretreatment MRI of the pelvis exams performed at Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) 
Cancer Institute for previously untreated rectal cancer patients are read by a radiologist who is an 
appointed member of the Rectal Cancer Multidisciplinary Team (RC-MDT).  
 
C. A minimum of 95% of MRI staging results for rectal cancer patients are reported in standardized format 
containing all required elements.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
• Systemic staging for rectal cancer is completed by CT or PET/CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis 
to identify distant metastatic disease prior to the patient starting treatment.  Systemic staging must be 
completed by CT whenever possible; however, a combined PET/CT scan is an acceptable alternative.   A 
PET scan without the CT scan does not meet Standard 5.2. 
 
• Local tumor is staged by MRI of the pelvis and reported using a standardized format containing all 
required elements. 
• For rectal cancer patients with Stage IV disease identified on the systemic staging studies, the 
managing physician may decide whether the MRI is necessary for local staging. If the physician 
determines the MRI will not add any benefit for the patient’s treatment planning, this decision 
must be documented in the medical record. 
 
• All pelvic MRIs performed at OLOL Cancer Institute for rectal cancer patients are assigned to a 
radiologist who is an appointed member of the RC-MDT to read the exam. 
 Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 2 of 2 
 
 Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
• Radiology reports are requested and scanned into the patient’s medical record by the managing physician 
for rectal cancer patients presenting to OLOL Cancer Institute who completed staging studies at an 
outside facility.  
 
• Results from all systemic and local tumor staging studies, whether performed at OLOL Cancer Institute or 
at an outside facility, are reviewed by a radiologist member of the RC-MDT at the RC-MDT Planning 
Discussion and included in the patient’s medical record. 
 
• In the event that the pelvic MRI is performed at an outside institution and the outside report does 
not include all the required elements of the NAPRC approved template, the missing elements will 
be discussed at the RC-MDT Treatment Planning Discussion and documented on the Treatment 
Planning Discussion form. The MRI core elements are subsequently recorded on the Treatment 
Evaluation and Recommendation Summary (standard 5.6), which is recorded in the medical 
record, signed by the presenting / treating physician, and provided to all treating physicians. 
 
• The RCP Coordinator records tracking of both systemic and local clinical staging studies for rectal cancer 
patients on the NAPRC Patient Tracking Spreadsheet. 
 
 
CHART REVIEW:  
• At a minimum, a random sample of 20 percent of eligible patient medical records or a maximum of 100 
cases are reviewed by the Rectal Cancer Program Director (RCP Director) each calendar year to evaluate 
compliance. The RCP Director may delegate this review to an appropriately credentialed physician 
member of the RC-MDT. For any result that does not meet the required percentages as listed in the rating 
criteria section, an action plan must be developed and implemented. 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS 
Commission on Cancer, National Accreditation Program for Rectal Cancer 2020, Standard 5.2 and 5.3. 