Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 1 of 3 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Cancer Institute 
Policy Manual: Policies and 
Procedures/Organizational  Section: Oncology 
Title: 
Rectal Cancer Multidisciplinary Team 
Treatment Planning Discussion, 
Evaluation and Recommendation 
Summary   
Policy 
Reference #: 
NAPRC 04 Planning 
Discussion        Standards 
5.5 & 5.6 
Supersedes #: Standard 2.5-2.6 
Date of Origination: November 22, 2017 Review Date: March 25, 2024 
Revision Date: July 14, 2023 
 
 
PURPOSE:  
  
To provide guidelines for individualized treatment planning discussion on all rectal cancer patients who 
undergo treatment at Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Cancer Institute and develop a standardized treatment 
evaluation and recommendation summary. This policy addresses National Accreditation Program for 
Rectal Cancer (NAPRC) standard 5.5 and 5.6. 
 
 POLICY: 
 
A. All rectal cancer patients who undergo treatment at OLOL Cancer Institute, excluding emergency 
patients, must have an individualized treatment planning discussion conducted at a Rectal Cancer 
Multidisciplinary Team (RC-MDT) meeting before beginning definitive treatment.  
• Definitive treatment is defined as neoadjuvant therapy, surgical resection, or initiation of 
palliative care.  
• Emergency patients who do not require a treatment planning discussion are those that present 
with tumor-related complications that require immediate or urgent treatment. Examples of 
emergent conditions include, but are not limited to, rectal tumor perforation, life-threatening 
tumor hemorrhage, and acute large bowel obstruction. 
 
B. In the event the Rectal Cancer Program (RCP) at OLOL Cancer Institute accessions 100 or more 
cases within a year, the RCP Director may develop criteria to determine which patients must be 
presented at the RC-MDT for a treatment planning discussion. At least 100 cases must be 
presented for treatment planning discussion in each year. 
 
C. Before the initiation of definitive treatment, a standardized evaluation and treatment 
recommendation summary is completed, recorded in the patient’s medical record, and provided to 
the patient’s treating physician for a minimum of 50% of rectal cancer patients.  The treating 
physician is responsible for ensuring communication of evaluation and treatment 
recommendations to the patient. NAPRC standard defines a treating physician as the provider of 
record treating the patient’s rectal cancer who seeks the opinion of the RC-MDT. The RC-MDT 
at OLOL Cancer Institute has identified the treating physician as the physician who presents the 
case to the RC-MDT.  Once the treatment summary recommendation is approved by the treating 
physician, the summary will be sent to all physicians involved in the management of the patient’s 
rectal cancer care. 
 
 
 PROCEDURE:  Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 2 of 3 
 
A. The RC-MDT treatment planning discussion must include, but is not limited to:  
1. Review of diagnostic and staging studies 
• Colonoscopy report (location of primary tumor and synchronous lesions) if present/ 
available 
• Biopsies of primary rectal cancer and metastases if present/available (Standard 5.1) 
• CT scan or PET/CT of chest, abdomen, and pelvis (Standard 5.2) 
• Rectal Cancer MRI (Standard 5.2) 
• Pretreatment CEA level (Standard 5.4) 
2. Documentation of Clinical Stage  
• Clinical stage according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer 
3. Creation of individualized treatment plan  
• Neoadjuvant therapy regimen, when indicated 
• Anticipated surgical procedure, when indicated 
• Referral to radiation oncology, when indicated 
• Referral to medical oncology, when indicated 
• Palliative care, when indicated 
 
B. The moderating physician and the RCP Coordinator complete a Treatment Planning Discussion 
Form for each case presented to ensure all required elements listed above are discussed. 
 
C. The physician who presents the patient to the RC-MDT is responsible for ensuring 
communication and presentation of the evaluation and treatment recommendation summary to the 
patient. 
 
D. The RCP Coordinator documents the date the patient is presented to the RC-MDT for the 
Treatment Planning Discussion, and which physician presented the case in the Treatment 
Evaluation and Recommendation Summary recorded in the patient’s medical record. 
 
E. The RCP Coordinator completes the Treatment Evaluation and Recommendation Summary in the 
patient’s electronic health record (EHR), EPIC, then routes the completed summary to the 
physician who presented the case to review and co-sign.  The RCP Coordinator sends the 
summary to the patient’s treating physician, other physicians involved in the management of the 
patient's rectal cancer care, and patient navigation, via inbox or fax through the EPIC EHR. 
  
F. The standardized Treatment Evaluation and Recommendation Summary includes, but is not 
limited to: 
• Tumor location in the rectum (lower, middle, or upper third) 
• Indication of sphincter involvement 
• Clinical (pretreatment) American Joint Committee on Cancer stage 
• Pretreatment circumferential resection margin status (involved, threatened, or not 
threatened) 
• Carcinoembryonic antigen level (CEA) 
• Neoadjuvant therapy recommendation 
• Type and duration of neoadjuvant therapy recommended 
• Anticipated date and type of surgical procedure 
• Clinical research study eligibility and/or enrollment Policy & Procedure Manual  
Administrative Page 3 of 3 
G. The RCP Coordinator tracks the date of the Treatment Planning Discussion, as well as, the dates 
the Treatment Evaluation and Recommendation Summary is completed, and provided to the 
patient’s treating physician, on the NAPRC Patient Tracking spreadsheet. 
 
CHART REVIEW:  
 
At a minimum, the RCP Director reviews a random sample of 20 percent of eligible patient medical 
records or a maximum of 100 cases each calendar year to evaluate compliance. The RCP Director may 
delegate this review to an appropriately credentialed physician member of the RC-MDT. For any result 
that does not meet the required percentages as listed in the rating criteria section, an action plan must be 
developed and implemented.  
 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS: 
Commission on Cancer, National Accreditation Program for Rectal Cancer 2020, Standard 5.5 and 54.6.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 