 NBL-004 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Specimen Collection 
Title: Properly Labeling Lab Specimens 
Policy 
Reference #: NBL-004 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: June 16, 2011 Last Review 
Date:  April 24, 2024 
Last Revision Date: April 23, 2018 
 
POLICY: 
All specimens submitted for testing must be appropriately labeled at the time of collection to assure 
positive identification and optimum integrity of patient specimens.  
Required information (Refer to Organizational policy: OrgClin018- Patient Identification) must be 
present and match. If there is any discrepancy between the two, the specimen must not be collected.  
 
 
EQUIPMENT/SUPPLIES: 
 -  Patient identification armband (inpatients) or Identification to verify the Name and date of 
birth (DOB) (outpatients) 
 -  Appropriate sample (blood, urine, sputum, tissue, fluid, etc…)  
 -  EMR barcode label printer (generic demographic labels for downtime or special orders, only) 
 -  Small plastic biohazard bag or approved container for delivery of specimen to laboratory  
 
PROCEDURES: 
A. Specimen Collection 
 
1.  The specimen must only be collected after successfully identifying the patient using 2  
     identifiers. (Pediatric patients have 3 step ID process including parent/caregiver) 
 *Refer to organizational policy: OrgClin018- Patient Identification 
 
2.  Allow the patient to participate in the identification process, if able, by asking the patient to  
     say their name while checking the armband and orders. 
 
3.  If the required armband is absent, not attached to the patient’s wrist or ankle or does not     
     match the orders: 
• DO NOT perform the specimen collection 
• Correct the identity discrepancy before proceeding with the collection 
  *Refer to organizational policy: OrgClin018- Patient Identification 
 
4.  Scan the patient’s armband with the appropriate scanner. 
 
5.  Select the orders to be collected, print the barcode labels. 
 
  NBL-004 
Page 2 of 2 
7.  Apply the barcode specimen labels to the corresponding containers. 
 
8.  Re-scan the barcode specimen labels to confirm collection. 
 
 
B.  Before Leaving the Patient 
 
 1.  Label the specimens in the presence of the patient. 
 
 2.  If a lab label is not available, use the computer-generated chart label to label the specimen or  
Handwrite patient name and medical record number or date of birth on the specimen label 
affixed to the container. 
 
3.  Record date and time collected and collector’s initials on all specimen containers, if the 
electronic device and/or bedside generated labels are unavailable.   
 
4. Place patient specimens in biohazard lab bag. Do not place samples from multiple patients in 
same biohazard lab bag. 
 
C.  Exception 
 For Blood Bank Sample collection refer to nursing policy NBL-002 for proper labeling with  
 Blood Bank Patient Identification System. 
 