 
 
 NBL-002 
Page 1 of 13 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Blood 
Title: 
Blood Bank Specimen Collection, 
Administration of Blood & Blood Products 
and Management of Possible Adverse 
Reactions  
Policy 
Reference #: NBL-002 
Supersedes #: 88, 94, 96, 97 
Date of Origination: February 26, 1988 Date Last 
Reviewed:   April 12, 2024 
Date Last Revised:    June 1, 2023  
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for the safe administration of blood and blood products.  
 
POLICY: 
A. The collection of a properly labeled blood sample from the correct patient is critical to safe 
blood transfusion. The person who draws the blood must identify the patient by comparing 
the information on the request form (computer-generated label) with the information on the 
patient hospital identification armband.  If there is any discrepancy between the two, the 
sample must not be collected. 
B. Patients requiring the administration of blood or blood products will be properly identified 
and receive vigilant monitoring and care to minimize complications. 
C. Standard safety precautions should be used when handling specimens, blood, and blood 
products. 
D. Re-labeling of Blood Bank samples is prohibited.  All samples are to be labeled in the 
presence of   the patient, prior to leaving the bedside.  No exceptions will be made.   
E. Patients requiring Emergent Transfusion may be transfused without a current Red Blood 
Bank Armband or a collected Blood Bank Specimen. 
F. Transfusion Reactions will be recognized, investigated, and treated immediately. 
 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. EMERGENT TRANSFUSION 
When blood or blood products are required for emergent transfusion, perform the following 
steps:  
1. Call to notify Transfusion Services regarding need for emergency release products. 
Products can be made available immediately after they are requested.  
 
 NBL-002 
Page 2 of 13 
 
2. NOT required at the time of emergency transfusion: 
a. Current Blood Bank Armband 
b. Current Blood Bank specimen 
3. Provide the following information: 
a. Patient Name and 2nd Identifier 
b. Product(s) needed (rbc, ffp, platelets, and/or cryo) 
c. Name of Physician authorizing the Transfusion 
4. Transfusion Services team member will verify if patient already has products 
assigned/crossmatched.  Products assigned/crossmatched to the patient are preferable 
for transfusion and will always be given first. 
5. Pick up product(s) from Transfusion Services using either a Blood Product request 
form or a patient chart label.   
6. Products will not be released from Transfusion Services without intended patient 
identification. 
7. No unit tags will be present on blood or blood products issued in an emergency. 
8. Patient information will be matched using the Emergency Request for Blood/Blood 
Products form issued with the products from Transfusion Services against Patient’s 
Hospital Armband. 
9. All patient transfusion information must be documented in the patient’s chart. 
10. Patient sample should be acquired as soon as situation permits to allow emergency 
released products to be crossmatched retrospectively. 
11. The physician authorizing the emergency transfusion must order “Transfuse 
Emergency Released Uncrossmatched Blood” as soon as possible after the event. 
 
B. SPECIMEN COLLECTION FOR BLOOD BANK TESTING 
1. Equipment/Supplies: 
a. Adult and Children -  EDTA purple top tube (10 ml – 2 ml standard).  If multiple 
specimens are collected each must be fully labeled including Blood Bank number. 
b. Neonate (infant ≤4 months of age) - 2 mL EDTA or 2-3 microtainers from a heel 
stick or venipuncture.  All specimens must be fully labeled including Blood Bank 
number.  Specimen expiration will be 120 days from the patient’s date of birth.  
For subsequent transfusion orders, a new specimen is not necessary as long as the 
Red Blood Bank Armband is on the neonate for the entire admission unless: the 
initial antibody screen is positive, or the infant received blood products containing 
plasma which are ABO incompatible with the neonate.  Transfusion Services may 
request additional sample if original has been exhausted.  
c. Blood Bank Patient Identification System – provides additional positive sample 
and patient identification.  
 
 NBL-002 
Page 3 of 13 
 
i. Consists of Red blood bank identification band to be placed on the patient 
with corresponding stickers to be placed on the specimen(s) at the time of 
collection for any blood bank testing.  
ii. Supplied by Transfusion Services 
iii. The following orders require the use of the Blood Bank Patient 
Identification System 
• Type and Screen 
• Draw and Hold 
iv. Platelets, plasma and cryoprecipitate orders do not require the use of 
Blood Bank Patient Identification System 
2. Physician submits the prepare order for blood or a specific blood product, the amount 
or number of units, and a type and screen (includes autologous), when indicated.  
This order is transmitted to Transfusion Services via EMR order entry. 
3. If patient does not have history in Transfusion Service’s computer system or an “in 
lab” sample drawn at an earlier time, Transfusion Services may request a 
confirmatory/second ABO sample to be drawn.  Per AABB standards, patients must 
have 2 blood types from 2 separate phlebotomies before crossmatched Red Blood 
Cells or Fresh Frozen Plasma can be given out for transfusion.  This sample may be 
drawn in a 2 mL purple top labeled using 2 ID process.  It cannot be drawn at the 
same time as the crossmatch sample.    
4. Collect specimen. Perform the following before leaving the patient as part of the 
collection: 
a. Do not leave the bedside after starting the collection of your sample to get labels 
or supplies.  Bring all supplies to the room.  
b. If a computer-generated lab label is available, label the specimen tube(s) with that 
label. Complete the collection electronically which will capture collector ID, date, 
and time collected.  
c. Attach a Blood Bank Identification System unique number to the tube. 
d. If a computer-generated lab label is not available, the computer-generated chart 
label or handwritten patient information is acceptable.  (Must have 2 pt. IDs) 
Record Lawson id, date and time collected on the tube and attach Blood Bank 
Identification System unique number to the tube. 
e. Write initials and/or team member’s Lawson ID, date and time of draw on the 
Blood Bank Patient Identification System armband insert, which is found on the 
bottom of the Blood Bank Patient Identification System label sheet. 
f. Remove the Blood Bank Patient Identification System insert from the label sheet 
and place it in the red plastic armband sheath. 
g. Secure the plastic Blood Bank Patient Identification System armband to the 
patient’s wrist or ankle. Do not apply the band too tightly.  Allow ample slack.  
Try to put the armband on the same arm as the hospital armband.  
 
 NBL-002 
Page 4 of 13 
 
5. Blood and Blood Component Anticipated Turnaround Times 
a. Routine Crossmatch – 2 hours from specimen receipt in Transfusion Services  
b. Stat Crossmatch – 1 hour from specimen receipt in Transfusion Services  
c. Trauma – Type O units immediately available; type A FFP immediately available 
d. Crossmatch with Special Transfusion Needs: 
i. Irradiated Blood – Add an additional 30 minutes to Crossmatch. 
ii. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) Negative Blood/Platelets - Add an additional 1 
hour to Crossmatch. 
iii. Crossmatched Blood for Patients with Antibodies – Minimum 2 hours to 
complete required work.  Complexity of patient antibodies is proportionate 
to turnaround time. Transfusion Services will communicate expected 
turnaround times for these patients. 
e. Fresh Frozen Plasma – Requires Transfusion Services notification to begin the 
thawing process.  30 minutes thaw time. 
f. Leukocyte-Reduced Apheresis Platelets – 10-minute preparation time 
g. Irradiated/Psoralen Platelets – Add an additional 30 minutes for irradiation. 
h. Cryoprecipitate – 45-minute preparation time (requires thawing and pooling). 
 
C. OBTAINING BLOOD/BLOOD PRODUCTS FROM TRANSFUSION SERVICES  
1. Equipment/Supplies: 
a. Blood Bank Product Request Form 
b. Transfuse Orders 
2. When a physician orders blood/blood products, the physician will select both a 
prepare order for the blood bank and a transfuse order for the nurse.  These orders 
will be entered into the electronic medical record (EMR). 
3. In flow sheets, select the Blood flow sheet. Click “Add Col” and complete the Pre-
Transfusion Documentation rows. When the blood is ready to be transfused, click the 
“Release Transfusion Report: above the table of contents. This will open the 
Transfuse Orders window. 3. In the Transfuse Orders report, click the “Release” link. 
A blood release form prints for this first unit of blood and flow sheet row appear for 
you to document transfusing that unit. 
4. Complete a Blood Bank Product Request form each time products are obtained from 
Transfusion Services. Blood Bank number must be recorded from patient’s Red 
Blood Bank armband onto the Product Request form for Red Blood Cell issue. 
5. Take the Blood Bank Product Request form to Transfusion Services.   
6. Transfusion Services Personnel will use the Blood Bank product request to:  
 
 NBL-002 
Page 5 of 13 
 
a. Enter the patient’s name into the Blood Bank Computer to access information 
about patient product availability. 
b. Locate the available product. 
c. Using a barcode scanner, scan product barcodes. 
d. Complete the procedure for releasing blood/blood product by recording the 
transporter’s first and last name, location, physician, and BB #. 
7. A copy of the Blood Bank unit tag is attached to the Blood Bank Product Request 
form and is kept in Transfusion Services for 1week. 
8. The product is released to the transporter. 
9. Issuing Multiple Products 
a. Transfusion Services will routinely issue one blood/blood product for only one 
patient to one person.  According to Transfusion Services policy the exceptions 
are: 
i. Surgery – needed products will be released in coolers for 1 patient per 
transporter. 
ii. Bedside Procedure (Dialysis, RBC Exchange, Plasma Exchange, etc) – 
needed products will be released in coolers for 1 patient per transporter. 
iii. Actively bleeding patient in critical care unit or non-critical care unit – 
needed products will be released in coolers for 1 patient per transporter. 
iv. Inpatient Oncology – 1 transporter may pick up a single product for up to 
3 patients provided there are 3 different transfusionists available to begin 
the transfusions. 
v. Off- site service facilities (ie. St. Jude, North Baton Rouge Infusion) – All 
products requested for scheduled patients will be issued to the facility in 
transport coolers. 
b. Multiple units and/or products must be issued in a Cell Safe Transport Container 
(“Cooler”) with a thermometer. Coolers are provided by Transfusion Services to 
be used for transport and temporary storage of products. 
c. Up to 6 units of blood and/or FFP can be issued in a single cooler packed with ice 
bottles. 
d. Coolers containing platelets and/or cryoprecipitate, packed with normal saline, 
may not be combined with blood or FFP.  These products require Room 
Temperature storage. 
e. Temperature of Cell Safe Transport containers must be documented every 4 
hours.  Transfusion Services personnel will contact the unit to read the 
temperature and will notify nurse if action must be taken.  
 
D. ADMINISTRATION OF BLOOD AND BLOOD PRODUCTS-ROUTINE PROCESS 
Red Blood Cells, Platelets, Cryoprecipitate, and Fresh Frozen Plasma  
 
 NBL-002 
Page 6 of 13 
 
1. Equipment/Supplies: 
a. Transfusion Consent 
b. Transfuse Orders 
c. Sterile, pyrogen-free Blood administration set (with filter designed to retain 
particle   potentially harmful to the recipient)  
d. 150mL or 250mL 0.9% NaCl USP (Normal Saline) 
e. Blood warmer, if needed 
f. Thermometer and Blood pressure cuff 
g. Adult Transfusion Documentation Record (NS-302A) or on the Pediatric 
Transfusion Documentation Record (NS-302B). 
2. In non-emergent situations, a Transfusion Consent must be obtained prior to the 
administration of any blood or blood product.  A Transfusion Consent must be 
obtained each time the patient is admitted to the hospital. 
3. In an emergent situation, a physician’s order is required specifying the release of and 
administration of blood which has not been cross matched to the patient. The 
orderable in EMR is “Transfuse Emergency Released Uncrossmatched Blood”.  
4. Do not remove the Red Blood Bank armband. If the clinical situation requires the 
removal of the Blood Bank armband, contact Transfusion Services to verify that the 
armband is outdated and can be removed and discarded. If the armband is not 
outdated and the patient will be requiring a transfusion, the patient must be redrawn, 
and a new armband applied. There is no way to securely re-attach this armband once 
removed. 
5. Blood and blood products may be administered via the following: 
a. Adults: 
i. Central venous access:  Administration via a central venous access is 
acceptable.   
ii. Administration via a Vas Cath requires a physician order. 
iii. Peripheral IV:  Administration via an 18 to 20G catheter is preferred.   
b. Children:  
i. Central venous access: Administration via a Central venous access is 
acceptable. 
ii. Peripheral IV: Administration via 20-22G is preferred, though a 24 G may 
be used. 
6. To avoid mechanical lysis of cells, the pumping of undiluted blood through an access 
smaller than 20 gauge is not recommended. 
7. The only IV solution to be used with blood and blood products is 0.9% NaCl USP 
(Normal saline).  This solution may be used to prime and flush blood administration 
set, and to dilute blood. 
8. No medications or other IV solutions are to be administered with blood and blood 
products.  
 
 NBL-002 
Page 7 of 13 
 
9. Autologous blood products must be used first.  
10. Administration of blood and blood products should begin immediately upon arrival to 
the clinical area.  If there will be a delay in administration, the blood/blood product 
must be returned to Transfusion Services within 30 minutes of the time it was issued.  
Transfusion Services will accept blood/blood products attached to tubing as long as it 
is returned within this 30-minute timeframe.  Blood/Blood Products shall not be 
stored for any amount of time in refrigerators on nursing units.   
11. Blood tubing must be changed after the administration of two (2) units of blood/blood 
products. 
12. If using a blood warmer to administer blood these guidelines must be followed: 
a. The temperature of the warming device should not exceed 42° C. 
b. The blood should be administered in four (4) hours or less. 
c. The reissue of warmed blood is prohibited. 
13. Blood, including leukocyte-reduced and washed RBCs must be administered 
completely within four (4) hours.  Platelets, Cryoprecipitate, and Fresh Frozen Plasma 
are administered as fast as the patient can tolerate. 
14. Preparation of patient and equipment: 
a. Review physician order for transfusion. 
b. Verify Consent for Transfusion has been signed.  Obtain consent if needed.  
c. Explain procedure to patient and significant other(s) and allow for questions or 
concerns. 
d. Insert or verify patency of venous access.   
e. Assess adult and pediatric patient’s temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and 
respirations.  Document in medical record. 
f. Click the “Release Transfusion Report and click the “Release” link. A blood 
release form prints for the first unit of blood.  
g. Complete Blood Bank Product Request form and send with transporter to 
Transfusion Services. (Refer to section C.  Procedure for Obtaining Blood/Blood 
Product from Blood Bank) 
h. Assemble equipment and supplies.   
i. Flush blood administration tubing with normal saline. 
j. Verify patient and blood/blood product to physician’s order. 
15. Patient identification: (performed at bedside) 
a. Must be performed by either two RNs or one RN and one LPN.  
i. One individual conducting the identification verification must be the 
qualified RN who will administer the blood or blood component to the 
patient.   
 
 NBL-002 
Page 8 of 13 
 
ii. The second individual conducting the identification verification must be 
qualified to participate in the process (i.e. RN, LPN) 
b. These two staff members (named above) compare the patient’s name and date of 
birth on the patient’s hospital armband with the patient’s name and date of birth 
on the blood unit tag and if transfusing RBCs they must also compare the 
patient’s unique Blood Bank Identification number on the blood unit tag and the 
patient’s Red Blood Bank armband. 
16. After issue and immediately before transfusion, the following information shall be 
verified:  
a. The intended recipient’s 2 independent identifiers, ABO group, and Rh type 
b. The unit number, the unit ABO/Rh  
c. The interpretation of crossmatch test, if performed 
d. Special transfusion requirements are met, if applicable  
e. The unit has not expired 
17. Blood product verification: (performed at bedside) 
a. With a Barcode Scanner 
i. In the “Blood Product Administration Module”, scan the patient’s 
wristband when prompted.  
ii. Follow the on-screen prompts to scan the barcodes on the blood product. 
After each barcode is scanned, the value will appear on the corresponding 
field, which included 
• Unit Number 
• ABC CODABAR Registration Number 
• Product Code 
• Expiration Date 
• Blood Type  
iii. Verify the information on the administration window and click “Accept.”  
b. Without a Barcode Scanner 
i. In the “Blood Product Administration Module”, enter the numbers below 
each barcode into the appropriate fields. Note that the barcodes are case 
sensitive.  
ii. Select an override reason in the “Reason for not scanning” field and click 
“Accept.”  
• The two staff members (named above) compare the donor number and 
blood type on the blood unit tag with the blood product label.  Verify 
the expiration date has not passed.  
 
 NBL-002 
Page 9 of 13 
 
• Both staff members verifying patient and blood product must sign the 
Blood Bank unit tag and record the start time on the tag.  All 
identification attached to the unit shall remain attached until the 
transfusion has ended.   
18. Don appropriate protective attire. 
19. Assess patient’s vital signs and document in EMR. 
20. Examine the unit for blood clots. 
21. Attach blood to blood administration tubing.  Close the clamp to normal saline.  Open 
the clamp to   blood; slowly administer blood for the first 15 minutes.  
22. The RN should remain with the patient for the first 15 minutes of the transfusion 
observing for signs and symptoms of a transfusion reaction. (Specific written 
instruction concerning possible adverse events shall be provided to the patient or a 
responsible caregiver when direct medical observation or monitoring of the patient 
will not be available after transfusion) 
23. Adult recipients:  After 15 minutes, assess patient’s vital signs. 
24. Child recipients: After 15 minutes and then hourly, assess patient’s vital signs.   
25. If there is no evidence of a transfusion reaction after 15 minutes, the blood 
transfusion rate may be increased as specified in the physician order. Upon 
completion of transfusion, assess vital signs and document in EMR. 
26. Document blood/blood product information and vital signs in the patient’s chart in 
EMR.  
27. Patient medical record shall include the transfusion order, documentation of patient 
consent, name of component, donor unit number and ABO/Rh type, the date and time 
of transfusion, pre and post transfusion vital signs, the amount transfused, 
identification of the transfusionist, and, if applicable, related adverse events.   
 
E. AFTERCARE: When the blood is absorbed 
1. Flush the tubing with normal saline.  Resume previous IV orders or discontinue the 
IV access. 
2. Assess and document the patient’s temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and 
respirations. 
3. Document completion of the transfusion on the Blood Bank unit tag and in EMR or 
on Transfusion Documentation Record  
4. Affix the completed chart copy of the Blood Bank unit tag to the patient’s medical 
record. 
5. If no reaction has occurred, the empty blood bag and tubing is placed in a plastic bag 
and disposed in the biohazard waste container. 
  
 
 NBL-002 
Page 10 of 13 
 
F. MANAGEMENT OF A SUSPECTED TRANSFUSION REACTION 
1. Equipment/Supplies: 
a. Thermometer 
b. Stethoscope  
c. Blood pressure (BP) sphygmomanometer or electronic BP machine  
d. Transfusion Reaction Report form (from Transfusion Services) 
e. Pulse oximeter, if indicated  
f. Cardiac monitor, if indicated  
g. Respiratory monitor, if indicated  
2. Observe the patient during the transfusion of all blood products for the following 
signs or symptoms: 
a. Fever of two (2) degree Fahrenheit rise above baseline temperature.  (Baseline 
temperature is defined as the temperature taken prior to the initiation of 
transfusion.) 
b. Rash 
c. Anaphylactic shock 
d. Pain or pressure in chest 
e. Generalized bleeding 
f. Hypotension 
g. Oliguria or anuria 
h. Flushing 
i. Back or flank pain 
j. Hematuria 
k. Dyspnea 
l. Pain at infusion site 
m. Any other unusual symptoms 
n. Symptoms of TRALI or TACO 
i. TRALI- Transfusion-Related Acute Lung Injury 
• TRALI is a syndrome clinically similar to adult respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS) but usually resolves within 96 hours 
• Presentation: dyspnea, fever, chills, cyanosis, hypotension, and new-
onset bilateral pulmonary edema.  Symptoms arise within 6 hours of 
transfusion.  
ii. TACO- Transfusion- Associated Circulatory Overload 
• Presentation: Hypertension is a typical feature.  Within 1 to 2 hours of 
transfusion, patient may develop any or all of the following symptoms: 
gallop, jugular venous distension, elevated central venous pressure, 
dyspnea, orthopnea, new ST-segment and T-wave changes on 
electrocardiogram, elevated BNP, and elevated serum troponin.  Rapid 
improvement with diuresis is consistent with TACO. 
• Patients identified by the ordering physician as being at increased risk 
for TACO should have blood components administered slowly  
 
 NBL-002 
Page 11 of 13 
 
(pediatric and geriatric patients, patients with severe anemia, and/or 
patients with congestive heart failure or end-stage renal disease). 
• Rates of 2 to 4 mL/minute and 1mL/kg of body weight per hour are 
most common.  This may require dividing units for these patients to be 
transfused at slower rates.  Total fluid input and output must be 
monitored.  
3. If the patient experiences any of these signs or symptoms, Transfusionist 
(Nurse/CRNA/anesthesiologist) will initiate a suspected transfusion reaction 
investigation. In order to facilitate timely and appropriate patient care the following 
actions as well as steps 3-7 may be performed simultaneously by multiple team 
members:  
a. Stop the transfusion immediately, discontinue blood product, and assess the 
patient. Disconnect the blood and tubing from the patient. 
b.  Notify the patient’s physician of possible transfusion reaction, so that treatment, 
if necessary, is not delayed. 
i. All suspected transfusion reactions will be investigated by Transfusion 
Services and reviewed by a Laboratory pathologist. 
ii. Patient’s physician may wish to consult with a pathologist.  A pathologist 
is available for consultation at all times and communication between 
physicians can be facilitated by the Transfusion Services department. 
c. Administer a new infusion of 0.9% NaCl injection, USP (normal saline) at a keep 
open rate using different tubing. 
d. In the Orders activity, search for “transfusion reaction” in the Place new order 
field.  
e. Select the “transfusion reaction evaluation” order and click “Accept” 
f. Click Sign Orders 
g. Mark “YES” for “Reaction?” on the Blood Bank Unit Tag and note the date and 
time the transfusion was discontinued  
h. Order and obtain a STAT Urinalysis (order name: Urinalysis-Transfusion Rxn) 
i. Recheck all labels, forms, and patient identifiers to confirm that the unit was 
intended for this recipient. (*Note-if product transfused during an emergent 
situation Blood Bank armband or unit tag may not be available)   
4. The RN notifies Transfusion Services to obtain Suspected Transfusion Reaction 
Report.    Report must include the following information: 
a. Date of reaction 
b. Donor/Pool number of suspected unit 
c. Time transfusion started and time discontinued 
d. Blood product transfused  
 
 NBL-002 
Page 12 of 13 
 
e. Amount of blood given 
f. Patient vital signs Pre and Post transfusion: 
i.  Temperature 
ii. Blood Pressure 
iii. Heart Rate 
iv. Respiratory Rate 
v. O2 Saturation 
g. Symptoms 
h. Diagnosis and medical history 
i. History of previous transfusions 
j. Medications 
k. Documentation that the wristband ID and data on unit tag was checked for error 
l. Signature of nurse completing the form 
5. Collect post-reaction venipuncture sample (2-9 ml purple top vacutainer) labeled with 
two patient identifiers and Blood Bank armband number written on the tube for 
clerical check against the patient’s pre-transfusion reaction specimen in the 
Transfusion Services department.  Where available, Transfusion Services will 
immediately dispatch a phlebotomist for specimen collection.  
6. Collect post-reaction urine specimen labeled with two patient identifiers. 
7. Return the Suspected Transfusion Reaction Report along with the blood product and 
all attached tubing to Transfusion Services (Blood Bank unit tag must remain 
attached to the unit). 
8. Order and collect a two-hour post-reaction urine specimen when 2 hours have passed 
(order name: Urinalysis-Transfusion Rxn) 
9. Assure the following is documented 
a. In Flowsheets, select the “Blood” flowsheet 
b. Add a column for the time when the reaction was noted 
c. Enter “Yes” in the Suspected Reaction? Row 
d. Complete the additional rows in the Suspected Transfusion Reaction group 
e. Verification that blood product administered was the blood product the physician 
ordered. 
f. Verification that Transfusion Consent was obtained. 
g. Vital signs obtained before transfusion, 15 minutes after the transfusion was 
started, and when the transfusion was discontinued. 
h. The time the transfusion was started, donor number, and rate of flow 
i. The time blood/blood product was discontinued.  
 
 NBL-002 
Page 13 of 13 
 
10. Suspected Transfusion Reaction findings will be submitted to a Laboratory 
pathologist for review.  Final determination will be documented in patient’s EMR.  
Once review is complete and final determination has been made, a patient safety 
event will be entered by Transfusion Services supervisory staff for quality tracking 
and trending purposes. 
 
 
REFERENCES:    
AABB Technical Manual, current edition.  
AABB Standards for Blood Banking and Transfusion Services, current edition. 
Arthur J. Silvergleid, M. (2008, October 17). UpToDate. Retrieved February 20, 2009, from 
www.uptodate.com: www.utdol.com 
Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference 
 