NCA-022 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Critical Care 
Title: Admission/Discharge Criteria for Adult 
Medical and Surgical Intensive Care Units 
Policy 
Reference #: NCA-022 
Supersedes #: 1989 
Date of Origination: April 25, 2006 Last Review 
Date:   March 4, 2024  
Revision Date: March 4, 2024 
 
PURPOSE:  
To state the admission/discharge criteria for patients admitted to Intensive Care Units. 
 
POLICY:  
1. A patient is admitted when his/her condition requires constant intensive nursing care.   
2. All physicians with active privileges at OLOLRMC may admit to the ICU.  Residents, nurse 
practitioners and physician’s assistants do not have admitting privileges to the ICU. 
3. Admissions are coordinated by the House Manager/ Bed Coordinator and Intensivists. 
4. It should be noted that the standard of care for OLOLRMC ICU is that a staff MD sees all ICU 
patients within an hour of admission to the unit. Evaluating the patient immediately (within 1 hour) 
prior to ICU admission in the OR, PACU, ER, or floor fulfills this requirement.  If the admitting MD 
is unable to see his/her ICU patient within this time frame, it is the standard of care for the Critical 
Care Medicine Service (CCMS) to consult on the patient. 
5. The Intensivists will be responsible for resolving day-to-day problems relative to admission, 
discharge, priorities, and medical operations in the intensive care unit. 
6. There are standard of care bundles in place to protect the safety of each ICU patient. These protocols 
are expected to be strictly adhered to and compliance is monitored daily.  
7.  Patients that are eligible for transfer should have transfer orders by the AM the day of transfer. 
8. Further stay shall be based on medical necessity and not on the lack of patient’s or family's specific 
room preference or for the convenience of admitting physician in other areas of the hospital. 
9. In order to facilitate ICU throughput, all patients are stratified according to acuity. A patient on this 
list is subject to being transferred out of the ICU at any time at the discretion of the Intensivists to 
create critical care capacity per Med Exec Policy. 
10. Admission guidelines shall follow Priority 1 through 5 of the criteria listed below. 
11. Priority 1 patients shall receive the highest admission priority.  Further priorities for use of the ICU   
will be established and determined by the Intensivists. 
12. It is expected that the physician will consider transfer of the patient out of the unit when Priority 3 or 
below is attained.  
 
Priority 1: 
▪ These are critically ill, unstable patients who require life support for organ failure in need of NCA-022 
Page 2 of 2 
intensive treatment and monitoring that cannot be provided outside of the ICU. These treatments 
include, but are not limited to ventilator support, critical IV infusions that are being titrated, 
contiuous renal replacement therapy, invasive hemodynamic monitoring, and drains that are 
monitored for critical changes. 
▪ Priority 1 patients generally have no limits placed on the extent of therapy and are expected to 
benefit from ICU treatment.  
 
Priority 2: 
▪ These patients require intensive monitoring or therapies and may potentially need immediate 
intervention. They may or may not be receiving ICU specific treatment, but no therapeutic limits 
are generally stipulated for these patients.   
▪ Examples include patients with chronic comorbid conditions who develop acute severe medical 
conditions due to septic shock, respiratory failure, or surgical illness.  
 
Priority 3: 
▪ These patients may have organ dysfunction requiring intensive monitoring for noninvasive 
ventilation but may be managed at a lower level of care. 
▪ These patients may be critically ill but have a reduced likelihood of recovery because of 
underlying disease or nature of their acute illness.  They may be managed on a step-down unit or 
possibly benefit from Palliative Care.  
▪ Priority 3 patients may receive intensive treatment to relieve acute illness but limits on therapeutic 
efforts may be set such as to no intubation or cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 
 
Priority 4:   
▪ Admission of these patients should be on an individual basis, under unusual circumstances and at 
the discretion of the Intensivists. 
▪ These patients can be placed in the following categories: 
o Patients with lower a probability of survival (e.g. underlying metastatic disease) not 
wanting to be intubated or resuscitated  
 
Priority 5: 
▪ These are patients generally not appropriate for ICU admission and are terminally ill with no 
possibility of recovery. 
▪ Palliative care should be offered due to irreversible processes. 
 
 
References: 
 
Nates, J. L., Nunnally, M., Kleinpell, R., Blosser, S., Goldner, J., Birriel, B., Fowler, C. S., Byrum, D., Miles, W. 
S., Bailey, H., & Sprung, C. L. (2016). ICU admission, discharge, and triage guidelines: A framework to 
enhance clinical operations, development of institutional policies, and further research. Critical Care 
Medicine, 44(8), 1553–1602. https://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0000000000001856 
 