POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Cardiovascular 
Lab 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  CVL 
Subject:  Standards of Practice – CVL Section:  Administrative 
Date of Origination:  September 9,1988 Supersedes: 1997 
Date of Last Revision: 
Date of Review:  
7/31/17 
7/31/24 
Serial Code:  NCD 002 
  
 
Distribution:  Cardiovascular Laboratory 
 
Formulated By:  Cardiovascular Laboratory 
 
Purpose:  To provide standards of practice for Cardiovascular Laboratory. 
 
Applies To:  Cardiovascular Laboratory Staff 
 
Policy:  
 
The standards of practice in the Cardiovascular Laboratory shall provide guidelines for quality 
patient care. 
 
Procedure: 
 
Standards of care for the Cardiovascular Lab will include the following: 
                 
1. The patient demonstrates knowledge of the procedure. 
a. Informed consent per Physician 
b. Pre-operative education of the procedure 
2. The patient's privacy and dignity are maintained. 
a. Cardiovascular staff shall introduce themselves to the patient and family 
  upon initial contact. 
b. Personnel shall inform patient as care is administered.  
c.         Procedure doors closed and patient covered except for procedure site 
d. Unauthorized personnel not allowed in room 
e. Privacy is provided during procedure site preparation.  
f. Patient's family notified of patient status at the beginning, during the case, if 
necessary, and at the end of the procedure.   
3. The patient's cardiovascular status is maintained or improved. 
a. Patient's cardiac rate, rhythm, blood pressure, pulse oximetry, ETCO2, and
  respirations monitored during the procedure. 
 
 
 
  
4. The patient is physically and emotionally as comfortable as possible. 
a. Patient continuously evaluated for pain per pain scale during procedure. 
 Anxiety level evaluated with comfort measures provided i.e. reassurance, 
 music, and medication. 
b. Patient’s comfort is assessed throughout procedure. 
c. The patient's cultural and religious beliefs are respected. 
d. Patient covered with warm blanket (as needed).  
5. The patient is protected from infection. 
a. The procedure is performed using sterile technique. 
b. Packaging of sterile supplies and instruments are visually inspected to ensure
 integrity of packaging. 
c. Procedure room cleaned prior to procedure  
d. Invasive lines inserted aseptically. 
e. Patient's dressing dry and intact upon transport to unit. 
f. Universal Precautions shall be observed by CVL personnel on every 
  procedure. 
6. The patient's safety needs are met. 
a. History and physical completed prior to procedure. 
b. Correct patient identification and documentation identified. 
c. National Patient Safety Goals are maintained.  
7. Patient is free from injury related to positioning, extraneous objects, or chemical, physical 
and electrical hazards. 
a. Proper radiation shielding  
b. Electrical equipment has proper safety checks performed. 
c. Radiographic equipment has proper calibration checks performed. 
d. Patient not exposed to allergic substances. 
8. The patient's health status is maintained or improved. 
a. Patient monitored for reaction to drugs and for physiological changes. 
b. Documentation shall reflect perioperative care and monitoring. 
9. The patient and family shall be educated regarding activity involved in the recovery 
process. 
a. Post-procedure instructions with understanding are given to patient and  
  family (if present).    
 
10. Data collected of patient status and report given is continuous and systematic. 
a. The data is recorded, retrievable and communicated to appropriate persons 
caring for patient. 
 
 
 