 Manual:  Cardiovascular Lab 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  CVL 
Subject:  Staffing:  Daily/ On call staffing  Section:  Administration 
Date of Origination:  August 11,1988 Supersedes: 92,93,94,95,96,97 
Date of Last Revision: 
Date of Review:  
7/31/22 
7/31/24 
Serial Code:  NCD 004 
          
Distribution:        Cardiovascular Laboratory 
 
Formulated by:       Cardiovascular Laboratory 
 
Purpose:              To provide staffing for Cardiovascular procedures. 
 
Applies to:           Cardiovascular Laboratory 
 
      
 
Policy:               Adequate staffing of Cardiovascular Laboratory         
                       personnel shall be provided to perform 
                       procedures. Scheduling, Call ins, Vacation requests. 
 
Procedure:  
 
1.  Cath Lab schedule: 
a. Schedule posted for 6 weeks. 
b. Vacation requests should be emailed to the Supervisor and Director. A return email of 
vacation approval/denied will be emailed back to the employee. 
c. All personnel shall rotate shifts as assigned. 
d. All changes in the original schedule should be approved by the Director or Supervisor. 
e. Changes in the schedule are the responsibility of the person who has requested the change.  
A completed “Change in Schedule” form must be completed by the requestor. 
f. A completed “Change in Schedule” form signed by both parties must be turned in to the  
scheduling coordinator and / or the supervisor for call changes and /or switching shifts. 
 
2. Call ins: 
a.  An employee who is ill and on 6am shift should call the Cath Lab desk at 6am and      
     speak to the person managing the desk.  Other shifts should call the   
     Supervisor/Manager or person in charge to report the call in. 
b.  Evidence of illness or accident may be required by the Supervisor or Director to  
authorize sick pay. A doctor’s certificate is the usual acceptable evidence of illness or 
 accident. 
      c.   Refer to OLOL policy 
 
3. Vacation requests: 
      a. Vacation requests should be emailed to the Supervisor &/or Director.  A return email of 
vacation approval/denied will be emailed back to employee. 
 
 
 4. Daily Staffing: 
The Cardiovascular Laboratory is staffed from 6:00 a.m. until completion of all scheduled 
procedures. Personnel will be provided for “on-call coverage” for emergency and / or after hour 
procedures. 
 
3. On-call Staffing.  
a. On-call staffing is provided for after hours, holidays and weekends. There are 4 Cath Lab 
personnel on call (2 RN/2RT).  Admissions, Lab, and Respiratory are available for Heart 
alerts.  HVCU will report to the Cath Lab to assist.  An ER physician and nurse bring the 
patient to the Cath Lab and give a patient handoff to the Cardiologist. 
b. In the event of a Dual Heart Alert, 1 RN & 1 RT will proceed to another Cath Lab. HVCU 
will be documenters in each Cath Lab. The House Manager will be notified if additional 
assistance is needed to document. 
c. Call schedules will be posted on Monday and Friday for the upcoming week/weekend. 
Copies of the call schedule will be distributed to Communication Tech in ER, HVI OR 
desk, HVCU, CVT & PBX operator. The call schedule will provide the names, pager 
numbers, and home/cellular phone numbers of the staff on call. 
d. Personnel on call are provided a pager and are responsible for checking it periodically to 
assure proper functioning. 
e. The on-call team will be notified by the Communication Tech and/or PBX operator via 
paging. 
f. Upon receiving an emergency page, personnel will report immediately to the hospital as 
quickly and safely as possible, within 30 minutes or less of initial page. 
g. Upon arrival to the Cardiovascular Lab, personnel will prepare for procedure as quickly as 
possible. For inpatient heart alerts, HVCU nurse and House Manager will transport patient 
to CVL (see In-house Heart Alert Protocol).  If the patient is located in the Emergency 
Room, the ER physician and RN will bring the patient to CVL.  If the patient bypasses ER,  
ambulance personnel and a physician will accompany the patient until a Cardiologist arrives 
in the Cath Lab (see Heart Alert Bypass Protocol). 
h. Upon completion of the procedure, staff will clean and prepare the room for the next 
procedure. 
a) Clean the room. Mop the floor and clean all equipment. 
b) Arrange the room in proper order in preparation for the next patient. 
c) Put away unused supplies. 
d) Bag all trash and linen and dispose of in a proper manner. 
i. Upon leaving the Cardiovascular Lab, the staff will ensure that all rooms are ready for the 
next case. 
j. Coverage will be found for staff members that are ill and on-call. However, the original 
person will be reassigned additional call. 
k. Upon severe weather conditions and warnings, the on-call staff may be required to stay in 
the hospital. 
l. All staff members are expected to participate in the call needs of the department. 
 
 
 
 