 NCP-038 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Critical Care 
Title: Site Care for Hemodynamic 
Lines/Arterial Lines 
Policy 
Reference #: NCP-038 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: June 24, 1988 Review Date:   March 4, 2024  
Revision Date: January 10, 2020 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define the standards for site care for hemodynamic lines. 
 
POLICY: 
RNs that have demonstrated competency may care for and maintain Arterial catheters. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. Change access site dressing immediately if dressing becomes compromised, i.e. wet, soiled or non-
occlusive. 
2. Use aseptic technique. Sterile supplies are to be utilized for site care. 
3. Gently remove the dressing, taking care to avoid placing tension on the line. 
4. Cleanse the insertion site with chlorhexidine-based solution, unless contraindicated.  
5. Apply a new sterile dressing to the site. Use a transparent, semipermeable dressing; however, if 
bleeding or oozing is encountered a gauze dressing can be used to hold pressure.  
6. Document the date and time the dressing was applied, and write initials on the external dressing 
7. If gauze or tape is used under the transparent dressings to cover the access site then these dressings 
are to be changed every 48 hours and PRN. 
8. Transparent semi-permeable dressing without gauze over the access site is to be changed every 7 
days and PRN. If a dressing with CHG gel pad (Chlorhexadine Gluconate) is used over the access 
site, the dressing is considered a transparent dressing and should be changed every -7 days and PRN. 
The CHG dressing is not considered gauze. 
9. Do not attempt to repair the vascular access device. 
10. Monitor catheter sites visually when changing the dressing or by palpation through an intact dressing 
on a regular basis. If patient has tenderness at the insertion site, fever without an obvious source, or 
other symptoms of infection, remove the dressing and assess the site. 
11. If a catheter-related complication is suspected, the catheter should be removed immediately. 
12. After catheter removal, the dressing to the access site should be changed after 24 hours and assessed 
for complications.  
13. Notify physician of any complications. 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
 
AACN Procedure Manual for High Acuity, Progressive, and Critical Care. 2024.  Edited by Karen L. 
Johnson.  8th edition, Elsevier. 2024. 
  NCP-038 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 Infusion Nurses Society. (2021). Standards of Practice. Site Care and Maintenance. Vascular access 
device site care and dressing changes. In Infusion nursing standards of practice. Journal of 
Infusion Nursing, 34( 4), S119-S122. 
 
Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference. 
 
 
 
 
 
 