 NCP-053 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Critical Care 
Title: Rapid Sequence Intubation  
Policy 
Reference #: NCP-053 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: April 2009 Last Date 
Reviewed:   March 4, 2024 
Last Date Revised: May 8, 2015 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
The purpose of this policy is to provide a uniform quality of care for patients undergoing rapid sequence 
intubation throughout the hospital.  
 
DEFINITION: 
 
Rapid Sequence /Intubation-During Rapid Sequence Intubation (RSI) a patient is administered a 
sedative and a neuromuscular blocking (paralytic) agent in rapid sequence, for the purpose of rendering 
that patient unconscious and flaccid, in order to facilitate emergent endotracheal intubation and to 
minimize risk of aspiration. The setting could be anywhere in the facility in response to a “Code Blue” 
or other emergency.  
 
 
POLICY: 
In accordance with Louisiana State Board of Nursing (LSBN, 2006) opinion, it is the policy of OLOL 
that the RN as a member of a rapid response team may administer medication for Rapid Sequence 
Intubation at the direction of the rapid response team physician / midlevel provider who is present and 
has designated the situation as an emergency (an acute life-threatening event) with the following:   
 
• The physician orders the medication to be administered by the nurse for rapid sequence        
       intubation and is present at the bedside. 
 
• The nurse has the knowledge, skills, and abilities to perform the medication  
      administration. 
 
• All equipment needed for resuscitation, hemodynamic support and monitoring is 
available at the bedside. 
 
• The competency of the registered nurse is verified. Documentation of competency is  
            maintained in the file of the registered nurse and is renewed and documented annually. 
 
 
 
  NCP-053 
Page 2 of 2 
REFERENCES: 
 
Caro, David,M D.(2016). Rapid sequence intubation in adults. UptoDate. Retrieved May 17,2016 
 from:            
 
http://www.uptodate.com/contents/rapid-sequence-intubation-in-
adults?source=search_result&search=rsi&selectedTitle=1%7E36 
 
Louisiana State Board of Nursing.(2006). Minutes of the March 8, 2006 board meeting.  
 
     Agenda Item 6.5. Page 12 of 17. Retrieved April 10, 2009 from: 
 
Npop06.01 RN Administration of medication for rapid intubation in emergent airway mangement _Propofol, 
etomidate_ (state.la.us)    
 
 
Refer to Facility Designated On-Line Clinical Reference 
 