POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Cardiovascular Lab 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Cardiology Svc 
Subject:  Discharge Patient from CVL Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  June 1996 Supersedes: 1997 
Date of Last Revision: 
Date of Review: 
7/31/17 
07/31/24 
Serial Code:  NCR 007 
           
 
Distribution:         Cardiovascular Lab/Patient Care Units  
 
Formulated by:        Cardiovascular Service Line 
 
Purpose:              To provide guidelines for the coordination and discharge of  
      patients from the Cardiovascular Lab. 
 
Applies to:           Cardiology Services/Critical Care Units 
 
Policy: 
 
1. Upon completion of a procedure in the Cardiovascular Lab, the circulating nurse should 
coordinate with the physician and charge person the appropriate area for monitoring of the 
patient post procedure based upon an assessment of the patient needs. 
2. Patients may be discharged from CVL when their PAR score is equal to or greater than the 
PAR on arrival to CVL, or by physician order. 
3.  The following information should be taken into consideration: 
a. The type of procedure performed. 
b. Complications of procedure. 
c. The presence of an arterial sheath, temporary pacemaker, or any invasive lines 
which require special monitoring. 
d. Medication administration requiring additional monitoring. 
e. Change in PAR score. 
4. Upon evaluation of the patient needs, CVL personnel will “request” a bed in Epic for 
patient placement post-procedure. 
5. The monitor person should call the receiving department to notify personnel of impending 
patient transfer.  If transporting patient to a critical care unit, a registered nurse must 
accompany the patient.  A registered nurse should give the receiving nurse a report 
including: 
a. Type of procedure performed. 
b. Pre & post assessment of patient including vital signs. 
c. Any complications of procedure. 
d. Intake and output during procedure. 
e. Presence of invasive lines. 