ECLS-012 (6020) 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Neurology Unit Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Neurology 2020 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 6020 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination:  Review Date:  
Revision Date: 6/26/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exits are located in the following areas:  
o Across from the family waiting area 
o End of A Hall (rooms 5200-5211) 
o End of  B Hall (rooms 5216-5227) 
o End of C Hall (rooms 5233-5243) 
• Adjacent smoke compartment is accessible through the doors located between 5200 and 5211 ECLS-012 (6020) 
Page 2 of 2 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• All available Registered Nurse (RN), Certified Nursing Assistant (CNA) and/or Clinical Service 
Representative (CSR) will clear all hallways of any carts or equipment by moving them to 
nutrition room. 
• All available RNs or CNAs will ensure all windows and doors are closed 
• The charge nurse or designee will ensure that all automatic fire doors are closed 
• All available staff members will ensure all patients and visitors to explain safety by stating “the 
hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety.” 
• The CSR or designee will prevent people from using the elevators   
• The Charge Nurse and/or Nurse Manger will ensure all employees are accounted for  
• The Charge Nurse and/or Nurse Manger will ensure all patients are accounted for  
• The Charge Nurse and/or Nurse Manger will ensure each room is empty  
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• The oxygen shut off valves are located on the top of A hall (wall next to nutrition room) 
containing rooms 5200-5211. House Manager, Unit Manager, Charge nurse and/or Respiratory 
are authorized to a delegate staff member to shut off gas valve. 
  
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• For horizontal evacuation, non-ambulatory and partially ambulatory patients will be assisted to 
the next smoke compartment using wheelchairs, stretchers and/or beds.  
• For vertical evacuation, non-ambulatory and partially ambulatory patients will be assisted down 
stairs with linens and mattresses.  
o Linens are stored in the nutrition room at the top of A hall that contain patient rooms 
5200-5211 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguishers are located at the end of each hall by the stairwell 
• Fire Pull Stations are located at the end of each hall by the stairwell.  
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• The department has med gases that would need to be turned off 
• The department has e-cylinders that are combustible  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• For primary horizontal evacuation all employees, patients, and visitors will move down the hall 
that contains rooms 5200-5211 to the Oncology Unit (starting with room 5157).  
• For secondary horizontal evacuation, all employees, patients, and visitors will move down the 
hall beginning with patient room 5142. 
• For primary vertical evacuation all employees, patients, and visitors will evacuate down the 
stairwell across from the simulation lab on the Oncology Unit ending at Garage 2.  
• For secondary vertical evacuation, all employees, patients, and visitors will evacuate down the 
stairwell across from patient room 5124. 