NICP-002 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Neonatal Intensive Care  
Subject:  Male Circumcision  Section:  Patient Care  
Date of Origination:  October 23, 2020 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  NICP-002 
  
PURPOSE: 
This policy is to provide guidelines for the health care team preparing and performing a circumcision on a male 
neonate.  
 
POLICY: 
The physician performing the circumcision has a responsibility to obtain informed consent and provide 
parents/legal guardians with risks and benefits regarding the procedure.  The consent must be signed by 
parent/legal guardian of infant and verified immediately prior to procedure. 
 
An order must be entered by performing physician for an infant to be circumcised. 
Documentation should address: 
 a.  Absence of obvious congenital anomalies of the GU tract or other related anomalies 
 b.  Signs of symptoms of infection 
 c.  Respiratory distress 
 d.  Hypothermia 
 
Order for analgesia is obtained prior to procedure and administered as ordered.  If dorsal penile block (DPNB) 
is ordered, this can only be done by physician. 
 
Last infant feeding should be at least one hour prior to start of circumcision.    
 
PROCUDURE: 
1. Identify infant with armband and compare to consent. 
2. Obtain circumcision set. 
3. Protectively restrain infant on circumcision board. 
4. Oxygen and suction equipment must be immediately available. 
5. Prep per physician preference. 
6. Perform “time out” per organizational policy and document in electronic medical record. 
7. Parent’s presence at procedure is at performing physician discretion. 
8. Notify physician for post-operative excessive bleeding.   
9. Petrolatum gauze or ointment should be applied to circumcision site for first three days following 
procedure  
if ordered.  Use of soap should be avoided for the first three days.   
10. Circumcision site should be checked for bleeding every 15 minutes for 1 hour and PRN following  
procedure. 
11. Documentation should include date, time, doctor, pain, and site assessment. 
12. The physician performing the procedure will be responsible for the procedure and should be notified of NICP-002 
Page 2 of 2 
 
any problems that arise post procedure.  The infant maybe discharged two hours post circumcision if 
infant has voided without difficulty.  Discuss with NNP/physician if > 2- 4 hours post procedure, and the 
infant has not voided and is ready for discharge. 
13. When abnormal findings of the penis are present before, during, or after the circumcision the performing  
MD will notify the pediatrician of the decision to not initiate or continue circumcision.  Appropriate 
urologic referral should be initiated as indicated. 
14. Educate family regarding appropriate circumcision care to parents/legal guardians. 
15. Clean circumcision board with hospital approved disinfectant. 
16. Send instruments to sterile processing department (SPD) for high-level disinfection.   
 
REFERENCES: 
American Academy of Pediatrics (2012).  Technical Report Male Circumcision.  Pediatrics, 130(2), e756-e785.  
doi: 10.1542/peds.2012-1990  
Committee on Fetus and Newborn and section on Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine.  (2016).  Prevention and 
Management of Procedural Pain in the Neonate:  An Update.  Pediatrics, 137(2), 1-13.  doi:   
10.1542/peds.2015-4271  
 