NICP-012 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Neonatal Intensive Care 
Subject:  Neonate Hearing Screening in the NICU Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  November 11, 2020 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  NICP-012 
  
PURPOSE: 
To establish guidelines and procedure for early identification of infants born with, or who acquire hearing loss, as 
mandated by Louisiana law. 
 
POLICY: 
It is the policy of OLOL Children’s Hospital to provide a hearing screening on all infants in the Neonatal 
Intensive Care Unit (NICU) not previously screened by 1 month of age or readmitted to the hospital within the 
first month of life when there is a condition associated with potential hearing loss (e.g., hyperbilirubinemia 
requiring exchange transfusion or culture-positive sepsis).  
 
A. Responsibility 
1. Must be performed by appropriately trained professionals supervised by a licensed audiologist or 
physician with training in infant hearing screening. 
2. Results, or reason not tested, must be reported to the Deaf or Heard of Hearing (D/HH) Early 
Hearing Detection and Intervention program on the Newborn Hearing Screening Report (NHSR) 
form by fax 504-568-5854 or e-mail LAEHDI@la.gov, as well as, to the Primary Care Physician and 
parents within 14 days. 
3. Should take place as close to discharge as possible for the most accurate results. 
i. Infant should be at least 24 hours following vaginal delivery or 48 hours following c-section 
to allow for any birthing debris in the ear canal to dry. 
ii. Infant should be screened at 34 weeks gestational age or greater, or upon discharge from the 
NICU. 
iii. If infant is receiving ototoxic medications, the screening should be conducted following 
completion of the course of medications. 
 
B. Equipment 
1. Contract company, Hearing Screenings Associates, will provide an automated Auditory Brainstem 
Response (ABR) unit, earphones, ear couplers, and supplies.   
2. Equipment will be kept in the NICU  
 
C. Procedure 
1. Preparation 
i. NICU team will contact Hearing Screening Associates to inform of hearing test needed. 
ii. Prior to screening, screener will determine any family history of genetic hearing loss, identify 
risk factors for hearing loss and obtain name of infant’s PCP following discharge. 
iii. Screener will perform proper hand hygiene prior to testing and will don appropriate personal 
protective equipment (PPE) during screening. NICP-012 
Page 2 of 3 
iv. Screener will give the completed report to the nurse (white copy) and another copy for the 
family. The nurse will enter the results into EPIC. In addition, the form is to be uploaded into 
the patient’s electronic record.   
v. The audiologist will report the results to DHH Early Hearing Detection and Intervention 
program. 
vi. If the infant fails the screening, they will be referred to an Audiologist post discharge, by the 
screener. 
 
2. Testing 
i. As stated in Louisiana law, screening will be conducted only by personnel trained, certified, 
current in observations and supervised by an Audiologist. 
ii. All information on screener competency will be maintained and reported to LAEHDI 
annually. 
iii. Screening will be conducted in the patient’s room.  
iv. Screening will be attempted at least 2, but not more than 4 times before being considered a 
refer result. 
v. If infant passes the test: 
1. All results are charted in the electronic medical record (EMR) and included in the 
discharge summary. 
2. All results are charted on the DHH Newborn Hearing Screening Form, and the white 
copy will be filed in the infant’s chart. Once the patient is discharged, HIM will 
upload this form into the electronic record. 
3. If an infant has risk factors for late-onset hearing loss, recommendations are made for 
further testing in the future. 
4. The Audiologist will send the results to DHH Early Hearing Detection and 
Intervention program 
vi. If infant refers for further testing: 
1. Screener contacts medical management to request referral to an Audiologist for 
further testing within 2-4 weeks after discharge. 
2. Treating physician should review screening results and importance of follow-up with 
the parent before discharge. 
3. Parent will receive a copy of the NHSF test results along with information on 
address/location of audiologist and contact number. 
vii. If the infant leaves without a hearing screening: 
1. Secondary to transfer to another hospital, the receiving hospital is responsible for 
completing the hearing screening.  
2. Secondary to discharge prior to completion of screening, a referral will be placed with 
an audiologist for evaluation within 2-4 weeks. 
3. Secondary to expiration, LAEHDI will be notified that testing could not be 
completed. 
 
D. Documentation 
1. The nurse will document the patient’s screening results in the EMR and the screening form (white 
copy) will be scanned into the patient’s chart by the HIM department after discharge.   
2. The contract company will accurately report all Newborn Hearing Screening Report (NHSR) results 
electronically into the LEERs system within 14 days and forward the results on those infants who 
did not receive a screening, who expired, or who transferred into the hospital and do not have a birth 
certificate to DHH Office of Public Health/Louisiana Early Hearing Detection and Intervention 
Program. NICP-012 
Page 3 of 3 
3. The Audiologist will document the results on all infants who return for follow-up or who are lost to 
follow-up in the DHH EHDI database.  
4. The Audiologist will maintain records on technician competency and equipment calibration for 
annual reporting to DHH. 
 
 
References: 
 
Guidelines for Newborn Hearing Screening in Louisiana Birthing Facilities. Department of Health and 
Hospitals, Office of Public Health, Hearing, Speech, and Vision Department, 2017. www.ehdi.dhh.la.gov 
 
Beauman, S.S & Bowles, S. (2019).  Policies, Procedures, and Competencies for Neonatal Nursing Care (6th 
Ed).  National Association of Neonatal Nurses. 
 