NICP-009 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Neonatal Intensive Care 
Subject:  Neonatal Opiate Withdrawal Syndrome 
(NOWS) 
Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  October 23, 2020 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
October 6, 2023 
Serial Code:  NICP-009 
  
PURPOSE: 
This policy is to provide guidelines for care of a neonate born to a woman who has suspected, or documented 
drug (illicit substance) use or abuse during pregnancy. 
 
POLICY: 
I. Mandatory Reporting 
The Louisiana Children’s Code Article 603 states: 
a) “Caretaker” as any person legally obligated to provide or secure adequate care for a child, including 
parent, tutor, guardian, legal custodian, foster home parent, an employee of a public or private day care, 
an operator or employee of a registered family child day care home, or other person providing residence 
for the child. 
b) “Mandatory reporter” is a “health practitioner” which includes physicians, surgeons, physical therapists, 
intern and hospital staff members.   
c) “Prenatal neglect means the unlawful use by a mother during pregnancy of a controlled dangerous 
substance, as defined by R.S. 40:961 et seq., which results in symptoms of withdrawal in the infant or 
the presence of a controlled substance in the infant’s body.” 
 
II. Drug Abuse Screening in Newborns 
According to the Louisiana Children’s Code Article 610: 
a) “If a physician has cause to believe that a newborn was exposed in utero to an unlawfully used 
controlled dangerous substance, as defined by R.S. 40:961 et seq., the physician shall order a toxicology 
test upon the newborn, without the consent of the newborn's parents or guardian, to determine whether 
there is evidence of prenatal neglect. 
b) If the test results are positive, the physician shall issue a report, as soon as possible, in accordance with 
this Article. 
c) If the test results are negative, all identifying information shall be obliterated if the record is retained, 
unless the parent approves the inclusion of identifying information. 
d) Positive test results shall not be admissible in a criminal prosecution.” 
 
Other Considerations: 
1. Mandatory reporting is made to the Department of Child and Family Services (DCFS). 
2. For neonates transferred to the Children’s Hospital from another facility with NOWS, the social worker 
will verify that reporting to DCFS has occurred at the transferring institution and document in a note in 
Electronic Medical Record (EMR). 
3. Parents should be notified of the need for mandated reporting to the state agency. 
4. Drug withdrawal scoring should be conducted for one or more of the following criteria: NICP-009 
Page 2 of 3 
 
a. Infants born to drug dependent mothers or, 
b. Mothers with a history of drug use, 
c. Infants whose mothers have positive drug screens,  
d. Infants exhibiting behaviors consistent with drug withdrawal or, 
e. Infants who are being weaned from medications that cause physiological dependence, such as 
morphine or fentanyl. 
5. Physician or NNP many initiate an order to begin scoring or nurses may begin scoring infants who meet 
these criteria and then notify physician or NNP to place an order. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. The nurse will use an approved neonatal scoring tool (Finnegan) to assess the severity of withdrawal 
with each feeding as needed. 
2. The infant’s score should represent all behavior during the selected interval, not a single point in time. 
3. RN will score infant 30-minutes to 1-hour after feeding. 
4. Crying infants should be quieted before assessing muscle tone, respiratory rate, and Moro reflex. 
5. Respirations should be observed for an entire minute. 
6. If sweating occurs during nursing intervention, a point should not be given. 
7. Discuss with NNP/physician the length of time the neonate should be scored (i.e., this will depend on 
the half-life of the substance) and frequency of assessments. 
8. RN will notify the provider of two consecutive score greater than or equal to 12, or three (3) consecutive 
scores greater than or equal to 8. 
9. Follow pharmacologic order for treatment of NOWS. 
10. Non-pharmacologic and supportive interventions (see below) should be used in conjunction with 
pharmacologic therapy. 
11. Breastfeeding should be encouraged.  Breastfeeding is contraindicated if the mother is: 
a. Taking illicit drugs, 
b. Has polydrug abuse, 
c. Infected with HIV 
12. Provide parent education regarding scoring, medication treatment, weaning, and discharge planning. 
13. Social worker will follow infant throughout hospital stay and will serve as primary contact with DCFS. 
14. Confirmation will be obtained from DCFS that the neonate is approved to be discharged home. 
15. Prior to discharge, ensure all follow up appointments have been made and any health maintenance 
activities have been completed (i.e., hearing screen, Hepatitis B vaccine) and documented in electronic 
medical record. 
 
 See Ebsco Health Online Resource for Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome Care 
 
REFERENCES: 
Louisiana State Legislature.  (2017).  Louisiana Children’s Code Article 603 Definitions.  
http://www.legis.la.gov/legis/Law.aspx?d=73195 
Louisiana State Legislature.  (2017).  Louisiana Children’s Code Article 610 Reporting procedure; reports to the 
legislature and the United States Department of Defense Family Advocate Program.  
https://www.legis.la.gov/legis/Law.aspx?d=73202 
McQueen, K. & Murphy-Oikonen, J.  (2016).  Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome.  New England Journal of 
Medicine, 375, 2468-2479.  doi: 10.1056/NEJMra1600879 
Beauman, S.S & Bowles, S. (2019).  Policies, Procedures, and Competencies for Neonatal Nursing Care (6th 
Ed).  National Association of Neonatal Nurses. NICP-009 
Page 3 of 3 
 
Non-pharmacologic Interventions: 
• Reduce environmental stimulation 
• Quiet room, dim lighting, low activity 
• Move infant away from high traffic areas 
• Minimal disturbance: time exams/procedures when infant is awake and fed 
• Present one stimulus at a time and slowly 
 
 
Supportive Interventions: 
• Consult physical therapy 
• Utilize staff to hold, comfort when parents not in unit 
• Structure infant’s day 
• Provide containment: swaddle with arms near body, hands near mouth flexed position, bundling  
• Avoid bright colors, utilize black and white colors 
• Rub infants back instead of patting 
• Monitor temperature and avoid overheating 
• Provide opportunities for non-nutritive sucking 
• Encourage breastfeeding and skin-to-skin contact 
• Respond to infant cues: respond quickly, feed on demand 
• Apply mittens to hands if needed 
• Encourage parents to provide care  
• Limit visitors 
• Provide comfort measures for painful procedures 
• Place item with mother’s scent in crib 
• Utilize soft music 
• Create an individualized multidisciplinary care plan for neonate 
 
 
 