NICP-003 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Neonatal Intensive Care 
Subject:  Therapeutic Hypothermia of the Neonate Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  October 23, 2020 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  NICP-003 
  
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of the policy is to provide guidelines for the initiation and management of therapeutic hypothermia in 
the neonate with moderate or severe encephalopathy. 
 
POLICY: 
The following criteria should be considered for implementing therapeutic hypothermia of the neonate: 
• Gestational age > 36 weeks 
o *At the neonatologist’s discretion, therapeutic hypothermia may be considered below 36 weeks 
gestational age.   
• Eligibility criteria are ultimately determined by attending neonatologist but should include: 
o Infants with pH< 7.0 or a base deficit of >16 mmol/L in a sample of umbilical cord blood or 
blood obtained during the first hour of life, history of an acute perinatal event, a 10-minute 
Apgar score of < 5 or assisted ventilation initiated at birth and continued for at least 10 minutes. 
o Neurologic examination demonstrating moderate to severe encephalopathy.   
• Hypothermia should be initiated before 6 hours of age and continue for 72 hours to provide the most 
benefit. 
• Induced hypothermia should occur by decreasing core body temperature by 2°C - 4°C. 
 
I.  PROCEDURE: 
1. A physician/NNP must determine neonate’s eligibility and accept transfer. 
2. Vascular access must be established by umbilical vein catheter or peripheral line. 
3. When possible, baseline laboratory studies will be obtained prior to initiation of cooling. 
4. Obtain baseline glucose and monitor frequently in accordance with orders. 
5. Not all infants will require mechanical ventilation, but hypocapnia and hypoxemia should be avoided 
during cooling.  If patient is ventilated, avoid over-ventilation (Target SpO2 94-99%; Target pCO2 40-
50 mm Hg).  Inspired gases should be set at 36 C 
6. Monitor frequently for the need of suctioning and perform as indicated. 
7. Maintain cardiopulmonary monitoring and vital sign monitoring including blood pressure and 
temperature.  In addition to rectal temperature as measured by probe, an axillary temperature should be 
recorded every 2 hours once goal temperature has been reached. Notify physician/NNP for any 
abnormal finding outside of prescribed range.  Vital sign frequency and documentation should occur at 
the following intervals:  
a. Hours 0-1 cooling every 15 minutes 
b. Hours 1-2 cooling every 30 minutes 
c. Hours 2-72 cooling every 1 hour 
 
8. Arrange head ultrasound (HUS) as soon as possible to evaluate for intracranial hemorrhage as ordered. NICP-003 
Page 2 of 2 
 
9. Arrange EEG/aEEG monitoring as ordered. 
10. Monitor neurologic status every hour and notify physician/NNP of any seizure activity.   
11. Monitoring for bleeding and report to physician/NNP as indicated.   
12. Reposition infant during cooling every 2 hours and monitor skin integrity on all dependent areas. Be 
alert for sclerema, bruising, exaggerated acrocyanosis, subcutaneous fat necrosis, erythema and 
cyanosis.   
13. Follow manufacturers recommendation for set up of cooling device.  Place device in Servo mode. 
14. Rectal probe must remain inserted approximately 5 cm in the rectum and temperature monitored 
continuously.  Temperature documentation should occur every 15 minutes for first 4 hours and then 
every hour once goal temperature has been reached.   
15. Induce hypothermia to the desired target temperature between 32° C – 34° C (standard - 33.5° C).  If 
fluctuations in target temperature occur confirm the rectal probe is in place; confirm all settings on 
cooling device are correct and functioning properly; notify physician/NNP if temperature fluctuations 
are not resolved with one hour.  
16. Maintain adequate sedation within orders as prescribed. 
17. In the event the neonate must be transported within the hospital during cooling, continuously monitor 
the temperature and safeguard against over cooling during the transport and throughout the procedure.  
 
II.  REWARMING: 
1. After 72 hours, begin the rewarming process by increasing the cooling device set point by 0.5°C every 
hour until rectal temperature reaches 36°C - 38°C.  This process should take 6-8 hours.      
2. Assess the neonate after each increase in cooling device temperature and make additional changes in 
increments as ordered by physician/NNP. 
3. Avoid hyperthermia after cooling. 
4. Continue careful neurologic assessment and monitoring for seizures in the rewarming phase. 
5. Continue cardiopulmonary monitoring and vital sign assessment every 30 minutes during the rewarming 
phase.  Notify physician/NNP for signs of physiologic instability. Post warming vital signs should be 
obtained every hour x 3 and then may be obtained per unit standard. 
6. Document when rewarming begins and is completed.  During the process of rewarming, document the 
rectal temperature, the set point on cooling device and infant’s axillary temperature.    
   
III.  Additional Documentation: 
1. Any adverse event that occurs during any phase of therapeutic hypothermia should be noted. 
2. If hypothermia is discontinued before the 72 hours, document time the cooling is stopped and reason. 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
Academic Medical Center Patient Safety Organization (AMC PSO) Neonatal Encephalopathy Task Force 
(2016).  Therapeutic Hypothermia in Neonates.  https://flbog.sip.ufl.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2019/11/AMC-PSO-Therapeutic-Hypothermia-in-Neonates.pdf  
 
American Academy of Pediatrics.  Clinical Report Hypothermia and Neonatal Encephalopathy.  Pediatrics, 
133(6), 1146-1150.  https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2014-0899 
 