NICP-005 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Neonatal Intensive Care  
Subject:  Neonate Exchange Transfusion Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  October 23, 2020 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  NICP-005 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide standard for exchange transfusion for the following patients:  
▪ To treat alloimmune hemolytic disease of the newborn. 
▪ To treat significant unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia with risk of kernicterus due to any cause when 
intensive phototherapy is unsuccessful. 
a. To remove circulating bilirubin to reduce levels and prevent kernicterus 
b. To replace antibody-coated red cells with antigen-negative cells 
▪ Polycythemia 
 
POLICY: 
The policy for performing neonatal exchange transfusions is as follows: 
 
EQUIPMENT: 
Blood Warmer and tubing 
Exchange Transfusion Tray/Kit  
Cut down/umbilical line tray and/or Hemodynamic/Central Line Cart 
Appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) 
Assorted syringe sizes 
Sterile drapes, gloves, gowns, and mask 
Stop-Cocks (2-4) 
Crash Cart with Emergency Drugs  
Radiant warmer 
Cardiac pulmonary and pulse oximetry monitoring 
4 x 4 Gauze 
Suction and oxygen set up 
Unit of cross-matched whole blood 
Glucose monitor 
Mayo stand 
Sterile towels 
 
▪ An exchange transfusion maybe performed by a physician/NNP.  Once initiated it should be carried out 
to completion without interruption, except emergencies. 
▪ See Ebsco Health Online Resource for Exchange Transfusion in the Newborn NICP-005 
Page 2 of 3 
 
I.  PROCEDURE:  
1. Determine need for exchange based on established NICU lab values 
a.  Partial: Amount to be determined per NNP/physician. 
b. Single – 1 x circulating blood volume (Term 80ml/kg; Pre-Term 100ml/kg) 
Replaces approximately 60% of circulating volume 
c.  Double – 2 x circulating blood volume 
Replaces approximately 85% of circulating volume 
2. Discuss need with parents and obtain informed consent. 
3. Send type and cross match to lab and any other lab as ordered. 
4. Obtain and set up necessary equipment 
5.  Place infant on radiant warmer with temperature probe in place, cardiopulmonary monitor and pulse  
     oximetry.  Ensure alarms are audible and set appropriate.  Record vital signs as ordered. 
6. If feeding has occurred recently, discuss with provider if gastric contents need to be aspirated. 
7. Verify if blood glucose and Calcium levels are to be obtained before, during and after procedure.  
8. Assist physician/NNP with establishing vascular access if not already present. Exchange transfusions are  
    typically done utilizing umbilical access (UAC/UVC). 
  *Procedure may be done with single UVC in place and used for withdrawal and infusion.   
*If a UAC and UVC are in place, then blood may be removed through the UAC and infused through  
  the UVC.  The correct placement of the UVC/UAC must be checked by x-ray before the procedure  
  begins.  Once the placement is confirmed, the UVC should be stabilized to assure that it does not  
  move. 
9.  Obtain IV access and/or verify patency. Infuse intravenous fluids as ordered. 
8.  Obtain blood products when ready.  Verify ABO group, Rh type, age, donor number and expiration date  
       with two RNs.  Verify blood bank number on identification band with blood bag.   
9.   Those assisting with procedure don PPE (gown, gloves, eye protection). 
10.   Proceed with setting up blood warmer and tubing per manufacturer’s recommendations. 
11.  Physician/NNP should don sterile PPE. 
12.  Create a sterile field with sterile drapes. 
13.  Consider best option for warming blood.  Prime tubing with blood and connect filtered tubing to blood  
        bag and open tubing to clear bag.  Place the discard container below the radiant warmer to allow          
        gravity to assist with drainage. 
14.  Verify lines are connected accordingly by tracing tubing to points of origin at the patient. The  
       physician/NNP places the stop cock after proper disinfection of the hub on the  
       umbilical line port.  The tubing should be labeled at the connection site closest to the neonate at the   
       connection site and at the connection site closest to the source when there are different access site or  
       several bags (*Note Ebsco Health Online procedure Image for Exchange Transfusion in the Newborn).  
15.  Prior to beginning procedure, the provider performing the procedure should determine the volume of  
       the aliquots to be exchanged and the time period over which the exchange will take place.   
       Documentation of the procedure should include a tally of volume exchanged. 
16.  Conduct a time out immediately before starting exchange to ensure correct patient, positioning, and  NICP-005 
Page 3 of 3 
 
       procedures are all identified, and all relevant information and necessary equipment are available. 
17.  On-going monitoring and documentation of vital signs and cardiopulmonary status will occur as the  
       provider aspirates the patient’s blood, discards and injects donor blood using aliquots.  This process will  
       be repeated until the desired volume is exchanged and in accordance with infant’s tolerance of  
       procedure.  
18.  Gently aspirate from blood transfusion bag to prevent RBC sedimentation. 
19.  Be prepared to administer Calcium Gluconate as ordered to prevent hypocalcemia if blood products  
       have been citrated.  
20.  Obtain serial lab as ordered at the initiation, during and post procedure. 
21.  Clamp blood tubing and disconnect from line.  Flush catheter as prescribed. 
 
II.  POST-PROCEDURE:    
1.  Monitor vital signs for 2 hours post procedure. 
2.  Maintain NPO status for prescribed period post procedure. 
3.  Monitor for transfusion reaction. 
4.  Monitor abdomen for ileus, bowel necrosis and perforation. 
5.  Obtain any additional lab; continue to monitor glucose as ordered. 
6.  Resume phototherapy as ordered. 
 
REFERENCE: 
Gomella, T.L., Eyal, F.G., & Bany-Mohammed, F.  (2020).  Gomella’s Neonatology Management, Procedures, 
On-call Problems, Diseases, and Drugs (8th Ed.).   New York:  McGraw Hill. 
Beauman, S.S & Bowles, S. (2019).  Policies, Procedures, and Competencies for Neonatal Nursing Care (6th 
Ed).  National Association of Neonatal Nurses. 
 