NICP-010 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Neonatal Intensive Care 
Subject:  Oxygen Therapy Management in the 
Neonate 
Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  October 23, 2020 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
April 23, 2021 
August 23, 2024  
Serial Code:  NICP-010 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide recommendations for oxygen therapy management in the neonate. 
 
POLICY: 
A. Oxygen may be delivered without a physician/NNP order in the event of infant cyanosis by a trained 
clinician.  After oxygen has been started, a pulse oximeter should be placed, and oxygen adjusted 
according to established guidelines and the fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) measured.  In this event, 
the physician/NNP should be notified as soon as possible. 
B. In the absence of an emergent situation, a physician/NNP order is required for the delivery of oxygen.  
Orders should include the percentage of oxygen to be delivered, parameters for pulse oximetry, and the 
mode of oxygen delivery.  Orders should be reviewed by nursing staff and Respiratory Therapist 
according to the policy and discussed with the provider team during rounds. 
C. Pulse oximeter alarms should be set at prescribed levels and not changed in response to frequent alarms.  
Alternatively, wider alarm limits may help decrease alarm fatigue. 
D. When oxygen increases are determined to be necessary, these should be done in increments of 3%-5% at 
a time and patient should be observed for a length of time to ensure appropriate response.  If recovery 
occurs, attempts should be made to wean the oxygen back to maintenance levels as soon as possible.  
E. For premature infants, a pulse oximeter and oxygen blender/analyzer should be in place even during 
short periods of oxygen administration. 
F. Oxygen blender or In-line oxygen analyzers should be available when oxygen is being delivered over an 
extended period of time. 
 
 
PROCESS: 
A. The alarm ranges for oxygen saturation may be different for specific populations.  Unless specified 
otherwise by physician/NNP order, alarm settings are: 
a. < 1500g or < 32 weeks gestational age at birth, pulse oximeter alarm limits set at 85-96% Sa O2 
targets 88-95% 
b. 32-36 weeks gestation at birth, pulse oximeter alarm limits set at 88-95%;Sa O2 targets 92-97% 
c. >36 gestational age at birth, pulse oximeter alarm limits 90-95% 
d. Infants at risk for PPHN, pulse oximeter alarm limits 93-98%;Sa O2 targets 95-98% 
e. Infants on FiO2 0.21 on any respiratory device or on room air, upper alarm may be set at 100% 
 
B. Alarms should be responded to immediately and silences at the bedside while evaluating the alarms. 
a. Perform full assessment NICP-010 
Page 2 of 3 
 
b. Check the pulse oximeter probe security on the patient’s extremity. 
c. Observe infant’s activity/motion. 
d. Check the pulse oximeter waveform for consistency. 
e. Confirm the pulse rate on the pulse oximeter (+/-5 beats/minute) the HR on the EKG monitor for 
at least 20 seconds before confirming accurate saturation. 
f. Record the actual saturation reading on the monitor at the time of event if it was an actionable 
event. 
C. The target ranges for oxygen saturation may be different for specific patient populations. The following 
parameters will be utilized for target saturations: 
a. Infants 23-31 weeks + 6 days GA at birth: 
• Target saturation 88-95% 
• Target saturations continue until retina is fully vascularized with no ROP and/or is 
cleared by pediatric ophthalmologist 
b. Infants: > 32 GA at birth 
• Target saturations 92-97% 
c. Infants with PPHN&/or on iNO 
• Target saturations 95-98% 
D. In the event of low oxygen saturation alarms: 
a. Both the infant and monitor should be evaluated when a low saturation alarm occurs before 
increasing FiO2 levels. 
b. Before increasing FiO2, the level of saturation and length of time at that measured saturation 
should be judged.   
c. Allow the infant to recover spontaneously rather than quickly increasing oxygen delivery when it 
may not be necessary. 
E. When weaning oxygen, it should be done quickly (but in small doses at a time) enough to prevent high 
saturation alarms, but cautiously enough to prevent having to abruptly increase oxygen delivery. 
F. When it is necessary to increase oxygen delivery, a healthcare provider should stay at the bedside until 
either the oxygen has been weaned back to baseline or this new oxygen level has been established as 
necessary to maintain saturation within the prescribed range. 
• The physician/NNP should be notified when an increase in FiO2 of 10% or more is 
required and the registered nurse or respiratory care practitioner is unable to wean the 
infant back to baseline. 
G. For infants receiving mechanical ventilation, all parameters should be evaluated and adjusted to 
minimize the need to increase oxygen delivery during care procedures, including suctioning. 
H. Increasing oxygen delivery to an infant who is apneic should not be the first choice of intervention.  
Initial response to apnea is tactile stimulation, followed by continuous positive airway pressure and 
progressing to artificial ventilation.  In the presence of assisted ventilation or emergencies, additional 
oxygen may be required to increase saturation within the prescribed range. 
I. All events should be documented in the electronic medical record. 
 
See Ebsco Health Online Resource for Oxygen Therapy Administration for the Newborn NICP-010 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
REFERENCES:  
Kayton, A., Timoney, P., Vargo, L., and Perez, J.A. (2018). A Review of Oxygen Physiology and Appropriate 
Management of Oxygen Levels in Premature Neonates. Advances in Neonatal Care, 18 (2), p. 98-104. 
 
Koehn, A.R. (2018). The Delicate Balance: Managing Oxygen Treatment in Neonates. Advances in Neonatal 
Care, 18 (5), p. 1-11.  
 
Managing Oxygen Therapy in the Neonate (2018).  Seattle Children’s. 
https://www.seattlechildrens.org/globalassets/documents/healthcare-professionals/neonatal-
briefs/managing-oxygen-neonatal-brief.pdf  
 
Oxygen saturation SpO2 level targeting in neonates. (2016, June). Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne. 
https://www.rch.org.au/rchcpg/hospital_clinical_guideline_index/Oxygen_Saturation_SpO2_Level_Targeti
ng_Premature_Neonates/ 
 
Beauman, S.S & Bowles, S. (2019).  Policies, Procedures, and Competencies for Neonatal Nursing Care (6th 
Ed).  National Association of Neonatal Nurses. 
 
 