NIV-004 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Medication 
Title: Total Parenteral Nutrition (TPN) 
Policy 
Reference #: NIV-004 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: October, 1996 Review Date:  October 14, 2024 
Revision Date: February 12, 2018 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide pertinent information regarding the administration of the Intralipids/Hyperalimentation.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Total Parenteral Nutrition (TPN):  for the purposes of this document, refers to customized total 
parenteral nutrition.  The term total parenteral nutrition will not be used to refer to pre-
mixed intravenous nutrition products (e.g., Clinimix). 
 
POLICY: 
 
A. Prescribing 
a. When consulted by prescribers, the Pharmacy Department and Nutrition services shall be 
responsible for initiating and monitoring total parenteral nutrition. 
b. Pharmacists ordering total parenteral nutrition will consult with nursing to determine the type of 
intravenous access prior to entering orders.  If central access is necessary but not available, the 
pharmacist shall contact the prescriber to discuss additional measures. 
c. Basic serum chemistries should be current (within 24 hours).  If chemistry results are not current, 
a stat order will be entered. Basic serum chemistries should be re-drawn at a minimum of every 
72 hours while the patient is receiving TPN. 
d. Total parenteral nutrition orders for adult patients are to be entered into the electronic medical 
record by 1300 daily.  The standard hang time is 2000. 
i. Orders for new TPN and orders for changes to existing TPN received after 1300 will 
be processed to hang at 2000 the following day.  
ii. If the TPN infusion has been completed prior to the next scheduled 2000 infusion, a 
physician’s order must be obtained to hang an alternative fluid (e.g., Dextrose 10%, 
Clinimix®) until the next TPN infusion can be prepared and delivered for the 
standard 2000 hang time. 
iii. Should any component of the TPN currently infusing be changed, including but not 
limited to electrolytes removed and/or decreased, a new order shall be entered into the 
electronic medical record with the necessary changes.  This order should also include 
an interim fluid such as Dextrose 10% or Clinimix® with a prescribed rate until the 
modified TPN order can be hung at the next standard hang time of 2000. 
e. All TPN orders must be entered into the electronic medical record.   
f. Continued use beyond the initial TPN order requires a new TPN order daily. 
g. A maximum dextrose concentration of 10% may be used for peripheral TPN. 
h. The pharmacist should contact the prescriber to replace electrolytes when they are out of range.  
i. The pharmacist should contact the prescriber to clarify the need for concurrent fluids while the 
TPN is hanging. NIV-004 
Page 2 of 2 
 
B. Preparation 
a.   Total parenteral nutrition solutions are to be prepared and dispensed by the Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) inpatient pharmacy.   
b. Total parenteral nutrition with volumes greater than 500mL will have 50mL of overfill. 
 
C. Administration 
a. Intravenous total parenteral nutrition is to be administered only by a registered nurse. 
b. Total parenteral nutrition solution along with the administration set and filter shall be infused               
and discarded within 24 hours of the administration set being attached. 
c. An IV pump is required to administer the therapy. 
d. The total parenteral nutrition catheter line shall not be used for central venous pressure 
monitoring.  
e. When no other route can be obtained for IV piggyback or IV push medications, compatibility 
should be verified with pharmacy prior to administration. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
Infusion Nurses Society. (2011). Infusion nursing standards of practice.  Journal of Infusion Nursing, 
34(1S).  
 
Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference 
 
 