 1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Patient Care Services 
SUBJECT:  
IV Auto programming 
PAGES: 6 pages 
 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
N/A 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
February 1, 2023 
REVISION DATE: 
REVIEW DATE: 
February 2, 2024 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
NIV025 
 
SCOPE:  The policies and procedures associated with IV pumps and the IV Auto-programming feature apply 
to facilities located within the Baton Rouge Market of the Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System 
(FMOLHS) which includes: Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Our Lady of the Lake Ascension, 
Our Lady of the Lake Assumption Community Hospital, Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital, Our Lady 
of the Lake Livingston, Our Lady of the Lake North Baton Rouge and Our Lady of the Lake Physician Group 
(FMOLHS BR Market). 
PURPOSE: Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Our Lady of the Lake Ascension, Our Lady of the 
Lake Assumption Community Hospital, Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital, Our Lady of the Lake 
Livingston, Our Lady of the Lake North Baton Rouge and Our Lady of the Lake Physician Group has 
established a policy to outline the requirements for utilization, monitoring, maintenance, training/education, 
and reporting related to IV Pumps and IV Auto-programming (IVAP) for intravenous medication 
administration.   
POLICY:  It is the policy to ensure safe management of IV pumps and the IVAP feature of the infusion pumps 
used for intravenous medication administrations. 
DEFINITIONS:    
PROCEDURE: 
 IV PUMP UTILIZATION AND PERFORMANCE MONITORING: 
A. Pump drug libraries will be updated quarterly. One month after the library update, the pharmacy 
department will generate IV pump utilization reports related to auto-programming, alerts, and 
overrides. The pharmacy department will review the drug library entries associated with the top ten 
medications in each category. If indicated, the pharmacy department will recommend changes to the 
drug library to reduce unnecessary alerts, decrease the number of overrides, and increase the rate of 
auto-programming associated with each medication.  
B. These recommendations will be reviewed by pharmacy and nursing leaders in the Medication 
Utilization Committee. Recommendations approved by the Medication Utilization Committee will be 
transmitted to IS analysts for inclusion in the next pump library update. The pump drug library shall be 
listed by generic name and shall not contain investigational medications.  
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 2 
C. For safety events related to pump library and pump performance, actual and near miss type events, the 
organization’s Safety Management Plan (Policy # ECSF000) for safety event escalation and 
investigation will be followed.   
D. Each IV Pump will have an Operation Verification Procedure (OVP) Performance Assurance 
performed by Biomedical team prior to initial use and have Preventive Maintenance at periodic 
intervals as defined by an assigned Preventive Maintenance (PM) Schedule based on Risk Evaluations, 
Regulatory Requirements, Contractual Requirements or Manufacturer's Recommendations. (Reference 
TriMedx Policy #TMX-SOP-0088) 
E. Equipment recalls and hazardous alerts from the IV Pump manufacturer will be managed utilizing 
standard operating procedure from biomedical equipment.  (Reference Trimedx Policy #TMX-SOP-
0089) 
F. See Attachment A for standard operating procedure for IV Pump drug library Maintenance. 
IV AUTOPROGRAMMING COMPLIANCE: 
A. IV Auto-programming (IVAP) compliance will be monitored on a routine basis.  A compliance report 
will be generated utilizing our Electronic Medical Record (EMR) and will be sent to department 
leaders detailing individual clinician compliance and departmental compliance, at a minimum monthly.  
Individual and Departmental non-compliance will be addressed through standard counseling actions 
and organizational accountability structure. “No attempt” IVAP data is included in the IVAP Routine 
Compliance report.  
B. Individual clinicians and/or department leaders are responsible for reporting issues that may be 
impacting compliance with IVAP.  Examples of these issues include medication and IV pump barcodes 
not scanning and intravenous medications not found in the drug library of the IV pump.  
C. For safety events related to compliance, actual and near miss type events, the organization’s Safety 
Management Plan (Policy # ECSF000) for safety event escalation and investigation will be followed.    
D. See Attachment B for standard operating procedure for reporting issues with IVAP.    
IV AUTOPROGRAMMING EDUCATION  
A. Nurses will receive Intravenous Pump education during Nursing Orientation and annually.  
B. A nurse is deemed competent if he or she demonstrates the necessary knowledge, skills, and behaviors 
to safely operate an infusion pump.  
C. At a minimum, competency will be evaluated upon completion of orientation and annually. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• The Joint Commission Sentinel Event Alert 63. (2021, April 14). Optimizing smart infusion pump safety with 
dose error reduction software (DERS). 
ATTACHMENTS:  
• Attachment A: IVAP Utilization Monitoring 
• Attachment B: Reporting problems with IVAP 
• Attachment C:  IVAP Troubleshooting Guide   3 
REFERENCES: 
• Policy OO-HR-E-008 “Employee Competence Validation” 
• Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference 
• Sentinel Event Alert 63: Optimizing Smart Infusion Pump Safety with DERS. (2021). Joint Commission journal 
on quality and patient safety, 47(6), 394–397. 
 
   4 
OLOLRMC Policy NIV025 
Attachment A: IVAP Utilization Monitoring 
 
SOP: IV Auto-programming Utilization Monitoring  
 
Introduction: The inpatient pharmacy department will be responsible for maintenance of the IV 
pump drug library. This includes monitoring the frequency of alerts, overrides, and bypassing of 
auto-programming for each medication. Specified reports will be generated in ICU Medical 
MedNet quarterly. Issues of concern and recommendations for library updates will be reported to 
the Medication Utilization Committee.  
 
Report Instructions 
1. Access ICU Medical MedNet via the following: TeamLink Home>Applications>Our 
Lady of the Lake Applications>MedNet.  
2. Reporting features are in the ICU Medical MedNet Performance application.  
3. Generate the following reports for the previous 30 days:   
• Auto-programming  
• Auto-Programs with Unmatched Medication  
• Edit Variance Detail 
• Override Variance Detail  
4. Utilize the following report Criteria:  
• Infuser type: “Plum A+/Plum 360” 
• CCA Name: “All” 
• Timeframe: “Last 30 days” 
• Sort by: Medication 
• Check the box that says “Hide Patient Name” 
 
   
5. Click “Submit” to generate the report.  
 5 
6. When the report appears, click the boxed icon below to export the data to Excel.  
 
7. Use a Pivot Table to generate the top ten medications for each report.  
Data Review  
The information generated will be used to generate recommendations for pump library updates. 
If approved, updates will be transmitted to IS analysts for inclusion in the next pump library 
update.  
Reports reviewed by 
Pharmacy Leadership 
Pharmacy IS Specialist 
ICU Clinical Specialist
System CNOs
System Pharmacy 
Directors
Medication Utilization 
Committee AnalystsRecommendations are 
generated by pharmacy
  
 
  
 6 
OLOLRMC Policy NIV025 
Attachment B: Reporting problems with IVAP  
 
 
SOP: How to Report Problems with IV Auto-Programming 
 
To help pharmacy solve any IV pump programming issues, when reporting problems: 
 
1. Send a message to pharmacy using the Rx function on the MAR 
2. Choose “other” as a reason and type in details in the comment box 
3. Include the problem, the error message, and the pump ID whenever possible 
 
IVAP Issue reporting and Follow-up 
 
  
 7 
OLOLRMC Policy NIV025 
Attachment C: IVAP Troubleshooting Guide 
 
 
