NIV-024 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Medication 
Title: Intravenous Therapy, Adult Peripheral 
Policy 
Reference #: NIV-024 
Supersedes #: NIV008, NIV010 
Date of Origination: September 19, 2006 Review Date:  May 1, 2024 
Revision Date:  March 24, 2023 
 
PURPOSE:   
To provide safe, aseptic vascular access for fluid administration for a short period of time. 
 
POLICY:   
    
Managing the IV site and Tubing: 
1. Peripheral IVs will be evaluated every 4 hours for appearance and condition of the site in the adult 
patient.  The site should be changed every 96 hours for standard peripheral IV insertions and every 
144 hours for ultrasound-guided insertions, unless there is a physician order to continue. If signs of 
infiltration, inflammation or the integrity of the site has been compromised, the site should be 
immediately discontinued and restarted in another location.  
2. If the IV site is not labeled, and the initiation date cannot be determined, the site should be changed. 
If the IV site was placed by an outside facility or is an emergency medical services (EMS) field IV, 
the site should be changed within 24 hours. 
3. For an ultrasound-guided IV, if the technique was not documented, the IV site should be changed at 
96 hours.  
4. Pharmacy is responsible for the admixture of intravenous solutions except in emergencies as 
indicated in each unit’s scope of service 
5. IVPB medications may be administered via an intermittent IV device and / or via a compatible IV 
fluid.  Registered Nurses or Licensed Practical Nurses may administer IVPBs. 
 
Procedure for Managing IV Therapy: 
Standard IV Insertion 
1. Consider the condition of the vein and the proposed infusion when selecting a site. 
2. Utilize aseptic technique by cleansing the skin for 30 seconds with 2% chlorhexidine solution 
and allowing it to air dry for 30 seconds. 
3. Holding the skin and vein taut, perform the venipuncture and thread the catheter. 
4. Secure the catheter and remove stylet. 
5. Filters are not routinely required for IV solutions except when issued by the pharmacy for a 
particular medication (e.g., Mannitol, Dilantin) 
6. Dress the site 
a. A transparent semi-permeable membrane dressing is preferred for IV sites.  Gauze should 
not be placed under the transparent dressing 
b. When the patient is allergic to a transparent dressing or has fragile skin, sterile gauze may 
be used and secured with paper tape or stockinette. 
c. Label the site with date, leaving the insertion site clear for assessment. 
Ultrasound-guided IV Insertion  NIV-024 
Page 2 of 3 
1. Only performed by nurses with documented competency 
Maintenance 
1. Dressing Change  
 
a. Gauze dressing will be changed every 48 hours.  
b. When dressing is compromised, it must be changed immediately. Re-label the site with 
the original catheter insertion date and time, leaving the insertion site clear for 
assessment.  
2. IV tubing is changed based on the type of solution infusing or if contamination is suspected. 
3. Needless injector caps are to be changed with each tubing change. 
 
IV Tubing Time Limitations 
IV catheter Change every 96 hours 
Primary and Secondary tubing Change every 96 hours 
TPN or Intralipids tubing Change every 24 hours 
Blood tubing Change after each unit or after 4 hours. If more than 1 unit 
can be infused in 4 hours, the set can be used for both units. 
Propofol Tubing Change every 12 hours 
 
4. IV infusates should be changed as follows: 
IV Solution Time Limitation 
Primary and secondary infusions with or 
without additives 
Change every 24 hours 
TPN and Lipid combinations Change every 24 hours 
Lipids (Emulsions alone) Change every 24 hours 
Whole Blood, Packed Red Blood Cells 
(Packed RBCs), Washed RBCs, Leukocyte 
Reduced RBCs)  
Single unit infuses no longer than 4 hours 
 
5. Label IV tubing and solution with date and time it is hung and date and time it is to be changed. 
6. Medication Preparation – Spiking Intravenous (IV) Bags in Advance of Administration 
a. The infusion must be started in 1 hour of spiking the bag unless the bag was spiked in an 
ISO 5 environment. 
b. When a bag is spiked and the infusion is immediately begun, the spiking of the bag is 
considered part of the administration process. 
c. If the bag is spiked and then sorted for later use, it is considered to be part of preparation. 
 
7.   Maintaining system sterility: 
a. Follow aseptic technique when accessing a port on the IV tubing. 
b. Cover the exposed end of IV tubing with a sterile cap when not in use. 
c. Avoid attaching the exposed end of the IV tubing to a port on the same tubing when not 
in use. 
 
Documentation 
1. Include the following: 
a. Date and time of insertion 
b. Vein location 
c. Insertion technique NIV-024 
Page 3 of 3 
d. Number of unsuccessful attempts 
e. Catheter gauge  
 
 
References: 
 
Perry, AG & Potter, PA (2021). Clinical nursing skills & techniques, 10th ed. St. Louis: Mosby. 
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2017). "Guidelines for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related infections" [Online]. Accessed March 1, 2023 via the Web at 
http://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/pdf/guidelines/bsi-guidelines-2017.pdf 
 
Infusion Nurses Society. (2021). Therapy Standards of Practice.). Journal of Infusion Nursing, 34(4).  
 
Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference 
 
 