                      NMA-021 
   Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Medication 
Administration 
Title: Epidural and Intrathecal Infusion for Pain 
Management 
Policy Reference #: NMA-021 
Supersedes #: NIV-019 
Date of Origination: November, 1988 Last Review Date:  March 4, 2024 
Last Revision Date: January 10, 2022 
 
PURPOSE 
This policy is to ensure that Epidural/Intrathecal medications are administered in a safe, effective, 
secured and controlled manner by physicians, pharmacy and nursing. 
 
POLICY 
A. Medications for the management of pain may be administered via Epidural/Intrathecal Pump. This 
technique permits a continuous programmed dose of narcotics and local anesthetics to help alleviate 
pain. Medications are administered through an epidural or intrathecal line placed by a physician. 
B. All Nurses monitor the effectiveness of medications administered by the epidural/intrathecal 
implantable pump 
C. An IV access must be maintained at all times during Epidural/Intrathecal therapy. 
 
Intrathecal Pump  
A. Physicians will fill and maintain Intrathecal/Epidural Implantable Pump 
1. Reservoir medication dispensed by pharmacy 
2. Pump settings are managed and programmed by physician 
B. If patient requires a refill during hospitalization, the physician will address needs and/or contact pain 
management physician.  
C.  All Intrathecal medications must be labeled “Preservative free” or “For intrathecal use only”. 
 
Epidural Pump 
 
A. Epidural orders must be obtained from the physician. The route, dose, and drug must be specified in 
the orders. 
B. Registered Nurses (RN) may initiate, program, change parameters, change bags, change tubing, and 
administer bolus doses via the pump. 
C. Licensed Practical Nurses (LPN) may verify parameters, verify bolus doses and witness wastes.  
D. Two nurses must verify a narcotic count and pump program, and document such in the patient’s 
electronic medical record (EMR), at the following times:                        NMA-021 
   Page 2 of 4 
a. Initiation of therapy* 
b. Change in therapy (programming the pump) * 
c. Bag or syringe change 
d. Change in caregiver (this includes shift change) 
   *One must be a registered nurse. 
E. Epidural medication bags must be changed every 24 hours.  Tubing must be changed every 96 hours 
and/or with any change in medication type or concentration 
 
PROCEDURES / GUIDELINES 
Epidural Pump Initiation 
1. Epidural pump can be ordered/obtained through central supply.  
2. Premixed bags of narcotics are stored on high-use units; for other units, pharmacy will provide 
medication on request.  
3. Tubing must be obtained from central supply. 
4. For pump loading, priming and programming, refer to manufacturer user’s manual. 
 
 
Patient Education (Both Epidural and Intrathecal Pump) 
1. Prior to the initiation of the Epidural/Intrathecal pump therapy, educate the patient and the family 
regarding the purpose and use of the device 
2. Minimal education requirements include: 
a. Medication type 
b. Dosage     
c. Rate type—Continuous (basal) and/or patient-controlled 
d. Signs and symptoms of over sedation 
3. If the Epidural/Intrathecal pump therapy is initiated in PACU and patient/family education has 
begun, the nurses on the receiving unit will reinforce instructions to the patient/family as needed.  
4. Patient Education will be documented in the patient’s EMR.  
 
Documentation 
1. A new bag (or refill) must be scanned and recorded on medication administration record (EMAR) as 
“Begin Bag”. 
2. The nurse must document the initiation of epidural/intrathecal therapy or a change in medication or 
therapy in the patient’s EMR. 
3. Document the route, the bag #, drug name/concentration, rate and loading doses if ordered.  
4. Verify the order and co-sign with another nurse where indicated. 
5. For Epidural therapy only: 
a. Upon initiation of Epidural, the nurse shall document the following components in 
the patient’s EMR:                        NMA-021 
   Page 3 of 4 
1. Pain assessment 
2. Epidural settings (witness must verify settings) 
a. Medication 
b. Concentration 
c. Rate 
d. Sedation 
3. Sedation Scale: Pasero Opioid-induced Sedation Scale (POSS) 
4. Respiratory Status: Rate, depth, effort and breath sounds 
5. Oxygen Saturation (SpO2) 
b. Routine patient monitoring, including vital signs, pain and sedation scales, 
respiratory status and SpO2, shall be documented at the following intervals: 
1. Every hour for the first four hours of therapy 
2. Then every 4 hours 
c. For a dose change or bolus, two nurses, one being an RN, will review the physician 
order, change the program on the pump, and document the new settings to include 
the witness verification in the EMR. Routine patient monitoring and documentation 
are to be resumed every hour for 4 hours, then every 4 hours. 
d. At each hand-off, two nurses, one being an RN, must verify and document settings 
and volume remaining, to include electronic documentation of a witness. 
e. When the bag is changed, the RN and a witness verify and document the new 
medication being hung, the pump settings, and volume remaining. Verification by 
the witness is documented in the EMR.  
f. In the event of patient deterioration (adverse change in sedation score), the 
frequency of patient monitoring shall be increased to: 
1. Every 15 minutes for the next hour 
2. Every hour for the next 4 hours 
3. Then every 4 hours if stable  
 
Discontinuing Pump 
1. Only a physician may remove the Epidural/Intrathecal catheter. The nurse may stop the pump; but 
the tubing must remain intact until the physician arrives. 
2. Once removed by the physician, the pump will be disconnected from the catheter.  
3. The nurse will verify that all history has been recorded in the EMR, including the current hour’s 
therapy. 
4. Remove the bag and the tubing from the pump (refer to manufacture’s manual). 
5. Withdraw the remaining medication and waste with another nurse.  Document the waste in the EMR. 
6. If there is a discrepancy of more than 10 ml between the volume remaining as noted in the                       NMA-021 
   Page 4 of 4 
documentation and the actual amount wasted, notify the charge nurse, and follow hospital policy for 
narcotic discrepancy.  
7. Return pump to decontamination  
 
 
Patient Undergoing Surgery with Epidural/Intrathecal Pump Therapy 
1. Pumps will not be stopped before a patient is received in pre-op. 
2. The pump will be stopped in pre-op, if the physician desires. 
3. The pump can be placed in the off mode for surgical intervention. 
4. The OR circulator will be responsible for the pump during surgery, and will notify the PACU nurse 
of its status when he/she transports the patient to PACU. 
5. The pump is not to be disconnected from the Epidural/Intrathecal catheter. 
6. If Epidural/Intrathecal therapy is to be restarted, the PACU nurse would restart the same pump at 
that time. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
American Society of Anesthesiologists. (2023). Statement on the role of registered nurses in the 
management of continuous regional analgesia. Committee on Pain Medicine. 
 
Pasero, C., & McCaffery, M. (2011). Pain assessment and pharmacologic management. St. Louis: 
Mosby. 
Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference 
 