 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to outline the requirements for the administration of medications. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Scheduled medications: includes all maintenance doses administered according to a standard, repeated 
cycle of frequency (e.g., q4h, QID, TID, BID, daily, weekly, monthly, annually). 
Time-critical scheduled medications:  medications where early or delayed administration of 
maintenance doses of greater than 30 minutes before or after the scheduled dose may cause harm or 
result in substantial sub -optimal therapy or pharmacological effect.   Some medications defined as time -
critical may require a narrower window and this will be called out specifically in this policy 
Non-time critical scheduled medication s: medications for which a longer or shorter interval of time 
since the prior dose does not significantly change the medication’s therapeutic effect or otherwise cause 
harm. 
High-alert medications:  medications that bear a heightened risk of causing significant patient harm 
when they are used in error. 
 
POLICY: 
A. Medications are administered upon a physician's or allied health provider's order and must be 
verified by pharmacy prior to their administration by use of the Medication Administration Record 
(MAR) and/or original Physician's Orders. Administration of each medication dose must be 
documented on the MAR.  If a scheduled medication is not administered, the clinician must 
document “not given” and the reason  it was not administered . Registered nurses (RNs)  licensed 
practical nurses (LPNs) and licensed independent practitioners (LIPs) can administer medications at 
this facility.  Respiratory care professionals may administer medications for inhalation therapy 
and/or treatments. Imaging professionals may administer medications for the purposes of imaging 
that are within their scope of practice. 
B. Licensed practical nurses may NOT administer the following medications: 
1. IV push medications 
2. IV Chemotherapeutic agents 
3. IV Investigational medications 
4. TPN (Total Parental Nutrition) 
5. Oral Chemotherapy  
C. Nursing shall utilize bedside barcode administration (BCMA) scanning technology to verify the 
patient and the medication prior administration.  Intravenous admixtures shall further require IV 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKEREGIONALMEDICALCENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Medication 
Title: Medication Administration 
Policy 
Reference #: NMA-024 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: July 11, 2006 Review Date:   9/01/2024 
Revision Date: August 8, 2018 autoprogramming technology to program IV pumps with the correct infusion parameters.   While 
these are safety features, they must not replace visual verification.  
D. The “Five Rights” must be observed when administering medication: 
1. Right patient 
2. Right time 
3. Right medication 
4. Right dose 
5. Right route of administration 
E. The nurse should observe the complete administration of medications  with the exception of the 
following preparations that require extend times for complete administration: 
1. Intravenous infusions  
2. Ingestion of bowel or radiology preparations  
F. When orders for medications requiring intravenous (IV) administration are received, an IV catheter 
will be placed to allow administration to patients without existing IV access. 
G. The clinician is expected to know the action of each medication prior to administration and to 
observe the patient for signs of therapeutic effect, signs of  toxicity and any adverse effects. The 
Clinician is expected to use best clinical judgment on whether to call the physician, based on harm 
or potential for harm. 
H. Medications administered within the health care facility shall be administered according to standard 
medication administration time schedules.  
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
1. Medications defined as Time Critical that should be administered 30 minutes before or after 
scheduled administration times are defined as follows: 
a. Immunosuppressive Agents 
b. Anticonvulsants (indicated for epilepsy) 
c. Parenteral Antimicrobials 
d. Pyridostigmine (Mestinon) 
e. Scheduled Opioids 
2. Medications defined as Time Critical that should be administered directly before the patient eats are 
defined as follows: 
a. Short-acting insulin (Novolog, Humalog, Apidra) 
b. Pancrealipase products 
 
3. Medications that should be administered that should be administered 60 minutes before or after 
scheduled administration times are defined as follows: 
a. Digoxin 
b. Warfarin 4. All other medications should be given according to the timeframes in following table: 
 
Scheduled Time Goal for Timely Administration 
Daily, Weekly, Monthly medications  Within 2 hours before or after the scheduled 
time 
Medications prescribed more frequently than 
daily, but no more frequently than every 4 
hours (BID, TID, Q4H, Q6H, etc) 
Within 1 hour before or after the scheduled 
time 
Medications prescribed more frequently than 
every 4 hours 
Within 25% of the dosing interval 
Q1 hour:  +/- 15 minutes 
Q2 hour:  +/- 30 minutes 
Q3 hour:  +/- 45 minutes 
 
 
5. Exemptions to “Standard Medication Administration Time Schedules”: 
a. Initial doses, Loading doses, “STAT”, “On-Call”, Timed or Sequenced doses, PRN 
medications. 
b. For initial doses, the following turn-around times have been defined: 
i. STAT: 30 minutes 
ii. STAT (for drugs that must be mixed, i.e., large volume IV and IV 
piggyback/syringe): 45 minutes 
iii. Routine: 2 hours 
c. Respiratory Therapists are excluded from this policy since medication administration times 
are defined in departmental policy. 
6. Medication administration times may be altered based on current clinical practice and/or the 
professional judgment of the Physician, Pharmacist, Nurse or other allied healthcare provider for the 
following reasons: 
a. When special lab tests are to be done, medications due at that particular time may be omitted 
or postponed with appropriate documentation on the MAR 
i. Physician must be notified if a scheduled medication is postponed or omitted. 
b. If the patient is off the unit at the time of a scheduled administration and the medication has a 
frequency of “Daily”, the dose may be given at the time the patient returns with a reason for 
the late administration documented in the patient’s record and a medication safety event is 
not necessary.    
c. If the patient is off the unit at the time of a scheduled administration and the medication has 
been prescribed with a more frequent administration schedule, then pharmacy should be 
consulted to determine if administering the medication late is appropriate.  If it is determined 
that the dose may be given, then a medication safety event is unnecessary. 
d. Times may also be altered to accommodate the patient’s request to take their medications on 
the same schedule as they do at home. Pharmacy will change the permanent dosing schedule 
upon a request by the nurse indicating patient’s home med schedule/preference. Physicians may also designate times that do not match the standard dosing schedule and those times 
should be given as directed by the physician. 
e. Patient’s medication dosing times who are receiving scheduled tube feedings may require 
adjusting, particularly for medications that are affected by food consumption. The Nurse and 
Pharmacist should consult and make changes to the dosing plan for medication 
administration that coincides with scheduled tube feeding orders.  
7. Patient identification should be done prior to administering any medication. The patient wrist band 
as well as medications to be administered should be barcode scanned prior to administering the 
medication in areas where this technology is available.  The following procedures should be 
observed prior to the administration of any medication in all areas: 
a. Verify the medication selected matches the order and label. 
b. Visually inspect the medication for particulates, discoloration, or other loss of integrity. 
c. Verify the medication has not expired. 
d. Medications should be identifiable up to the point of administration. Medication in an 
unmarked container should not be administered.  
e. Resolve any concerns about the medication with the prescriber and/or staff involved with the 
patient’s care. 
f. Before administering a new medication, assure that the patient and/or family is informed 
about any potential clinically significant adverse drug reactions (ADRs) or other concerns 
regarding administration of a new medication. 
8. When a tablet needs to be cut, a patient specific tablet cutter will be used.  
9. When a tablet needs to be crushed, a patient specific pill pouch with Silent Knight Pill crusher will 
be used. (1 Tablet per pouch). 
10. Partial doses must never be saved for future use including, but not limited to, oral liquids, single 
dose injections and tablets.  Only multidose products may be saved for future doses (i.e. inhalers, 
ointments, creams, eye drops, ear drops, etc) 
11. Tablets and capsules removed from unit dose packaging must not be returned to supply.  
 
MEDICATION ERRORS & ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS (ADRs) 
a. Any error in medication administration is to be reported to the nurse manager or designee 
immediately and should be reported as soon as possible to the practitioner who ordered the 
medication.   If harm is suspected, the pharmacy should also be notified. 
b. A medication safety event should be filled out as soon as possible, refer to Policy OO-GN-019. 
c. For allergic reactions, other adverse drug reactions, medication errors or drug incompatibilities 
which result in harm or need for continued monitoring, refer to Policy OO-GN-019. 
 
 
HIGH RISK/HIGH ALERT MEDICATIONS  
Certain medications designated as High Risk/High Alert and should be handled and administered in 
accordance with the High Risk Policy PH-03-10.   
GUIDELINES FOR TRANSPORTING MEDICATIONS FROM THE Automated Dispensing 
Cabinet (ADC) TO THE PATIENT 
 
1. Transport medications in their original unit-dose package.   
2. Secure Transport 
a. Hand-carry a single patient’s medication for one administration time directly to the 
patient’s bedside 
b. If during a single medication administration time more than one patient’s medication 
must be transported, use computers on wheels, mobile carts, or workstations on wheels 
with labeled patient-specific drawers and the ability to lock if unattended. 
3. Medications may be placed in a plastic bag and labeled with the patient’s label.  
4. Ensure medications transported from the ADC are in a ready-to-use form for administration. 
5. Open packages at the patient’s bedside.  The only exception may be for medications that need to 
be crushed, measured, or wasted. 
 
SELF-ADMININSTERED MEDICATIONS:  
The self-administration of medications by patients shall be in accordance with this policy. 
1. REQUIREMENT FOR AN ORDER 
Self-administration of medications is permitted only upon the specific order of an authorized 
responsible prescribing physician or allied health provider. 
2. LIMITS ON MEDICATIONS THAT MAY BE SELF-ADMINISTERED 
Self-administered medications shall be limited to medications that can be self-administered 
with little risk to the patient (e.g., Teaching inhalers, PCA Pumps, lozenges, and throat spray). 
3. SUPERVISION BY A MEMBER OF THE PROFESSIONAL STAFF 
A member of the licensed professional staff shall supervise self-administration of medications 
with the exception of PCA’s, Throat Sprays and Lozenges     
4. RECORDING SELF-ADMINISTERED MEDICATION 
The nurse will record the patient’s self-administration in the Medication Administration 
Record with a note that it was administered by the patient. 
5. PATIENT INSTRUCTION 
The patient shall be instructed on the self-administration of medications.   Instructions shall 
include the purpose of the medication, how to administer the medication, the expected action 
of the medication, and signs and symptoms of adverse reactions. 
Persons who administer medications but are not staff members are determined to be 
competent at medication administration before being allowed to administer medications. 
6. WRITTEN INSTRUCTIONS 
Written instructions for self-administration of medications shall be provided when necessary. 
References 
 
1. ISMP. Guidelines for timely medication administration: response to the CMS “30-minuterule.” 
ISMP Medication Safety Alert! 2011;16(1):1-4. Available at: 
www.ismp.org/Newsletters/acutecare/articles/20110113.asp. 
2. ISMP. Special report: patient safety risk.CMS 30-minute rule for drug administration needs 
revision. ISMP Medication Safety Alert!2010;15(18):1-6. Available at: 
www.ismp.org/Newsletters/acutecare/articles/20100909.asp. 3. ISMP. CMS 30-minute rule may result in unintended consequences. ISMP Nurse Advise-ERR. 
2010;8(7):1-2. Available at: 
www.ismp.org/newsletters/nursing/issues/NurseAdviseERR201007.pdf. 
4. ISMP. ISMP survey on the impact of the CMS 30-minute rule. ISMP Nurse Advise-
ERR.2010;8(7):3. Available at: 
www.ismp.org/newsletters/nursing/issues/NurseAdviseERR201007.pdf. 
5. ISMP. Final Acute Care Guidelines for Timely Administration of Scheduled Medications posted 
on ISMP website. ISMP Medication Safety Alert!2011;16(10):1,3. Available at: 
www.ismp.org/Newsletters/acutecare/articles/20110519.asp. 
6. ISMP ® 2008 Guidance on the Interdisciplinary Safe Use of Automated Dispensing Cabinets 
7. Lippincott  Procedures: Oral drug administration Revised August 12, 2016 
8. Lippincott Procedures: Safe medication administration practices, general Revised November 11, 
2016 
9. National Patient Safety Agency (NPSA).Rapid response report NPSA/2010/RRR009: Reducing 
harm from omitted and delayed medicines in hospital. February 2010. Available at: 
www.nrls.npsa.nhs.uk/resources/type/alerts/?entryid45=66720.  
10. Policy NMO001 – Chemotherapy (Cytoxic agents), Handling, Administration and Disposal 
 
  
 
 