 NMA-019 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Medication Use Section: Medication Adm. 
Title: Home Medications – Storage and 
Administration 
Policy 
Reference #: NMA-019 
Supersedes #: NMA-004 and NMA-013 
Date of Origination: May 26, 2003 Last Review 
Date:  May 31, 2024 
Last Revision Date: July 3, 2018 
 
PURPOSE: 
To assure the safe storage & administration of home medications dispensed by a pharmacy other than 
the Medical Center Pharmacy. 
 
 
POLICY: 
1. The use of medications brought from home or from another health care facility should be limited 
to those medications that the Medical Center Pharmacy cannot readily provide. 
 
2. A Patient’s own home medications can be administered only: 
a. With an explicit order from the physician, AND after a Medical Center pharmacist has 
visually inspected and identified the medication. 
b. In the case of an emergency situation (i.e., factor medications for a hemophiliac), two 
licensed independent practitioners (a physician and a nurse) may inspect and approve the 
medication.  
i. Inspect product for damage, expiration date, and verify with the patient or family 
that the proper storage conditions have been maintained. 
ii. Have patient or family sign the Hold Harmless form. 
iii. Review and document the medication name, dose and route of administration, and 
any special instructions. 
iv. Directly oversee the preparation and administration of the medicine. 
v. Document medication administration in medical record to include lot # and 
expiration. 
3. A Pharmacist may attempt to identify or verify the medication by: 
a. Comparing the medication and imprint with the Micromedex Identidex, PDR or other 
publication. 
b. Calling the dispensing pharmacy. 
 
4. Once ordered and identified, the home medication should be stored in the secured patient 
specific medication bin with the exception of controlled substances.  Controlled Substances 
should be transferred to the main pharmacy and dispensed on an as needed basis using a 
perpetual inventory log. The nurse will obtain the medication from the main pharmacy and 
administer the home medication as ordered. 
 
5. When the patient is discharged, all remaining home medication will be returned to the patient.   NMA-019 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Home medications not authorized for use: 
1. Medications brought from home and not authorized for use shall be taken home by the patient’s 
family.  If the medication cannot be taken home, the medications will be secured using the 
Patient Valuables and Home Medication Safekeeping policy (OC022) 
 
2. Medications that are not reclaimed by the patient or patient’s family within 30 days of discharge 
will be disposed of by the pharmacy according to state and federal regulations. 
 
3. If the patient expires, home medications shall be returned to the family or disposed of (according 
to state and federal regulations) by the pharmacy department after 30 days. 
 
REFERENCES 
MM 03.01.05 EP1.  The Hospital defines when medications brought into the hospital by patients, their 
families, or licensed independent practitioners can be administered. 
MM 03.01.05 EP2.  Before use or administration of a medication brought into the hospital by a patient, 
his or her family, or a licensed independent practitioner, the hospital identifies the medication and 
visually evaluates the medication’s integrity.   
MM 03.01.05 EP3.  The Hospital informs the prescriber and patient if the medications brought into the 
hospital by patients, their families, or licensed independent practitioners are not permitted. 
MM 05.01.07  EP3.  During preparation, staff visually inspect the medication for particulates, 
discoloration, or other loss of integrity. 
MM 06.01.01  EP4.  Before administration, the individual administering the medication does the 
following:  Visually inspects the medication for particulates, discoloration, or other loss of integrity. 
OrgClin-022 Patient Valuables and Home Medication Safekeeping Policy 
 
 