 
NMA 025 Palliative Care Analgesic Infusion Therapy 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Patient Care Services/Nursing  
SUBJECT:  
Palliative Care Analgesic Infusion Therapy 
PAGES: 
4 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
8/2018 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
12/10/2020   
REVISION DATE: 
 07/06/2023 
Review Date: 
10/7/2024 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
NMA- 025 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure that analgesic infusion therapy is utilized in an effective, safe, secure, controlled manner to provide 
smooth and efficient control of distressing pain or dyspnea in the imminently dying patient. 
POLICY: 
During end-of-life situations, Authorized Agent Controlled Analgesia (AACA) can be utilized for administration of 
analgesia to a patient who is unable to self-administer and is experiencing pain and suffering.  The physician or advance 
practice professional will enter an order to include specified medication, delivery route, concentration, and dosing 
schedule.   
Authorized Agent Controlled Analgesia is not permitted unless ordered by a physician or advance practice professional 
and the patient has a “do not resuscitate” (DNR) order.   
Authorized Agent Controlled Analgesia may be administered by the nurse responsible for the patient - Nurse Controlled 
Analgesia (NCA) or a nonprofessional individual (i.e. parent, significant other) - Caregiver Controlled Analgesia (CCA)  
“One of the primary purposes of medicine in caring for the dying is the relief of pain and the suffering caused by it.  
Effective management of pain in all its forms is critical in the appropriate care of the dying.” Ethical and Religious 
Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, Sixth Edition - Part 5 – Issues in Care for the Dying).   
Patients should be kept as free of pain as possible so that they may die comfortably and with dignity…Medicines capable 
of alleviating or suppressing pain may be given to a dying person, even if this therapy may indirectly shorten the 
person’s life so long as the intent is not to hasten death.  (Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care 
Services, Sixth Edition - # 61).   
In end of life situations, when the agreed upon goal of care by the physician, advance practice professional, patient and 
family is comfort care, these medications may be given in a non-monitored setting. 
Please reference the Palliative Care Analgesia Infusion Pump order set. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
NMA 025 Palliative Care Analgesic Infusion Therapy 
2 
PROCEDURE: 
General Information 
1. Palliative Care analgesic infusion pump therapy can be administered through a subcutaneous, peripheral or 
central line. 
2. The physician or advance practice professional must order Palliative Care analgesic infusion pump 
therapy, the narcotic, the delivery route and the dosage parameters. 
3. Registered nurses (RNs) may initiate, program, change parameters, change injector vials (syringes) and 
tubing and administer bolus doses via the analgesic infusion pump. 
4. Two nurses, one being an RN, must verify orders, programming of pump, bolus doses, and any wastes. 
5. If pain is not relieved, two nurses, one being an RN, will assess the pump functioning. 
6. LPNs may verify parameters, verify bolus doses and witness wastes.  An LPN may also monitor the patient 
with analgesic infusion therapy and document in the Electronic Medical Record (EMR). An LPN may 
change an injector vial (syringe) if the vial, dosage and original order have been verified by an RN. 
 
Pump Initiation 
1. Order the PCA pump from central supply.  
2. Central supply will deliver the pump.  
3. The injector vials (syringes) will be located in the automated dispensing machine on the nursing unit 
whenever possible.  They will come from main pharmacy when not in the automated dispensing machines. 
4. Analgesia vials (syringes) must be changed every 72 hours; and tubing must be changed every 96 hours.  
5. For pump loading, priming and programming, refer to manufacturer’s user manual. 
 
Patient/Family Education 
1. Prior to the initiation of the Palliative Care analgesic infusion pump therapy, education should be provided 
to the patient and the family regarding the purpose and use of the device. 
2. Minimal education requirements include: 
▪ Medication type 
▪ Dosage 
▪ Frequency of use 
▪ Use of the patient injection device (bolus cord). 
▪ Signs and symptoms of potential side effects. 
▪  The patient and family should be educated that only the nurse and caregiver(s) should administer 
the medication via the injection device. 
▪ Information on pump timing between doses. 
3. The nurse initiating the PCA pump will document patient education in the Education section of the EMR   
 
Documentation 
A. Upon initiation of Palliative Care analgesic infusion pump therapy, the nurse shall document the 
following components in the patient’s EMR:  
 1. Pain assessment and/or dyspnea assessment 
 2. PCA Settings (witness must verify settings) 
  a. Mode 
  b. PCA Medication 
  c. Concentration  
NMA 025 Palliative Care Analgesic Infusion Therapy 
3 
  d. Continuous Basal Rate (if applicable) 
  e. Demand Dose (PCA dose on pump) (if applicable) 
  f. Lockout Interval 
  g. Hourly Dose limit 
 3. Sedation 
  a. Sedation Scale: Pasero Opioid-induced Sedation Scale (POSS) 
  b. Respiratory Status: Rate, depth, effort and breath sounds 
c. Routine patient monitoring, including vital signs, pain and sedation scales, and respiratory 
status shall be documented every four hours or as ordered by the physician 
B. Documentation should also include the number of completed doses, partial doses, and denied doses 
from each previous hour in the corresponding time column. 
C. For a PCA dose change or bolus, two nurses, one being an RN, will review the physician order, change 
the program on the pump, and document the new settings to include the witness verification in the 
EMR. Routine PCA monitoring and documentation are to be resumed every hour for 4 hours, then 
every 4 hours. 
D. At each hand-off, two nurses, one being an RN, must verify and document settings and volume 
remaining, to include electronic documentation of a witness. 
E. When the bag/syringe is changed, the RN and a witness verify and document the new medication being 
hung, the pump settings, and volume remaining. Verification by the witness is documented in the 
EMR.  
 
Discontinuing Pump 
1. The order to discontinue Palliative Care analgesic infusion therapy must be received from a physician or 
advance practice professional. 
2. The nurse will verify that all history has been recorded, including the current hour’s therapy. 
3. Remove narcotic from the pump. 
4. Any remaining medication must be removed from the cartridge or bag and wasted by the nurse in the sink 
in the presence of a witnessing nurse.  The nurse will document the volume remaining (waste amount), in 
addition to the witness verification, in the EMR. (see policy (OC 060 Controlled Substance Monitoring) 
5. If there is a discrepancy of more than 10% between the milligrams remaining in the patient record and the 
actual amount wasted, notify the charge nurse and follow hospital protocol for narcotic discrepancy. 
6. Place used pump with all cords in the soiled utility room for return to Central Supply. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and OLOL reserves the right to deviate from, 
revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Patient Controlled Analgesia (PCA) Policy 
• Palliative Sedation for Refractory Suffering at End of Life 
• Controlled Substance Monitoring 
•  Dynamic Health, 2020United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, (2009), Ethical and Religious Directives 
for Catholic Health Care Services (Sixth Edition).  
NMA 025 Palliative Care Analgesic Infusion Therapy 
4 
 
• Wuhrman, E., Cooney, M., Dunwoody, C., Eksterowicz, N., Merkel, S., and Oakes, L., (2007).  Authorized and 
unauthorized (“PCA by proxy) dosing of analgesic infusion pumps: Position statement with clinical practice 
recommendations.  Pain Management Nursing, 8:1, pp.4-11. 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
• N/A 
 
 