                                                                                                                              NMA- 026  
Page 1 of 3 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Medication 
Administration 
Title: Continuous Infusion Nerve Block (CINB) 
Policy 
Reference #: NMA-026 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: September 28, 2011 Last Review 
Date:   June 26, 2023 
Last Revision Date: October 7, 2024 
 
     
 
Purpose and Goal: 
To ensure that continuous infusion nerve blocks are used in an effective, safe, secure, 
controlled manner and monitored by the nurse. 
 
Policy: 
Medications for the management of pain may be administered via a continuous infusion 
nerve block (CINB).  This technique permits continuous programmed administration of 
analgesics through an indwelling perineural catheter.  CINB orders must be obtained 
from the physician, and must include drug, concentration and dosing. 
 
Applies To: 
Registered nurses who have documented knowledge and skills in CINB therapy.  
 
Procedure 
I. General Information 
A. CINB is administered through a catheter that has been placed by an 
anesthesiologist in or near a nerve near the surgical site. 
 
B. Medications must be administered via a continuous infusion pump.   
 
C. CINB provides a continuous infusion of a local anesthetic in close proximity 
to nerves for postoperative pain management. 
 
 
D. Flow rate may be adjusted by a Registered Nurse, if specified in MD orders, 
up to a maximum rate not to exceed that stated on approved order set. 
 
E. Maximum dose per hour of CINB medication must be in compliance with 
physician orders.  
 
F. If pain is not relieved by rate increases, nurse must contact the physician.                                                                                                                               NMA- 026  
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
G. IV access must be maintained for the duration of CINB therapy. 
 
H. LPNs may not increase/decrease CINB but may verify dosage and monitor 
pump. 
 
I. An LPN or RN may monitor patients with a CINB, and document settings in 
the patient record.   
 
II. Pump Initiation 
A. Pump initiation is to begin in the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU).  
B. PACU is to send order to pharmacy for order verification and computer entry.  
C. CNB will be located in the automated dispensing machine in the PACU 
whenever possible.  They will come from main pharmacy when not in the 
automated dispensing machines. 
D. Pump must be labeled with drug name, drug concentration, and volume at the 
time of insertion. 
E. Initiation of CNB must be documented in the patient record 
 
III. Emergent Situation- Toxicity 
A. Symptoms of anesthetic toxicity can include muscle twitching, convulsions, 
unconsciousness, coma, respiratory depression, cardiac arrhythmias, or cardiac 
arrest. 
B. Anesthesia should be immediately notified in the event of an emergent situation 
of local anesthetic toxicity 
C. Decrease rate to zero before notifying anesthesia provider. 
 
II. Patient Education 
A. Prior to the initiation of the CINB, anesthesia staff will educate the patient and 
the family regarding the purpose and use of the device. 
B. Nurses on the receiving unit will reinforce instructions to the patient/family as 
needed, and chart in the patient record. 
C. Minimal education requirements include: 
1. Medication type 
2. Dosage 
3. Instruction to the patient about pain scale 
4. Instruction to the patient that dosage can be increased or 
decreased by an RN or MD. 
 
                                                                                                                               NMA- 026  
Page 3 of 3 
 
III. Documentation 
A. Assessment of catheter site, tubing, and connection is to be completed every 4 hours 
in the patient record.   
B. Pain is to be reassessed within 1 hour of flow rate adjustment 
C. Adjustment in CINB rate must be documented in the patient record using the patient 
medication administration record. 
 
IV. Discontinuation of the CINB  
A. The order to discontinue the CINB must be received from a physician. 
B. The nurse should verify that the end of the CINB catheter is intact. 
C. Tubing and reservoir is to be discarded as biohazard waste. 
 
 
 
References: 
LSBN. (March, 2011). Changes to Rule 3705: Administration of Anesthetic Agents.  
http://www.doa.louisiana.gov/osr/reg/regs2011.htm 
 
Refer to Facility Online Reference 