Page 1 of 5  
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Medication 
 
Title: Management of Non-chemotherapeutic 
Extravasation or Infiltration in Adults 
Policy 
Reference #: NMA-028 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: May 7, 2013 Review Date:  May 31, 2024 
Revision Date: May 8, 2023  
PURPOSE: 
To minimize the risk of extravasation and to facilitate the timely and effective management of 
extravasations. 
DEFINITIONS: 
Extravasation: the unintentional escape of fluid from its physiologic contained space into the 
surrounding tissue  
- 2016 Infusion Therapy Standards of Practice define as “inadvertent infiltration of vesicant solution 
or medication into the surrounding tissue” 
 
Vesicants: agents known to cause blistering and necrosis when extravasated. 
- 2016 Infusion Standards of Practice define as “agent capable of causing tissue damage when it escapes 
from the intended vascular pathway into surrounding tissue” 
 
POLICY: 
A. The following non-cytotoxic (non-chemotherapeutic) agents are known vesicants: 
 
Calcium salts ≥ 10% Sodium chloride > 0.9% 
Dextrose ≥ 10% Epinephrine 
Mannitol ≥ 5% Norepinephrine 
Potassium ≥2meq/mL Dopamine 
Sodium bicarbonate ≥8.4% Phenylephrine 
Radio contrast media/dyes  Dobutamine 
Phenytoin Parenteral nutrition 
 
B. Suspect extravasation if the patient has the following signs or symptoms: 
a. Signs: swelling, redness or blanching, blister formation, unexplained reduced IV flow rate, 
necrosis, lack of blood return, or ulceration 
b. Symptoms: tightness, burning, pain or aching, tingling sensation, itchiness 
 
C. An infiltration scoring system and a phlebitis scoring system is available in the nursing 
documentation portion of the electronic medical record (See Appendix). The use of these scoring 
systems must be charted if extravasation is suspected or confirmed. 
 
D. Suspected or confirmed extravasation should be treated immediately. See “procedures” for 
management below. 
 
E. When necessary, wound care should be consulted. Page 2 of 5  
PROCEDURES: 
 
A. Immediate management 
1. As soon as extravasation is suspected, immediately stop the infusion, disconnect the 
tubing as close to the catheter hub as possible. Attach a syringe to the hub and 
attempt to aspirate the remaining drug from the catheter. The line should not be 
flushed as this may redistribute the vesicant. 
2. Notify the house supervisor. 
3. Estimate the amount of extravasated solution and notify the physician at the time of 
the occurrence to obtain orders for treatment. If deemed necessary, utilize the 
A. Critical Care - Regitine for Extravasation or Infiltration 
B. Critical Care - Hyaluronidase for Extravasation or Infiltration 
4. If antidotes are not indicated, a warm or cold compresses may be used and the 
effected limb should be elevated for 24 to 48 hours as directed by the physician. 
 
B. Antidote administration 
 
Regitine (phentolamine): indicated for dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, phenylephrine, or 
dobutamine extravasation). 
 
1. Treatment is most effective if given within 6 to 8 hours of extravasation. It should 
not be administered if 12 or more hours have lapsed from the time of extravasation. 
2. Retrieve phentolamine from the Pyxis machine. This item is available on override in 
Critical Care areas (ICU’s, ECUs) for use as defined by the extravasation order set. 
A. Call pharmacy for phentolamine if the item is not available in the  Pyxis 
machine (e.g. due to drug shortages) or if extravasation occurs outside of 
Critical Care areas. 
3. Using a 10mL syringe, withdraw 2mL (10mg) of phentolamine and add 8mL of 0.9% 
normal saline to make a 1mg/1mL phentolamine solution. 
4. Disconnect IV tubing from the hub of the catheter (if not already done) and inject 
1mL of the phentolamine solution. Then, remove the catheter. 
5. Using a hypodermic needle, inject 0.5 to 1mL of the remaining phentolamine 
subcutaneously in multiple sites around the perimeter of the infiltrated area (at least 5 
injections with one half-inch between sites) 
A. It may not be necessary to use all the prepared phentolamine. The amount of 
the solution used will vary with the size of the area of infiltrated tissue. 
B. Erythema, pain, and hypotension may occur 
C. If the dose is effective, normal skin color should return to affected area 
within one hour. 
6. Place a limb alert band on the affected limb. 
7. Warm compresses may be applied for patient comfort for 15 to 20 minutes 3 to 4 
times per day for 24 to 48 hours 
8. Elevate the affected limb for 24 to 48 hours Page 3 of 5  
 
 
Hylenex (hyaluronidase): used for extravasation of concentrated electrolytes (listed above) 
including parenteral nutrition, mannitol, phenytoin, and radio contrast media/dyes (large volume). 
 
1. Treatment is most effective if given within 1 to 2 hours of extravasation 
2. Contact pharmacy by phone to retrieve one - 150unit/mL vial of hyaluronidase. 
3. Using a 10mL syringe, withdraw 1mL of hyaluronidase and 9mL of 0.9% normal 
saline which makes a 15 units/mL solution. 
4. Using a 25-gauge needle, inject 0.2mL of the 15 unit/mL hyaluronidase solution 
subcutaneously in multiple sites around the perimeter of the infiltrated area (at least 5 
injections with one half-inch between sites) 
A. Erythema, pain, and urticaria may occur. If urticaria develops, contact a 
physician to alert him/her of a potential allergic reaction. Use of oral or IV 
antihistamines may be necessary. 
5. Place a limb alert band on the affected limb. 
6. Cold compresses may be applied for patient comfort for 15 to 20 minutes 3 to 4 times 
per day for 24 to 48 hours 
7. Elevate the affected limb for 24 to 48 hours. 
 
C. Post-event documentation & reporting 
1. Document the following in the patient’s medical record: 
i. Date 
ii. Time 
iii. Type of access 
iv. Location of access 
v. Drug sequence 
vi. Drug administration technique 
vii. Approximate amount of drug extravasated 
viii. Patient response 
ix. Appearance of the site 
x. Attending physician (if different from treating physician) & house manager 
notification 
xi. Follow up measures 
2. Report the event utilizing the hospital’s electronic safety event manager system 
 
REFERENCES: 
1. Phentolamine product insert 
2. Hylenex product insert 
3. Ong, Jennie, Gerpen Ruth V. Recommendations for management od noncytotoxic vesicant 
extravasations. J Infus Nurs. 2020; 43(6): 319-343. 
4. Gorski L, Hadaway L, Hagle ME, McGoldrick M, Orr M, Doellman D. Infusion therapy standards of 
practice. J Infus Nurs. 2016;39 (suppl 1):S1–S159 
5. Micromedex Healthcare Series Drugdex Consults: non-cytotoxic drug extravasation therapy (online 
access). Last accessed May 2013. 
6. Chemotherapy and Biotherapy Guidelines and Recommendations for Practice. ONS, 2009, p.105- 
110. 
7. Schummer W, Schummer C, Bayer O, et al. Extravasation injury in the perioperative setting. Anesth 
Analg 2005; 10: 722-7. Page 4 of 5  
8. Doellman D, Hadaway L, Bowe-Geddes LA, et al. Infiltration and extravasation: update on 
prevention and management. J Inf Nursing 2009; 32(4): 203-11 
9. Kassner E. Evaluation and treatment of chemotherapy extravasation injuries. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs 
2000; 17(3): 135-48 
10. Upton J, Mulliken JB, Murray JE. Major intravenous extravasation injuries. Am J Surg 1979; 137: 
497-506 
11. Gaze NR. Tissue necrosis caused by commonly used intravenous infusions. Lancet 1978; 2: 417-9 
12. Bellin MF, Jakobsen JA, Tomassin I, et al. Contrast medium extravasation injury: guidelines for 
prevention and management. JBR-BTR, 2004: 87:93-6 
13. Infusion Nurses Society. Infusion nursing standards of practice. J Infus Nurs. 2011;34 (l)(suppl):Sl- 
S110. 
 
14. Refer to Facility Online ReferencePage 5 of 5  
Appendix: 
 
Infiltration Score 
(graded according to the most severe presenting indicator) 
Grade Clinical Criteria 
0 No symptoms of infiltration 
1 Skin blanched 
Edema less than 1 inch in any direction 
Cool to touch 
With or without pain 
2 Skin blanched 
Edema less than 1-6 inches in any direction 
Cool to touch 
With or without pain 
3 Skin blanched or translucent 
Gross edema greater than 6 inches in any direction 
Cool to touch 
Mild to moderate pain 
Possible numbness 
4 Skin blanched or translucent 
Skin tight, leaking 
Skin discolored, bruised, swollen 
Gross edema greater than 6 inches in any direction 
Deep pitting tissue edema 
Circulatory Impairment 
Moderate to severe pain 
Infiltration with any amount of blood, irritant, vesicant 
 
 
Phlebitis Score 
(graded according to the most severe presenting indicator) 
Grade Clinical Criteria 
0 No symptoms of phlebitis 
1 Erythema at site with or without pain 
2 Pain at site with erythema and/or edema 
3 Pain at site with erythema and/or edema 
Streak formation 
Palpable cord less than 1 inch 
4 Pain at site with erythema and/or edema 
Streak formation 
Palpable cord greater than 1 inch 
Purulent drainage 
 