NMO-001 
Page 1 of 9 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Oncology 
Title: Chemotherapy (Cytotoxic agents), 
Handling, Administration and Disposal 
Policy 
Reference #: NMO-001 
Supersedes #: 1985; 1988; 1991; 1997 
Date of Origination: August, 1985 Review Date: October 23, 2023 
Revision Date:  December 2, 2024 
 
 
                               
PURPOSE:  
To provide pertinent information regarding the safe handling, administration, and disposal of 
chemotherapy. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
• USP800: United States Pharmacopeia (USP) General Chapter <800> Hazardous Drugs – 
Handling in the Healthcare Setting is a guidance document comprised of best practices handling 
hazardous drugs in healthcare settings.   
 
• Hazardous Drug (HD): NIOSH defines any drug having any of the following six characteristics 
in humans or animals:  
o Carcinogenicity 
o Teratogenicity or other developmental toxicity 
o Reproductive toxicity 
o Organ toxicity at low doses 
o Genotoxicity 
o Structure and toxicity profiles of new drugs that mimic existing drugs determined 
hazardous by any of the above criteria  
 
• High Risk HD: following OLOL policy of HDs, High Risk HDs are considered to be NIOSH 
Group 1 drugs: Antineoplastic HDs. Signs available where administration occurs. Only to be 
given by biochemo certified nurse.  
 
• Low Risk HD: following OLOL policy of HDs, Low Risk HDs are considered to be NIOSH 
Group 2 and 3 drugs: Non-Antineoplastic and Reproductive Risk HDs.   
 
• Deactivation: Deactivation renders a compound inert or inactive.   
 
• Decontaminate: Decontamination occurs by inactivating, neutralizing, or physically removing 
HD residue from non-disposable surfaces and transferring the HD residue to disposable materials 
for proper removal from an area.   
 
• Hazardous Drug Spill: NMO-001 
Page 2 of 9 
o Hazardous drug spills are spills of liquid, High Risk HDs or Antineoplastics.  Small spills 
are considered any spill that can be contained by a single spill kit.  Large spills are those 
that require more than one spill kit to clean.  Pharmacy, EVS, and the unit supervisor 
should assist in the cleaning of a large spill.    
 
• Spill Response Team (SRT): The SRT will consist of the following personnel:  
o The person who created and/or found the spill 
o The unit or clinic supervisor (or designee) where the spill occurred  
o A team member from Pharmacy for spills occurring in acute locations  
o A team member from Environmental services for spills occurring in acute locations 
 
• Personal Protective Equipment (PPE):  
o Gloves: Per USP800 gloves used as PPE when handling HDs shall meet American 
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standard D6978 (or its successor) Gloves must 
be powder-free. 
o Gown: Per USP800 gowns used as PPE when handling HDs shall meet the following 
criteria: 
▪ be disposable and nonabsorbent 
▪ shown to resist permeability by HDs 
▪ close in the back and have no openings to the front 
▪ be long sleeved with closed, elastic or nit, cuffs 
▪ must not have any seams or closures HDs could pass through 
o Respirator: a full-face piece, chemical cartridge-type respirator or powered air-purifying 
type mask.  This type of mask should only be worn when attending to HD spills larger 
than what can be contained with a spill kit or with the risk of respiratory exposure 
 
• Hazardous Bodily Fluid Spill:  Hazardous bodily fluid spill refers to any patient currently 
receiving or has received a High Risk HD at any point during patients admission, where any 
bodily fluids have spilled or soiled any locations or surfaces in the patient care area.    
 
• Body Fluids: blood, emesis, urine, and feces 
• Immediate Use: is an exemption to USP 797 that allows certain sterile products to be prepared 
without the need for special facilities (i.e., ISO 5 hood) and practices (full cleansing and 
gowning), administration must begin within 4 hours following the start of preparation. 
 
POLICY: 
A. Preparation of the Patient 
1. Assess level of understanding of chemotherapy drugs and treatment plan. 
2. Review educational materials with the patient and family 
3. Explain procedure and any side effects of the drugs and answer patient’s questions 
appropriately. 
4. Review patient allergy history. 
5. Assess patient’s reaction history to previous therapy. 
6. Assess patient’s intravenous access and initiate a peripheral or central venous intravenous 
access if indicated. 
7. Avoid extremities with gross anatomic alterations. NMO-001 
Page 3 of 9 
8. Veins near a flexion joint, such as the wrist or antecubital areas should not be used.   
9. Note venipuncture sites used within the last 24 hours and administer chemotherapy proximal 
to those sites. 
10. For intravesicular chemotherapy, have patient empty bladder. Prepare to insert urinary 
catheter. 
11. Verify Informed Consent  
 
B. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)  
PPE must be worn during all chemotherapy activities including chemotherapy preparation, the 
administration of chemotherapy by any route, transportation of chemotherapy, and when disposing 
of chemotherapy. Disposable PPE must not be re-used. 
PPE consists of the following: 
1. Chemotherapy protective disposable gowns: Must be worn during all handling activities, 
including initiating chemotherapy and disposing of chemotherapy bags. 
2. Chemotherapy gloves:  Approved chemotherapy gloves must be worn during every 
chemotherapy handling activity.  Double gloving with chemotherapy gloves is required during 
all handling of chemotherapy drugs. Gloves must be changed after every handling activity, or 
immediately if contamination occurs. Hands must be washed after removing gloves.  
3. Eye and Face Protection: Must be available whenever the risk of splashes, sprays, or aerosol 
are possible.  Goggles with a side panel or a face shield are appropriate.   
C. Preparation of the Delivery of Chemotherapy Agents 
1. Intravenous anti-neoplastic agents may be administered only by registered nurses with current 
chemotherapy/biotherapy certification. 
2. Personnel who are pregnant or breast-feeding will not prepare or administer chemotherapy 
agents. 
3. Administer pre- medications as ordered. 
4. The nurse responsible for the administration of the chemotherapy will check the drug with 
another nurse immediately prior to administering.  One nurse will read the label on the 
container while the other verifies the physician’s order.   
5. Both nurses will sign the chemotherapy documentation record. 
6. The RN administering the agent is responsible for the accuracy and safety of treatment. 
7. If there is any discrepancy when checking the drugs, verify the orders with the pharmacy and 
the physician. 
8.  Pneumatic tubes must not be used to transport any liquid HDs or any antineoplastic HDs.  
 
D. Administration of Chemotherapy 
Oral Chemotherapy Agents 
 
1. Must be checked by two biochemo certified nurses.  May use a pharmacist as second check.  
2. Must be administered by a biochemo certified registered nurse. NMO-001 
Page 4 of 9 
3. Chemotherapy gloves will be worn.  
4. Oral agents used for nononcologic therapy may be administered by a non-biochemo certified 
nurse and do not require a double check by nursing. These agents include Megestrol, 
Hydroxyurea, and anti-hormonals.  
 
Initiate intravenous chemotherapy using the following guidelines: 
1. Must be checked by two biochemo certified nurses. May use a pharmacist as second check.   
2. Intravenous chemotherapy is to be given by a chemotherapy/biotherapy certified nurse only.  
Each chemotherapy/biotherapy nurse completes an annual competency. 
3. Transfer the necessary supplies and equipment to the room. 
4. Wash hands. 
5. Identify the patient by using the 2-identification process at the bedside/chairside. 
6. Chemotherapy protective disposable gown and double chemotherapy gloves will be worn.  
7. Primary tubing should be primed with compatible IV fluid with the exception of 24-hour 
continuous infusion chemotherapy, in which case the primary line is primed with drug.   A 
closed system device should be utilized at all times and breaks in the closed system device 
should be minimized. After completion of each chemotherapy, the primary line should be 
flushed with compatible IV fluid.  
8. Verify patency by validating blood return and condition of IV site.  
9. If unable to obtain blood return to verify patency of a central venous catheter: 
i. Notify physician. 
ii. Obtain vascular studies as ordered. 
10. If unable to obtain blood return to verify patency of a peripheral IV site, re-start a peripheral 
IV. 
11. Do not use an IV over a bony prominence, joint, or in the hand for chemotherapy. 
12. Patients are not to leave their nursing unit with chemotherapy infusing without a physician’s 
order.  
13. Interruptions of chemotherapy for any reason require a physician’s order.  
14. Stop chemotherapy immediately and refer to the Chemotherapy Extravasation Protocol if any 
of the following occur at or around the IV site: 
i. Pain  
ii. Swelling  
iii. Redness 
iv. Leaking 
v. Heat 
15. In case of a chemotherapy spill refer to the Chemotherapy Spill Policy and Procedure.  
 
Intravesicular Chemotherapy/biotherapy administration. Delivers medication directly into the 
bladder. 
1. Chemo must be checked by two biochemo certified nurses. May use a pharmacist as second 
check.   
2. Don PPE, including chemo gown, double chemo gloves and a face mask or goggles 
3. Insert catheter 
4. Instill medication and flush as per facility online reference- Administering Intravesical 
Medication  
5. Remind patient of position changes per MD order, and monitor NMO-001 
Page 5 of 9 
6. When treatment is completed, don PPE including mask or googles, and remove catheter (catheter 
should remain clamped). 
7. All supplies used in the administration of all forms of chemotherapy are to be disposed of in the 
chemotherapy disposal bag and then placed in the Chemotherapy/cytoxic waste container. 
 
  Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy Administration 
1.  Access intaperitoneal port. Flush port with preservative free normal saline solution to confirm 
catheter patency. (Do not aspirate to verify placement, as port is inserted into peritoneal cavity, 
not a blood vessel). 
2. Ensure chemotherapy is warmed to 37 degrees C/ 98 degrees F. Solution is stored in a warmer 
until immediately prior to administration.  
3. Chemotherapy should be checked by two biochemo certified nurses. May use a pharmacist as 
second check.   
4. Prime tubing with compatible solution. 2 nurses competent in chemotherapy administration will 
verify medication, dose and route. 
5. Open clamps and allow chemotherapy to infuse by gravity. 
6. Instruct and/or assist patient to turn side to side every 15-20 minutes during infusion to disperse 
chemotherapy throughout abdomen.  
7. At completion of infusion flush tubing with normal saline to clear chemotherapy from tubing. 
Flush intraperitoneal port with 10ml 0.9%NS and 5ml heparin flush 100u/ml.  
8. At discharge instruct the patient to reposition from side to side every 15 minutes for at least 1 
hour after completion of infusion. 
 
 
 
Peripheral administration of Vinca Alkaloids: 
An international safety alert recommends that vinca alkaloids be administered as an infusion instead 
of a bolus. 
        
1. Chemo must be checked by two biochemo certified nurses. May use a pharmacist as second 
check.   
2.  Vinca alkaloids are to be administered as a 10-minute infusion via a minibag and must be 
infused to gravity and never on an infusion pump. If a patient has a central line, and is receiving 
a vinca alkaloid, it must be infused on an infusion pump. 
3.  The nurse must remain at the bedside or chairside to provide constant supervision, and 
observation for a peripheral site administration. 
4. Blood return by aspiration, must be checked before and after the infusion. 
5. To ensure that all of the medication is infused backflush the tubing with compatible fluid and 
infuse the remaining content of the bag via gravity. 
6. In case of a suspected extravasation or infiltration, stop the infusion follow the extravasation 
policy, and notify the provider. 
 
 
 
 
 NMO-001 
Page 6 of 9 
Large Volume Chemotherapy 
 
1. Non-vesicants may be infused through a peripheral or central intravenous catheter.  
2. Large volume vesicants MUST be infused via a central venous catheter only. 
3. Use new tubing with each new bag of chemotherapy. 
4. Always connect chemotherapy tubing directly to patient’s intravenous access device.  Do not 
long-line chemotherapy into other fluid lines. 
5. Administer via an IV pump utilizing auto programming.  
6. Verify blood return every 4 hours on central venous catheters and every 2 hours on peripheral 
IVs. 
7. Follow the policy for disposal of hazardous wastes upon completion of therapy. 
IVPB Chemotherapy 
1. Chemo must be checked by two biochemo certified nurses. May use a pharmacist as second 
check.   
2. Prime secondary tubing by back-flushing with compatible fluid. 
3. New tubing is to be used with each new IVPB.  
4. Administer via an IV pump utilizing auto programming.  
 
IV Push Chemotherapy 
1. Chemo must be checked by two biochemo certified nurses. May use a pharmacist as second 
check.   
2. Place chemotherapy absorbent pad under injection site of IV tubing. 
3. Administer chemotherapy using the closest injection port to the IV site. 
4. Administer chemotherapy through a free flowing IV. 
5. Observe IV site throughout chemotherapy administration. 
6. Check blood return after every 2-3 mLs. 
7. After all chemotherapy has cleared the IV tubing, disconnect the syringe from the port site over 
gauze pad. 
8. Discard syringes and all other used supplies into chemotherapy disposal bag and then place bag 
in chemotherapy waste container. 
9. Observe patient for any reaction to treatment.  
Intrathecal chemotherapy  
 1. Chemo must be checked by two biochemo certified nurse. May use a pharmacist as second 
check.   
 2. Chemotherapy to be administered by an oncology physician, radiologist, an advanced practice 
provider, or a physician assistant.  
 3. Verify that the patient’s coagulation studies meet the institutional parameters for lumbar 
puncture.  
 4.  Verify that the patient is not receiving anticoagulants or that they have been stopped for the 
necessary amount of time before the lumbar puncture, per institutional guidelines.  
 5.  Immediately preceding the procedure 
  a.  Perform a time-out procedure 
  b.  Verify with the practitioner performing the procedure (e.g., oncologist, radiologist, 
advanced practice provider) the following: 
   i.  The medication to be administered is safe to administer by the intrathecal route. 
   ii. The medication is NOT a vinca alkaloid or bortezomib.  NMO-001 
Page 7 of 9 
   iii. The medication is mixed with preservative-free normal saline.   
Multiple Chemotherapy Administration - When administering more than one type of chemotherapy, 
administer in the following order: 
1. IVP vesicants 
2. IVP non-vesicant  
3. IVPB vesicants 
4. IVPB non-vesicants 
5. Large volume  
6. As MD order 
E.       Storage 
1. Store in designated hazardous area labeled with a hazardous sign.  
2. Access is restricted to authorized personnel only.  
3. May be stored with other inventory in separate contained area.  
 
F. Disposal  
1. All supplies used in the administration of all forms of chemotherapy are to be disposed of in 
the chemotherapy disposal bag and then placed in the Chemotherapy/Cytotoxic waste 
container. 
 
G. Documentation 
1. Document the following when administering chemotherapy: 
2. Location and type of IV access device. 
3. Condition of the site before, during, and after chemotherapy administration. 
4. Drugs administered 
5. Patient reactions 
6. Document urinary catheter type and size if applicable. 
7.  A safety event must be completed through the electronic events reporting system for all 
complaints, errors and adverse events.  
 
  
H. Linen:  
1. Contaminated linen will be placed in a specially marked laundry bag. 
2.  The laundry bag and its contents should be prewashed and the linens added to other laundry 
for a second wash.  
3. Laundry personnel should wear double gloves and gowns while handling prewashed material.  
 
I. Manipulation  
1. Nursing should avoid manipulating hazardous drugs such as crushing tables or opening 
capsules if possible. If crushing tables or opening capsules is required then pharmacy will 
crush or open capsules and return to nursing in a plastic pouch for administration 
2. If hazardous drug dosage forms do require manipulation such as crushing tables or opening 
capsule for a single dose, personnel must don appropriate PPE and use a plastic pouch to 
contain any dust or particles generated 
3. HDs that do not require any further manipulation, other than counting or repackaging of final 
dosage forms, may be prepared for dispensing without any further requirements for 
containment unless required by the manufacturer or if visual indicators of HD NMO-001 
Page 8 of 9 
4. Active pharmaceutical ingredients or other powdered HDs MUST be handled in a 
containment primary engineering controls to protect against occupational exposure, especially 
during particle-generating activities (such as crushing tablets and opening capsules) 
 
J. Hazardous Bodily Fluid Handling after ingestion of a High-Risk HD:   
1. Wear double chemo gloves and gown 
2. Wear a face shield if splashing is possible 
3. Incontinent patients- apply a protective barrier ointment to the skin of the patient’s diaper area 
4. Flush the toilet with lid down, If lid is not present, cover the open toilet with a plastic-backed 
pad to prevent splashing or release of aerosols 
 
K. Spill Management: 
1. Chemo spill kits should be readily available in any area where chemotherapy is handled.  
Should a small spill occur, the person that created or found the spill is to utilize the chemo 
spill kit to begin the cleanup procedure.  If the spill is not able to be cleaned by a single spill 
kit, pharmacy and EVS should be called to assist in the spill management as part of a Spill 
Response Team.  A safety event should also be entered noting the spill and possible exposure.  
Please refer to Spill Management Policy NSO002 for further instructions.   
 
L. Administration of Chemotherapy to non-oncology units: 
1. When a patient requires chemotherapy to be administered in non-oncology units such as 
intensive care, a biochemo certified nurse will administer chemotherapy and provide a 
chemotherapy cart from central.  
M. Annual Nursing Competency and training  
1. Oncology nursing competency will be evaluated and reassessed each year according to the 
OLOLRMC Organizational policy OrgOps/HR/E/008.  
2. Education will be provided prior to the introduction of a new high-risk HD, equipment, 
process changes, spills and exposure.  
3. 3. Education will be provided on immediate use medications yearly  
N. Immediate Use: 
1. Single-dose containers must only be used for one patient and discarded after use 
2. No more than three sterile vials are used in preparation of immediate use medications 
3. Medications must be labeled with name, amount of active ingredient, name or initial of preparer 
and 4 hour beyond use date 
O. Environmental wipe sampling: 
 1. Environmentally wipe sampling for HD surface residue should be performed routinely.  
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
American Society of Clinical Oncology.  Journal of Oncology Practice, 12, 1262-1271.  
HTTPS://doi.org/10.1200/jop.2016.017905. 
 
Chemotherapy and Immunotherapy Guidelines (2019) Oncology Nursing Society.  
 NMO-001 
Page 9 of 9 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). (n.d.).Accessed January 21, 2019 at 
https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/hazardousdrugs/controlling_occex_hazardousdrugs.html.  
 
 Louisiana State Board of Nursing December 12, 2012 Board meeting Practice action taken to Instill 
and/or remove chemotherapy and biotherapy and biotherapy agents, vesicant and non-vesicant, into/out 
of the bladder/intravesical. under La. R.S. 37:913(14) (l). 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Policy #OrgClin-040, Universal Protocol for Operative, Invasive, Sedation, High 
Risk Procedure Verification; (Time Out/Surgical Safety Checklist). 
 
USP General Chapter <800> Hazardous Drugs – Handling in Healthcare Settings Reprinted from USP 
40—NF 35, (2019) 
 
NIOSH Drug List December 2024 
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2025-103/default.html 
 
Refer to Facility Online Reference 
 
 