NNA-001 
Page 1 of 4 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Nursing Administration 
Title: Nursing Standards for Patient Care 
Services 
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-001 
Supersedes 
#: 1985; 1994; 1997 
Date of Origination: November, 1987 Last Review 
Date: April 11, 2022 
Last Revision Date: September 9, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
These standards provide the measurable criteria necessary to guide the practicing nurse in rendering 
quality patient care at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC).  They offer 
guidelines for the development of the optimum working environment and the economic and efficient 
utilization of human and material resources. 
 
DEFINITION: 
1. Nursing – Nursing is the protection, promotion, and optimization of health and abilities, 
prevention of illness and injury, facilitation of healing, alleviation of suffering through the 
diagnosis and treatment of human response and advocacy in the care of individuals, families, 
groups, communities, and populations. (ANA, 2015)  
2. Caring – The act of caring is viewed as the moral ideal consisting of human-to-human attempts 
to protect, enhance, and preserve humanity and human dignity, integrity, and wholeness by 
assisting a person to find meaning in illness, suffering, pain, and existence.  Human caring helps 
another gain self-knowledge, self-control, self-caring, and self-healing so that a sense of inner 
harmony is restored regardless of the external circumstances. (ANA, 2015)  
 
STANDARDS OF PRACTICE: 
 
1. Assessment 
2. Diagnosis (expanded for APRNs) 
3. Outcomes identification 
4. Planning 
5. Implementation 
a. Coordination of Care 
b. Health teaching and health promotion 
6. Evaluation 
 
STANDARDS OF PROFESSIONAL PERFORMANCE: 
1. Ethics 
2. Culturally congruent practice 
3. Communication 
4. Collaboration 
5. Leadership NNA-001 
Page 2 of 4 
 
6. Education 
7. Evidence-based practice and research 
 
8. Professional practice evaluation 
9. Resource utilization 
10. Environmental health 
 
POLICY: 
A. The philosophy and objectives of Patient Care Services reflect the ideology of OLOLRMC and give 
direction to Patient Care Services Nursing caregivers in that service. 
a. Implementation: During the initial orientation, period each new employee is introduced to 
hospital philosophy and mission, as well as the Patient Care Services philosophy, objectives 
and vision. 
 
B. Quality nursing care of patients at OLOLRMC is the primary responsibility of the Patient Care 
Services Department. 
a. Implementation: Patient Care Services maintains the responsibility and authority to establish 
qualifications, and determine staffing levels and skill mix appropriate to promote quality care 
for all patients. Tools used to assess and plan staffing criteria; personnel assignment and 
division of workload include, but are not limited to, unit specific staffing matrix, , practice 
guidelines, standards of practice, statistical data reflective of census, admission, discharge or 
transfer activity, and personnel data such as experience and documented competencies. 
 
C. The Patient Care Services maintains an organizational plan that delineates line and staff relationships 
of all employees in the Patient Care Services Department. 
a. Implementation: The Patient Care Services is organized in a traditional structure headed by 
the Vice President of Patient Care Services as the Chief Nursing Executive supported by 
service-specific Directors or Managers and Nurse Supervisors. The organizational plan, role 
requirements, and reporting relationships are delineated through the following means: 
1. Hospital Organizational Chart 
2. Patient Care Services Organizational Chart 
3. Plan for Provision of Nursing Care 
4. Job Descriptions 
b. The Plan for Provision of Patient Care, as originally established by the nursing leadership 
group, is reviewed annually by the Nurse Executive Council (NEC).  It may be revised as 
necessary to respond to the dynamic needs of the healthcare environment and the health care 
consumer in accordance with the hospital mission, the philosophy, and the Patient Care 
Services Department vision. 
 
D. The purpose of the Patient Care Services is to assess, plan, implement and evaluate patient care 
programs, practices and policies which promote professional clinical practice and to facilitate the 
delivery of clinical care within the framework of the nursing process. 
a. Implementation: The plan for provision of care is formulated by the Nursing Executive 
leadership, management and staff, and documents the structure and means for guiding 
clinical nursing practice. 
 NNA-001 
Page 3 of 4 
 
E. There is a structured department-wide program of evaluation established to assure a quality of 
patient-care services congruent with the philosophy and objectives of Patient Care Services.   
a. Implementation: Quality of care is monitored and improved through ongoing activities of 
interdisciplinary Performance Improvement (PI), unit based quality assessment, employee 
appraisal process, and patient satisfaction monitoring. Administrative monitoring of unusual 
occurrences is reported through the Nurse Executive Council (NEC) as a means to improve 
quality outcomes.  
 
F. Patient Care Services, in conjunction with the Human Resources Department, recruits and employs 
qualified personnel. 
a. Implementation: All registered nurses employed in clinical positions are classified according 
to clinical specialty, individual experience, and academic qualifications and demonstrated 
performance. 
b. Records of current credentials of all registered and licensed practical nurses are maintained.  
Every nursing employee is employed, assigned and compensated for the service, based on 
individual qualifications and capabilities without regard to race, creed, socioeconomic status, 
culture background, political belief, national origin, sex or age. 
 
G. Patient Care Services establishes guidelines for utilization of all nursing personnel based on the 
following assumptions: 
a. Delivery of relevant nursing service is a complex process requiring nursing diagnosis, patient 
care plans, and collaboration with other members of the health care team. 
b. The provision of comprehensive nursing care at OLOLRMC requires the employment of 
nursing personnel with different types of educational preparation, knowledge, experience, 
skills, competence and motivation.   
c. The increasing diversity of the skill, experience and knowledge of Patient Care Service 
employees must be correlated to the expectations and needs of the patients. 
d. Implementation: The primary purpose of OLOLRMC Patient Care Services is to provide 
clinical services to patients and their families.  In order to secure optimum quality of service, 
objective means of correlating the varied levels of staff with the varied needs of patients have 
been instituted.  Staffing acuity systems data contributes to appropriate allocation of various 
categories of clinical nursing staff necessary to carry out the program of patient care 24 hours 
per day.  Patient Care Services, in collaboration with hospital administration and ancillary 
departments, defines appropriate responsibilities and functions of various personnel to 
promote quality patient care. 
 
Clinical Education Department maintains orientation and CEs 
 
 
H. Patient Care Services maintains and develops standing and ad hoc committees to facilitate and 
support the work, responsibilities and functions of the department. Policies, Procedures and Practices 
are developed collaboratively, communicated throughout the organization. 
a. Implementation: A shared decision-making governance model is in place with the nursing 
councils and/or other decision-making bodies as follows: 
1. Nurse Executive Council (NEC). 
2. Professional Practice Council NNA-001 
Page 4 of 4 
 
3.  Retention, Recruitment, and Development Council 
4. Organization of Nurse Leaders (ONL) 
5. Unit-based and Team Councils 
6. Clinical Education Committee 
 
b. Appointment of membership on all committees is voluntary and representative of appropriate 
classification of personnel, area of assignment and tour of duty.  Each committee has its 
statement of purpose, guidelines, and authority to accomplish its work.  The department 
keeps on file records of all committee work including summaries and attendance list.  
 
c. Ad hoc committees can be convened as needed to consider, investigate, take action on, 
report, or make recommendations about matters that pertain to patient care services or 
professional practice issues. 
 
I. To facilitate collaboration, information exchange, and to ensure integration of Patient Care Services 
programs throughout the hospital system, representatives from Patient Care Services department are 
active members of ongoing hospital-based inter-disciplinary committees. 
a. Implementation: The Patient Care Services department representation on inter-disciplinary 
committees is defined by committee by laws, management role and function, and/or interest, 
experiences, and potential for contributing to committee process.  
 
J. Patient Care Services has primary authority and responsibility for the development of budget 
proposals reflecting fiscal requirements needed to carry out department programs, policies, and 
practices. 
a. Implementation: Nurse Managers, House Managers, Senior Directors, the Assistant Vice 
President and Vice President of Patient Care Services work collaboratively to establish 
annual budget projections. In addition, these individuals confer with staff in their respective 
areas and engage in discussions impacting the financial operation of their individual areas on 
an on-going basis. 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
American Nurses Association (2021).  Announcing ANA’s Nursing:  Scope and Standards of Practice 
4thed; 10(7) pp18-19. Retrieved from http://www.AmericanNurseToday.com 