NNA-095 
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Nursing Administration 
Title: Types of Orders 
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-095 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: September 19, 2006 Review Date: June 4, 2024 
Revision Date:   June 11, 2018 
 
PURPOSE:  
To define the types of orders approved for use at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
• Written Orders – Orders written directly on paper by the prescriber.  
• Verbal Orders – Orders given by the prescriber in the presence of an authorized person who 
repeats the order back to the prescriber, then enters the order into the patient record for the 
prescriber. Verbal orders are to only be used in Code Blue or emergency situations.  
• Telephone Orders – Orders given by the prescriber over the telephone to an authorized person 
who repeats the order back to the prescriber, then enters the order into the patient record for the 
prescriber. 
• Electronic Order – Orders entered into the electronic medical record (EMR) via the 
Computerized Provider Order Entry (CPOE) pathway, or by authorized personnel for physician 
authorization. 
• Protocol Orders – Protocols are orders that permit treatment to be initiated by appropriate staff 
when a patient’s condition meets certain pre-determined clinical criteria. Protocol authentication 
occurs by physician order.    
POLICY:  
The order types approved at Our Lady of the Lake RMC include written physician orders, 
verbal/telephone (VO/TO) orders, computerized physician, or provider order entry (CPOE) and protocol 
orders. 
 
GUIDELINES:   
1. Physician’s orders may be entered directly into the patient’s electronic medical record by the 
physician or mid-level provider or indirectly, from the patient’s chart, via designated hospital 
personnel (i.e., Nurse and Pharmacist). 
 
 
Physician Order Sets categorized by Service Line are available on the intranet under Provider Links by 
selecting Physician Orders 
 
 
References: 
Louisiana State Board of Nursing, Declaratory Statement on Transmission and Acceptance of 
Verbal Orders, Edited: February 10, 1999. 