NNA-089 
Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Nursing Administration 
Title: Sedation for Procedures 
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-089 
Supersedes #: 2000 
Date of Origination: May 2000 Review Date:  December 27, 2023 
Revision Date:  January 22, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide parameters for the administration of medication and monitoring of patients receiving 
sedation in accordance with the Louisiana State Board of Nursing Declaratory Statement on the Role 
and Scope of practice of the Registered Nurse during procedural sedation and to assure a uniform quality 
of care for these patients occurs throughout the hospital. 
    
POLICY: 
Only a Registered Nurse with Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS), moderate/deep sedation training 
and competency may administer medications for the purpose of moderate sedation and monitoring deep 
sedation for adult patients.  Only a Registered Nurse with Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS), 
Emergency Nurse Pediatric Course (ENPC), or Neonatal Resuscitation Program (NRP) and 
moderate/deep sedation training and competency may administer medications for the purpose of 
moderate sedation and monitoring deep sedation for pediatric patients.  The adult patient shall meet the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) criteria for ASA Class III or below, and a pediatric 
patient shall be ASA Class II or below. ASA Class is assigned by the physician performing the 
procedure.  It is within the scope of practice for a registered nurse to administer non-anesthetic 
medications as ordered by the physician.  It is not within the scope of practice for the registered nurse to 
administer an anesthetic agent for any level of sedation. 
 
This policy is not intended to prohibit registered nurses from administering propofol (Diprivan) to 
intubated, ventilated patients in a critical care setting.  A registered nurse may administer anesthetic 
agents to intubated patients in a critical care setting and may titrate and continue infusion of local 
anesthetic agents through the use of epidural catheters for pain management, in accordance with the 
Administrative Procedure Act. 
 
Initial competency and annual competency are required for the registered nurse administering and 
monitoring of patients during levels of sedation.  
 NNA-089 
Page 2 of 5 
The below table is a quick reference guide for monitoring and administering medications per ASA 
classifications. 
 
ASA classification 1 2 3 4 5 
Pediatric moderate 
sedation           
RN may monitor Y Y Y Y Y 
RN may administer meds Y Y N N N 
            
Pediatric Deep Sedation           
RN may monitor Y Y N N N 
RN may administer meds N N N N N 
            
Adult moderate 
sedation           
RN may monitor Y Y Y Y Y 
RN may administer meds Y Y Y N N 
            
Adult Deep Sedation           
RN may monitor Y Y Y N N 
RN may administer meds N N N N N 
 
 
The Joint Commission (TJC) revised its standards for sedation and anesthesia care, effective 
January 1, 2001. “The standards for sedation and anesthesia care apply when patients receive, in 
any setting, for any purpose, by any route moderate or deep sedation as well as general, spinal, or 
other major regional anesthesia. Definitions of four levels of sedation and anesthesia include the 
following: 
 
 
1. Minimal Sedation (Anxiolysis) - A drug induced state during which patients respond normally to 
verbal commands.  Although cognitive function and coordination may be impaired, ventilatory and 
cardiovascular functions are unaffected. 
 
2. Moderate Sedation (Conscious Sedation): A drug-induced depression of consciousness during which 
patients respond purposefully to verbal commands, either alone or accompanied by light tactile 
stimulation.  No interventions are required to maintain a patent airway, and spontaneous ventilation 
and cardiovascular function is adequate. The patient maintains his or her protective reflexes and it 
able to communicate verbally. There are minimal variations in the vital signs. 
 
3. Deep Sedation/Analgesia: A drug-induced depression of consciousness during which patients cannot 
be easily aroused but respond purposefully following repeated or painful stimulation. The ability to 
maintain an airway and spontaneous respiration may be inadequate.  Cardiovascular function is 
usually maintained. 
 
4. Anesthesia-A drug induced loss of consciousness during which patients are not arousable, even by 
painful stimulation.  The ability to independently maintain ventilatory function is often impaired.  NNA-089 
Page 3 of 5 
Patients require assistance in maintaining a patent airway.  Cardiovascular function may be 
impaired. 
 
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS: (prior to sedation being administered) 
1. The Physician is responsible for the completion of pre-procedure History and Physical and 
obtaining informed consent for the planned procedure prior to the administration of sedation and 
initiation of the procedure. 
2. Physician evaluates and documents in electronic medical record or the Moderate/Deep Sedation 
Progress Record form # NS-305 the appropriateness for the level of sedation and anesthesia planned 
and discusses and documents the risks, benefits and alternatives with patient. 
 
PROCEDURE GUIDELINES: 
1. A pre-procedure checklist is completed and documented in the electronic medical record.  During 
computer down time the form Pre-op/Procedure Checklist & Final Pause Verification (NS-27A&B) 
must be used.  The pre-procedure verification occurs with the patient involved, awake and aware, if 
possible.  Ensure the physician marks the surgical site, when applicable.  
2.  Time-Out by the entire team participating in the procedure must be performed utilizing active 
communication techniques and documenting in accordance with Universal Protocol Policy 
(OrgClin/040). 
3. The registered nurse assigned to sedate and/or monitor the patient shall have no other 
responsibilities that would leave the patient unattended or compromise continuous monitoring. 
4. Intravenous access is required prior to the administration of moderate sedation or as deemed 
appropriate by the authorized prescriber. 
5. Oxygen should be administered if a patient's O2 saturation drops lower than 92%. 
6. Capnography shall be utilized to monitor end tidal carbon dioxide level. 
7. Drapes should be arranged to minimize oxygen build-up beneath the drapes if open supplemental 
oxygen is given and any ignition sources are being used, (i.e., electrosurgery devices, lasers, light 
sources, etc.), as a fire prevention measure. 
8. If electrosurgery may be utilized, the patient shall be assessed for contraindications and grounding 
requirements. 
9. Evaluate and omit open supplemental oxygen for head and neck procedure whenever possible as a 
fire prevention measure. 
 
 
 
Nothing By Mouth Status – Adult and Pediatric  
The following Nothing By Mouth (NPO) restrictions will apply unless documented by the physician that 
the procedure must be done on an emergency basis and NPO status is specifically waived. The final 
decision is at the provider’s discretion who has sedation privileges to overrule the ASA guidelines for 
moderate sedation only, not for general anesthesia. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NNA-089 
Page 4 of 5 
 
NPO Guidelines for General Anesthesia/MAC/Moderate Sedation 
 
 
Ingested Material 
 
Minimum Fasting Period 
Clear liquids 2 hours 
Human milk (Neonates and 
Infants) 4 hours 
Solids/ Light Meal/Infant Formula 6 hours 
More than a Light Meal (Fried, 
Fatty, or Meat)  8 hours 
 
1. These recommendations apply to healthy patients who are undergoing elective procedures.  They 
are not intended for women in labor.  Following the guidelines does not guarantee a complete 
gastric emptying has occurred. 
2. The fasting periods noted above apply to all ages 
 
PATIENT ASSESSMENT: 
1. Each patient receiving sedation will be assessed by the physician and registered nurse before the 
procedure and findings documented in the medical record.   
2. Pre-procedure assessment and documentation includes but is not limited to: 
▪ Cardiac rate and rhythm 
▪ Blood pressure 
▪ Respiratory rate 
▪ End-tidal carbon dioxide by capnography 
▪ Oxygen saturation 
▪ Level of Consciousness 
▪ Nothing By Mouth Status. 
▪ Pain assessment 
▪ Allergies 
▪ Chronic use of opioids/cannabis 
▪ Sleep apnea 
▪ Aldrete Score 
 
EQUIPMENT: 
The following equipment must be available and functional with all alarms on and audible: 
▪ Oxygen flow meter and size-appropriate oxygen mask or nasal cannula 
▪ Suction set-up and yanker 
▪ Capnography 
▪ Pulse oximeter for continuous monitoring 
▪ Blood pressure equipment 
▪ Appropriate crash cart with defibrillator 
▪ EKG monitor 
▪ Appropriately sized ET tubes, laryngoscope and blades 
▪ Oral and nasal airways 
▪ Mask and Ambu bag 
▪ Reversal agents NNA-089 
Page 5 of 5 
 
MONITORING AND DOCUMENTATION: 
1. Each of the following should be assessed as a baseline, monitored during the procedure, and 
documented every 5 minutes or more frequently as required  
by patient condition or administration of medication during the procedure. 
▪ B/P (as indicated for pediatric patient) 
▪ Cardiac rate and rhythm 
▪ Respiratory rate 
▪ Oxygen saturation 
▪ End-tidal carbon dioxide by capnography 
▪ Level of Consciousness 
▪ Cap refill for pediatric patient 
▪ Pain level 
▪ Aldrete Score 
2. Documentation will include but is not limited to the above.  
 
POST – PROCEDURE:     
1. The RN will monitor vital signs and other parameters (capnography not required) at a minimum 
every 15 minutes until vital signs and status return to safe physiological and psychological levels 
according to the Aldrete scoring system, (a score ≥ 8), pre procedure Aldrete score, or until directed 
by physician to discontinue monitoring.  
2. There will be a minimum of 30 minutes of observation by a qualified/competent RN following the 
last dose of sedative and/or narcotic.  The patient may be transferred to a unit with the same level of 
care or a unit with comparable monitoring capabilities during this 30-minute window of time.  
3. If an antagonist (reversal agent) was given, the patient must remain in the hospital for at least 2 
hours after the reversal is given and once the discharge criteria is met.  If a reversal agent is given 
the nurse must submit a safety event utilizing the hospital’s safety event reporting software. 
4. Post-procedure instructions must be given to a responsible designated adult. Criteria for discharge 
home will be determined by unit specific discharge criteria and in accordance with the policy 
Discharge Criteria: Patient Receiving Anesthetic Agents (NPC-123) 
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
Association of Nurse Anesthesiology. 2023. Non-anesthesia provider procedural sedation and 
analgesia: Position statement and policy considerations. 1-13.  
 
Williams, K., 2022. Guidelines in Practice: Moderate sedation and analgesia. AORN Journal. 115.6. 
554-564.   
 
Louisiana State Board of Nursing, Declaratory statement on the role and scope of practice of the 
Registered Nurse in the administration of medications and monitoring of patients during levels of 
sedation. Revised 4/09/2015. 
 
AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practice, 2021. 
 
The Joint Commission Standards Universal Protocol, 2021.  