NNA-051  
Page 1 of 2 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Nursing Administration 
Title: Physician Orders, Implementation of  
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-051 
Supersedes #: 1994; 1997 
Date of Origination: February 1988 Review Date:  July 8, 2024 
Revision Date    March 5, 2019 
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish the standard implementation of physician orders in an efficient manner to facilitate and 
expedite safe patient care. 
 
 
POLICY: 
A. Physician’s orders may be entered directly into the patient’s electronic medical record (EMR) by the 
physician or mid-level provider or indirectly by designated hospital personnel (i.e. Nurse, 
Pharmacist). 
 
B. The use of verbal orders should be kept at a minimum and only used in an emergent situation (such 
as a Code Blue or an emergency).  
 
 
C. Orders written by mid-level providers will be entered as “signature required” to expedite the 
physicians authentication process. 
 
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. Recording Verbal/Telephone (VO/TO) Orders 
a. Verbal/Telephone orders will be received by authorized professionals within their scope of 
practice, and immediately entered into the EMR or reduced to writing (on the physician’s 
order form or other authorized document). Verbal orders should be kept at a minimum and 
only used in emergent situations.  
b. When accepting a verbal/telephone order, the authorized professional who is giving the 
order should supply two patient identifiers.  Reasonable identifiers include patient name 
and date of birth.  
c. A verbal/telephone order will be verified by reading back the order to the prescriber. The 
read back is documented by selecting the “Phone/Read Back” order type in the EMR, or by 
writing “RB” with a written order. 
d. In addition to the information required for a written or physician-entered computer (CPOE) 
order, verbal/telephone orders shall include: 
▪ The orders received. 
▪ Date and time of the orders. 
▪ Name and Credentials of the prescriber. 
▪ Name and Credentials of the person receiving the orders. 
 
2. Authentication (verification) of Verbal/Telephone Orders NNA-051  
Page 2 of 2 
 
a. Orders that are not entered or written by a prescriber shall be subsequently authenticated 
(verified) and countersigned by the prescribing practitioner or other responsible 
practitioner within the time period specified by medical staff rules and regulations and 
state law. The specified time period for authentication is within 10 days.  
b. Signature stamps are prohibited; if an order has a signature stamp the order must be 
clarified. 
 
3. Persons Who May Transmit Verbal/Telephone Orders 
a. Nurses may accept verbal/telephone orders only from a licensed physician, dentist, or other 
authorized mid-level prescriber. 
 
 
4. Stat Orders are to be entered into the EMR or transcribed to the paper chart as soon as the nurse is 
made aware of the order.  
 
5. During each shift, it is the responsibility of the patient’s nurse to  
a. Review the medical record for accuracy of electronic or written orders received. 
6. Verify that transcribed orders are accurately entered into the EMR by verifying with the written 
orders.   
7. Order Clarification   
a. An order clarification must be entered into the EMR by the authorized professional who clarifies 
the order only after speaking with the prescriber.  The correction must never be made to the original 
order. 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
Louisiana State Board of Nursing, Declaratory Statement on Transmission and Acceptance of Verbal 
Orders, Edited:  December 6, 2006. 
 
Our Lady of the Lake RMC, Medical Staff Rules & Regulations.  