NNA-026 
Page 1 of 2 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Nursing Administration 
 
Title: 
 
Nursing Orientation 
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-026 
Supersedes #: 1994 
Date of Origination: November 1987 Review Date: December 9, 2024  
Revision Date: November 6,2023  
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide information related to the purpose and content for general nursing and unit specific 
orientation at Our Lady of the Lake. Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) 
 
POLICY: 
All nursing employees overseeing or working in direct patient care areas will attend Nursing and Unit 
Specific Orientation. For outside sources of nursing personnel-see Policy NNA-067 
 
PROCEDURES:  
1. Human Resources facilitates proof of American Heart Association life support certification (Policy 
OC058) prior to first day of employment. 
 
2. Human Resources facilitates General Orientation for all new hires. 
 
3. The Clinical Education Center (CEC) conducts Multidisciplinary Orientation (MDO) for all new 
clinical hires. The nursing professional development practitioners at Lake Physician Group (LPG) 
conduct MDO for new LPG clinical employees. 
 
4. The CEC conducts Nursing Orientation. Attendance  is mandatory, which includes, but it is not 
limited to: 
a. Multidisciplinary Orientation 
b. Nursing Orientation 
1. Electronic Medical Record, Medication Dispensing System, Medication Scanning 
and Intravenous Infusion Device Introduction 
2. General Nursing Care Practice Standards, including skills demonstration.  
3. Computer Based Learning (CBL) Modules 
4. Capillary blood glucose monitoring and skills demonstration. 
 
5. Unit specific orientation is overseen by the unit leader and preceptor with support provided by a 
nursing professional development practitioner including: 
a. Competency validation and completion 
b. Unit specialty training 
c. Additional classes as required by unit specifications. 
d. Completion of all CBLs 
 
6. Nursing employees that transfer to another unit, or add a job 2 status or transfer from another 
FMOL facility are required to: NNA-026 
Page 2 of 2 
 
a. Have all previously assigned CBLs completed prior to transfer.  
b. Complete all OLOLRMC nursing and unit specific orientation that has not been previously 
documented in the employee education record.  
 
7. Nursing employees resuming employment after an absence of 6 months or more must attend and 
complete all general, nursing, and unit specific orientation. 
 
8. Nursing employees resuming employment will be required to complete any undocumented required 
training delivered during their absence. 
 
9. Nursing orientation may be divided into more than one week for part-time or prn employees. 
a. Nursing recruiters will notify the CEC prior to the start of orientation if an employee is 
splitting orientation time. 
b. Employees that are given permission to split orientation, must attend nursing orientation in 
sequential order, since materials build upon the previous day’s information. 
 
10. Nursing orientation must be completed prior to being assigned patients, with a nurse preceptor, on 
hired unit. 