NNA-091 
Page 1 of 3 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Nursing Administration 
Title: Float Pool Staff  
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-091 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2002 Review Date: September 1, 2024 
Revision Date:  April 11, 2018 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To outline the guidelines for the Float Pool program.  
 
POLICY:  
The Float Pool program of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) allows for 
supplemental staffing to assist in meeting patient care needs. Nurses in the float pool shall adhere to the 
requirements as outlined in this policy. 
 
A. Pre-Requisites for Employment 
1. Current Louisiana license or temporary nursing work permit. 
2. Completion of all Human Resources pre-employment pre-requisites and OLOL hiring practices.  
3. A minimum of two years and no less than 4000 hours of acute-care nursing experience. 
4. Proof of current American Heart Association BLS certification. The certification must be 
current for a minimum of 60 days from the date of hire. Only American Heart Association 
(AHA) cards and the Military Training Network (MTN) cards are accepted.  
 
B. Required within six months of employment 
Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) and/or Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS) must be 
obtained within six months of hire or as mandated by the hiring unit/department. First time 
participants in ACLS must have successfully completed the OLOL Basic EKG course or 
successfully passed the EKG challenge exam. 
 
C. Holiday Requirements: Full Time, and Part Time Float Pool team members are required to work one 
(1) major holiday and (2) minor holidays on their hired/regularly worked shift (day/night) based on 
staffing needs. Major and minor holiday shifts will only be scheduled as twelve (12) hour shifts.  
 
Major and minor holidays are defined as follows: Major Holidays – 
Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year’s (must choose 1) 
i. Minor Holidays will be broken up into two categories (Minor Holiday 1 and 
Minor Holiday 2). Each full time, part time and PRN float pool team member 
must work one (1) of the listed days from each category, for a total of two (2) 
minor holidays: 
   Minor Holiday 1 – July 4th, Labor Day, and Good Friday (must choose 1) 
   Minor Holiday 2 – Christmas Eve, New Year’s Eve (must choose 1) 
           
 NNA-091 
Page 2 of 3 
 
Vacation request or scheduled PTO will not be allowed during the week of a major holiday 
(Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Years). 
Holiday schedules are subject to change as directed by the Director of Nursing or the House 
Manager/Supervisor in order to maintain safe and adequate staffing levels at all times to ensure quality 
patient care.  
 
D. Performance Evaluations/Salary Adjustments   
1. The Float Pool salary consists of a set, hourly rate specific to the float pool plus any shift, 
weekend and holiday differentials in congruence with direct care RNs in other patient care 
areas. 
2. Annual performance evaluations will be performed by the Director of Nursing or House 
Manager/Supervisor in alignment with the RN job description.  
3. Merit increases may apply to the Float Pool nurse’s Job 2, if applicable, but will not be reflected 
in the set, hourly float pool rate.  
Increases to the Float Pool hourly rate may be based on a market analysis performed by Human 
Resources and/or by the approval of the Vice President, Patient Care Services. 
 
E. Orientation and Competencies 
1. Orientation will be congruent with hospital requirements and will be arranged through Patient 
Care Services. Refer to policy “Employee Competence Validation (OrgOps/HR/E/008).  
2. Orientation may include rotations with preceptors through clinical areas during which unit 
specific competencies will be evaluated.  
3. Critical Care or specialty areas may be supplemented by Float Pool nurses who have completed 
the required skills and competencies.  
 
F. Scheduling and Work Assignments 
1. Scheduling and work assignments are coordinated by Patient Care Services only. Float Pool 
nurses may self-schedule via the current scheduling program, however schedules may be 
changed at the discretion of the Director of Nursing or House Manager/Supervisor to ensure 
Float Pool coverage on all shifts. Scheduling periods are six (6) week increments.  
a. Weekend shifts are defined as occurring on Friday, Saturday or Sunday.  
b. Only twelve (12) hour shifts are allowed to be scheduled on the required weekend 
shift.  
i. Full time float pool team members are required to work six (6) weekend shifts 
in a schedule period. 
ii. Part time float pool team members are required to work three (3) weekend 
shifts in a schedule period.  
c. PRN float pool team members are required to work one (1) weekend shift in a 
schedule period.  
2. Work assignments of Float Pool personnel will be based on patient care needs, on a daily 
basis, and in congruence with the competence of the nurse.  
3. Float pool team members may not sign up with individual nursing units, they must sign up 
only through Patient Care Services.  
 
 
G. Attendance  
1. Attendance requirements are consistent with organizational and patient care services policies.  NNA-091 
Page 3 of 3 
 
2. Float Pool staff will report illness or expected absence at least 3 hours before the scheduled 
reporting time to Patient Care Services. Employees not giving a 3 hour notice will be considered 
unexcused. 
3. Frequent absenteeism and/or tardiness is handled in accordance with the system wide 
attendance policy (HR.06.008).  
 
H. Supervision of Float Pool staff 
1. The Director of Nursing for Patient Care Services is responsible for the Float Pool. 
2. Patient Care Services personnel may assist with payroll and scheduling. 
3. House Managers / Supervisors serve as supervisors, mentors and complete scheduling for the 
float pool team members.  
 
References: 
Life Support Credentialing Guidelines, policy #OCO58 