NNA-044 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Nursing Administration 
Title: Scheduling of Personnel 
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-044 
Supersedes #: 1990; 1995 
Date of Origination: November, 1987 Review Date:    November 4, 2024 
Revision Date:   May 7, 2021 
 
POLICY:  
Defined clinical coverage by staff provides for patient care, contributes to employee satisfaction 
and allocates staff effectively.  Schedules reflect the categories and numbers of employees as 
defined in the unit's staffing matrix. 
 
PROCEDURES:   
1. The Master Staffing Matrices are reviewed and revised annually based on historical data, 
current nursing practices and skill mix of nursing personnel and support staff. 
2. The work schedule is based on the Master Staffing Matrix of each nursing unit. 
3. A Charge Nurse is scheduled for each shift by the Director of Nursing. 
4. The Director of Nursing approves and is responsible for the scheduling of nursing personnel 
and support staff. Schedule requests are submitted through the electronic scheduling software 
or in writing to the Director of Nursing or their designee.   
5. Generally, the scheduling of overtime is discouraged; however, this is a consideration for 
providing clinical coverage for patient care as the needs of the unit and availability of other 
resources dictate. Overtime should be authorized by Director of Nursing or their designee. 
6. An employee is not permitted to be scheduled more than 16 consecutive hours on duty in a 
twenty-four-hour period and no more than 60 hours scheduled per week. This may vary 
during times of disaster staffing where the disaster activation and recovery teams have been 
implemented. 
7. Changes in the electronic schedule must be requested by the employee and approved by 
Director of Nursing or their designee. 
8. Computerized Staffing Sheets are printed daily and are submitted to Patient Care Services. 
The computerized staffing worksheets are to be consistent with the unit Schedule. The 
Director of Nursing or their designee will validate the accuracy of the staffing sheet.  
9. Employees who are sick are required to call in three hours prior to the scheduled shift.  The 
employee is to call the unit and patient care services of their absence. If the employee does 
not give three hours’ notice, the call in will be an occurrence.  
10. Employees who call in on a scheduled weekend shift will be scheduled to make-up the next 
weekend based on the unit need and discretion of Director of Nursing. 
11. Schedules are retained in an electronic format or the electronic staffing system for the 
calendar year for six years. 
 NNA-044 
Page 2 of 2 
 
SUPPORTING POLICIES: 
▪ Attendance HR.06.002Family and Medical Leave of Absence (OrgOps/HR/P/007). 
 
 
 