NNA-056 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Nursing Administration 
Title: Nursing: Professional Code of Ethics 
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-056 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: May 1998 Review Date:    September 25, 2023 
Revision Date: October 3, 2024 
 
PURPOSE 
To state the ethical standards that are the guide for carrying out nursing responsibilities in a manner 
consistent with quality in nursing care and the ethical obligations of the profession. 
 
POLICY: 
Nurses at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Our Lady of the Lake Ascension, Our Lady of 
the Lake Children’s Hospital, Our Lady of the Lake Livingston, and Our Lady of the Lake North Baton 
Rouge shall adhere to the Code of Ethics for Nurses developed by the American Nurses Association 
(2023). 
 
Code of Ethics for Nurses   
1. The nurse practices with compassion and respect for the inherent dignity, worth, and unique attributes 
of every person. 
 
2. The nurse’s primary commitment is to the patient, whether an individual, family, group, community, 
or population. 
 
3. The nurse promotes, advocates for, and protects the rights, health, and safety, of the patient. 
 
4. The nurse has authority, accountability, and responsibility for nursing practice; makes decisions; and 
takes action consistent with the obligation to promote health and to provide optimal care. 
 
5. The nurse owes the same duties to self as to others, including the responsibility to promote health and 
safety, preserve wholeness of character and integrity, maintain competence, and continue personal 
and professional growth.  
 
6. The nurse, through individual and collective effort, establishes, maintains, and improves the ethical 
environment of the work setting and conditions of employment that are conducive to safe, quality 
health care. 
 
7. The nurse, in all roles and settings, advances the profession through research and scholarly inquiry, 
professional standards development, and the generation of both nursing and health policy.  
 
8. The nurse collaborates with other health professionals and the public to protect human rights, promote 
health diplomacy, and reduce health disparities. 
 NNA-056 
Page 2 of 2 
9. The profession of nursing, collectively through its professional organizations, must articulate nursing 
values, maintain the integrity of the profession, and integrate principles of social justice into nursing 
and health policy.  
 
 
References: 
 
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2023). Code of ethics for nurses with interpretive statements. 
Silver Spring, MD. Retrieved from:  
https://www.nursingworld.org/practice-policy/nursing-excellence/ethics/code-of-ethics-for-nurses/ 
 
 
 