NNA-017 
Page 1 of 3 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Administration 
Title: Dress Code Policy Reference #: NNA-017 
Supersedes #: 1994; 1997; 
Date of Origination: January 1987 Last Review Date:  February 26, 2024 
Last Revision Date:  February 26, 2024 
 
 
KEYWORDS (Hold Ctrl & click on the link to go directly to that section of the policy) 
 
Scrubs/Uniforms, Footwear, Jewelry, Personal Appearance & Hygiene, Nails & Artificial Nails 
 
 
PURPOSE:    
To define standards of attire that are reflective of and promote professionalism in accordance of Our 
Lady of the Lake Service Excellence Standards for Patient Care Services employees. 
 
 
POLICY: 
In addition to the Patient Care Services dress code guidelines listed below, employees must also adhere 
to the following policies: 
1. “Dress & Personal Appearance” – HR.06.004 
2. “Fingernails, Artificial & Natural” – IC2005a 
3. “Dress Code” – NPD-006 (Children’s Hospital) 
4. “Attire, Surgical” – SOS002 (Perioperative Services) 
 
 
DRESS CODE GUIDELINES / STANDARDS 
1. All personnel are required to wear name badges. 
2. Badges must be clearly visible on the upper body. 
3. Employees are expected to maintain good personal hygiene and to dress in neat, clean, and 
appropriately fitted clothing while on the job.  Clothing must be in good repair i.e., no rips, wrinkles, 
stains or excessive fading. 
4. Holiday scrubs, tops and/or jackets may be worn two weeks prior to the holiday.  
5. Organization approved T-shirts, with OLOL or Tau logo, can be worn. 
 
 
Scrubs / Uniforms 
1. Clinical staff may wear a white or black turtleneck or white or black tee shirt under primary shirt or 
scrub top.  
2. Registered Nurses, Licensed Practical Nurses, and Nursing Support Services nurses may wear any 
combination of white and galaxy blue scrubs.   
3. Nurses may wear a white or galaxy blue scrub jacket or white lab coat.  A pullover, non-hooded NNA-017 
Page 2 of 3 
 
sweatshirt with OLOL logo may be worn over the uniform.  No other jackets, sweaters, or coats may 
be worn.  
4. Clinical Service Representative (CSR): Approved black dress slacks or skirt, galaxy blue button 
down or polo-style shirt (long or short sleeves), and professional black shoes should be worn at all 
times. A black blazer, vest, or lab jacket may be worn. CSR’s may wear OLOL approved light blue 
sweater set with approved black dress slacks or skirt and professional black shoes. Clothing is not 
required to have OLOL logo.  
5. Uniform colors for other job classes listed below:  
a. Nursing Assistants (CNA): teal uniforms (pants or skirt) scrub tops and jacket. 
b. Nurse Technicians (Tech.): navy tops and white pants or skirt, white lab coat 
c. ECU Technicians (Tech.): solid burgundy scrubs. 
d. Male Nursing Assistant/Attendant: gray scrub top with black pants, black shoes, and black 
socks. 
e. Mental Health Technicians: solid navy blue scrubs. 
 
Footwear 
1. Shoes designed to be worn in clinical areas are to be clean, polished, in good repair, and compliment 
the uniform.  
2. High-tops are not acceptable unless required by department policy for the purpose of support and 
safety. Any high-tops when worn must be fully laced. 
3. Shoelaces will be tied and of the same color as shoes.  
4. No open toed shoes are acceptable.   
5. Clogs are acceptable if they do not interfere with safe or effective job performance and the color 
compliments the uniform, unless indicated otherwise (above). 
6. Socks or hose must be worn with uniforms. 
 
Jewelry 
1. Excessive jewelry is not permitted, including dangling earrings or necklaces, heavy chains, noisy 
bracelets, large rings, or keys on ropes or chains. A single chain necklace, with or without a pendant, 
may be worn inside the neckline of a shirt or uniform. 
2. Earrings are limited to one stud or small hoop per ear, worn on the ear lobe. 
3. Rings are limited to one ring per hand, but a wedding ring and engagement ring on the same finger 
are acceptable. 
4. Items placed on teeth that are not required for dental or medical reasons are prohibited. 
5. Body piercing (other than ear piercing) should be covered at all times; tongue and facial piercing are 
prohibited. 
 
Personal Appearance / Hygiene 
1. Makeup should be moderate in amount and tones. 
2. Hair should be collar-length or may be pulled back or up so as not to interfere with patient care. 
3. Ponytails and braids are acceptable if they are neatly tied at the nape of the neck at all times. 
4. Extremes in style or coloring of hair are not acceptable; only hair colors that are natural in humans NNA-017 
Page 3 of 3 
 
may be worn. 
5. Hairstyles should be conservative. Hairstyles that are distracting and interfere with patient care or do 
not present the OLOL service image are not acceptable. 
6. Clean and neatly trimmed beards, mustaches, goatees, and sideburns are acceptable. 
7. Natural fingernails are to be kept clean, smooth, well-manicured and natural tips should be no longer 
than ¼ inch. 
8. Artificial nails may not be worn by any personnel in patient care areas. 
9. Nail polish of one moderate color is permitted but must be removed if chipped or cracked.  Multi-
colored nails, nail ornamentation, or extremes in color (i.e., blue, black, green, purple, yellow, gold) 
are not acceptable. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 