 NNA-088 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Nursing Administration 
Title: PEC/CEC 
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-088 
Supersedes #: B/N/A018 Mental 
Date of Origination: July, 1997 Review Date:  September 25, 2023 
Revision Date: October 7, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for appropriate placement and care of inpatients on a Physician’s Emergency 
Certificate (PEC)/Coroner’s Emergency Certificate (CEC). 
 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
1. Physician Emergency Certificate/Coroner Emergency Certificate (PEC/CEC):  
▪ If an individual is dangerous to self or others or is so gravely disabled mentally that he or she 
is unable to care for his/her basic physical needs, an individual may be admitted involuntarily 
to a treatment facility, for a period up to fifteen (15) days for mental illness and up to twenty-
eight (28) days for substance abuse. 
 
2. Dangerous to Self/Others:  
▪ Behavior or significant threats supporting a reasonable expectation of a substantial risk of 
physical harm to another person or self is imminent. 
 
3. Gravely Disabled:  
▪ Condition of a person who is unable to provide for basic physical needs such as food, 
clothing, shelter, medical care and inability to survive safely in freedom or protect self from 
serious harm. 
 
POLICY: 
A. Patients in which a PEC/CEC is executed should be maintained in the unit most appropriate for 
clinical needs. 
 
B. Notification to the Coroner 
 
1. Non-Mental and Behavioral inpatient units:  
a. RN is to verify that the original PEC and/or CEC are present on the chart when the patient 
arrives from the emergency department or another unit.  
a. Immediately notify the House Manager of all PEC’s when the nurse becomes aware of the       
PEC. 
 b. Notify COPE at 765-8900 or 765-1050 of all PEC’s as soon as the nurse is aware of the PEC 
 c. Fax completed PEC form to COPE at 765-6354  
 
2.   Mental and Behavioral Health Units (MBH):  NNA-088 
Page 2 of 3 
a. MBH units will notify COPE each morning of PECs present on the unit that will need a CEC. 
 
b. COPE notifies the Coroner’s office of all PECs admitted to MBH units. 
 
3. COPE notifies the Coroner’s office of all PEC’s within the hospital daily. 
  
C. Coroner Emergency Certificate (CEC) may be initiated first; the physician must validate the CEC 
within 72 hours by completing a PEC.  
 
D. Both documents must be in place within 72 hours of the first document being signed to hold patient 
for the 15 days, the PEC and CEC must be in place within 72 hours. The original PEC/CEC 
document must remain on the patient’s medical record and accompany the patient whenever 
transferred to another unit or facility. 
 
 
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. For a PEC/CEC to be initiated a patient must be evaluated with an actual examination by the 
physician or coroner prior to initiating an involuntary commitment. This evaluation may have been 
done within 72 hours prior to initiation (La.R.S. 28:52).   
 
2. The psychiatrist is consulted about appropriate psychiatric treatment of the patient and when 
medically stable, will recommend disposition.  
 
3. Transfer of a patient to a Mental and Behavioral Health Unit requires acceptance by a psychiatrist. 
 
4. A psychiatrist must be the attending physician on all Mental and Behavioral Health Units.  
 
5. The medical physician becomes the consulting physician on Mental and Behavioral Health Units for 
medical needs. 
 
6. The Crisis Oriented Psychiatric Evaluation Team (COPE) should be contacted to complete 
admission paperwork. 
 
7. When a patient on a PEC/CEC is admitted to a non-Mental and Behavioral Health Unit, the 
following should be done: 
a. The nurse caring for the patient should contact his/her immediate supervisor and the House 
Manager to notify them of the PEC and/or CEC.  
b. A consult order should be placed for the psychiatry consult team “Inpatient Consult to 
Psychiatry” 
c. When the patient is medically stable (would otherwise be discharged home), and psychiatry 
has determined the patient needs inpatient psychiatric care, the RN shall notify the COPE 
Team (225-765-8900 or 225-765-1050) that the patient is medically cleared for placement. 
The COPE Team will seek appropriate placement for the patient.  
  NNA-088 
Page 3 of 3 
8. When it is determined that a patient on a PEC/CEC will be cared for on a non-Mental and 
Behavioral Health Unit the following should be done: 
a. The House Manager and/or Patient Care Services should be consulted for other resources to 
support needs of the patient. 
b.  Refer to the policy for Suicide Prevention and Observation of the High-Risk Behavioral 
Patient in Non-Mental Health/Non-Emergency Department Areas for adult and pediatric 
patients. 
 
9. If the coroner or physician verifying initial commitment within a 72-hour time frame does not agree 
with the commitment, it is immediately null and void. 
10. If the PEC/CEC are close to their 15-day expiration date and the patient requires additional 
psychiatric care, the psychiatric consult team may file for a judicial commitment.  
 
11. When a patient is determined no longer a danger to self or others, a written order and progress note 
by the attending physician stating the PEC/CEC is no longer needed and is discontinued will make 
the PEC/CEC null and void. 
 
12. Discharge of the patient will discontinue the PEC/CEC. 
 
 
 
 
References:  
 
CM.07.001 Mental Health Legal Status 
https://fmolhs.sharepoint.com/sites/TeamLink/Policy/FMOLHS/Operations/Care%20Management/CM.
07.001_Mental%20Health%20Health%20Legal%20Status%20(01.20.2021).pdf 
 
Louisiana R.S. Title 28 Mental Health Law 
 
 