 
NNA-100 
Page 1 of 2 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To delineate the guidelines for virtual observer (in designated nursing units) services at Our Lady 
of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) to promote a safe environment for patients. 
 
DEFINITION: 
Virtual observer services include the use of a closed circuit, secure video surveillance camera 
that is centrally monitored at the nurse’s station in designated areas in the facility.  
 
Virtual observer cameras recording capability is disabled. OLOLRMC will not record any 
patient activity using this camera.   
 
  
POLICY: 
Virtual observer services are the primary responsibility of the clinical staff. The registered nurse 
will assess the need as appropriate to maintain a safe patient environment. Nursing assessment 
determines that the patient is at an increased risk for danger of injury due to: 
o recent neurological pathology or 
o significant mental or physical impairment 
 
• Virtual observer services will always be taken into consideration with each patient 
assessment and can be used in lieu of an in-person observer as deemed by defined criteria 
or may be used in conjunction with family provided observer services.  
• The patient and or the caregiver/family will be notified and educated whenever the virtual 
observer is in use.   
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Nursing Administration 
Title: Use of Hospital Provided Virtual Observer 
Services  
Policy 
Reference #: NNA-100 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination:  February 20, 2018 Review Date:   April 24,2023 
Revision Date: 6/10/2024 NNA-100 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
PROCEDURES  
A. Duties of a virtual observer: 
1. Activate the virtual bed/chair rails using the virtual observer services. 
2. Provide observation of patients based on the identified patient safety need via a 
centralized video monitor.  
3. Notify nursing staff of any patient safety concerns or safety alert signal.  
4. Privacy is provided for patients during sensitive procedures or processes by activating 
the privacy screen using virtual observer centralized monitoring system. 
 
 
• Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) clearly supports video 
monitoring of patients for their safety and does not require patient consent if the 
video is not being recorded 
• CMS also makes specific requirements of staff to protect the privacy rights of 
patients by ensuring the video is not visible to anyone not involved in the care of the 
patient or insuring his/her safety 
 