NOICC001 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Nursing Section: Outpatient Infusion 
Centers - Clinical 
Title: 
Peripheral Saline lock usage, care, and 
maintenance for Outpatient Infusion 
Centers Only 
Policy Reference #: NOICC001 
Supersedes #:   
Date of Origination: August 11, 2014 Last Review Date:   December 11, 
2023 
Last Revision Date: September 13, 2021 
 
PURPOSE: 
To outline the process/procedure for safe maintenance and use of an existing peripheral IV for daily IV 
therapy in the outpatient setting. 
POLICY:  
With a physician order, patients may be discharged with peripheral IV access when returning for 
multiple days of treatment. 
PROCEDURE 
1. Preparation of the saline lock for discharge 
• Nurse must obtain a physician order to discharge a patient with a saline lock. 
• Upon discharge, IV site must be without redness, swelling, drainage or pain. 
• Prior to discharge, IV will be flushed as per policy 
• IV will have an extension tubing and male adaptor in place 
• IV site and extension tubing will be neatly and firmly secured with gauze wrap. 
2. Assessment of IV site for subsequent infusion 
• Upon observation, IV site must be free of redness, edema or drainage. Patient must deny 
discomfort. 
• Site must have a blood return. 
• Prior to instilling medication, IV must flush without resistance, and primary fluids must 
flow freely to gravity. 
3. Patient education 
• Instruct patient not to unwrap or manipulate the dressing. 
• Instruct patient not to get the dressing wet.  May wrap in plastic wrap for bathing or 
showering. 
• Instruct patient to inform nurse if there is any discomfort when IV is flushed, or if the IV 
is causing general discomfort. 
4. IV site must be changed every 96 hours.   
5. Whether or not an IV has been in place for 96 hours, it must be removed prior to the weekend. NOICC001 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
References: 
Access Device Guidelines:  Recommendation for Nursing Practice and Education 
Chemotherapy/Handling/Administration/and disposal. OLOL Policy NMO-001 
IV Therapy, Adult Peripheral-NIV 024 
 
 
Refer to Facility Online Skills Reference 