NOP-038 
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Medication 
Title: Herbal or Natural Products 
Policy 
Reference #: NOP-038 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: April 18, 2003 Review Date:    October 14, 2024 
Revision Date: August 9, 2021 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
It is the practice of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) Inpatient Pharmacy 
not to dispense herbal and other natural products to any OLOLRMC patient.  The purpose of this policy 
is to allow OLOLRMC Inpatient Pharmacists to discontinue any order for herbal and/or natural products 
and notify the ordering prescriber upon the discontinuation of such orders. . 
 
POLICY: 
 
A. Herbs and other natural products are not placed on the OLOLRMC drug formulary unless 
specifically approved by the Pharmacy & Therapeutics Committee (P&T) 
B. Prescribers should not continue home therapy nor initiate new therapy with the aforementioned 
products while the patient is in the hospital.   
Vitamins and Minerals, and any practitioner order pertaining to Vitamins and Minerals, are 
excluded from this policy.  
PROCEDURES: 
 
1. Even though herbal and/or natural products will not be continued in the hospital, the patient should 
be questioned regarding herbal and natural product usage upon initial admission screening and/or 
assessment during the medication history portion of the initial assessment. 
 
2. If these products are ordered, they will be discontinued, and the prescriber will be notified.  
Currently, the following herbal and/or natural products are approved for use and may be dispensed 
and administered within OLOLRMC: 
 
a. Co-Enzyme Q10 (Ubiquinone)  
b. Cranberry  
c. Melatonin 
 
3. A Pharmacist will review and perform order entry or verification, as well as dispense any P&T 
approved formulary herbal and/or natural product. The order entry or verification will be noted 
within the Hospital Electronic Medical Record (EMR). . 
 
References:  
 
https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/providers/digest 