NOP-016 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Medication 
Title: Medication Labeling for Parenteral 
Administration 
Policy 
Reference #: NOP-016 
Supersedes #: 8/99 
Date of Origination: August, 1997 Review Date:  June 6, 2024 
Revision Date: June 6, 2024 
 
DEFINITION: 
Parenteral – medication administered outside of the gastrointestinal tract.  This includes but is not 
limited to, IV infusion, IV Push, Intramuscular and subcutaneous injections.  
 
Immediate Use - An immediate use medication is one that an authorized staff member prepares or 
obtains, takes directly to a patient, and administers immediately 
 
 
POLICY: 
 
1. Parenteral, doses dispensed from the pharmacy department:  
a. All labels for parenteral doses dispensed from the pharmacy shall contain the following 
information: Patient's name and hospital number; patient's location, the date and time to be 
administered, the base fluid and volume, the names and amounts or concentrations of all  
ingredients, , the route of administration, the rate of administration , special instructions 
(where applicable) the initials of the preparer; and the expiration date of the preparation 
(which must include the day, month, and year), storage information or special handling 
instructions (where applicable) 
 
2. Parenteral doses dispensed from an automated dispensing device: 
a. All labels for parenteral doses dispensed from an automated dispensing device shall contain 
the following information: Drug name, and dose, the base fluid and volume (where 
applicable), and the manufacturer name, lot # and expiration date (which must include the 
day, month and year).   
 
3. Parenteral doses prepared outside of the pharmacy for immediate use 
a. All labels for parenteral doses prepared for immediate use shall contain the following 
information: Patient label with name/ DOB, medication name and dose, diluent (solution) 
and volume ((if not apparent from the container), initials of preparer, date and time of 
preparation Expiration date (which includes the day, month year and time of day).  The 
expiration date must never exceed 4 hours 
 
4. Chemotherapy 
a. All parenteral doses of chemotherapy must be prepared, labeled and dispensed by the 
pharmacy department. 
b. Labels for parenteral chemotherapy doses shall contain the following information: Patient's NOP-016 
Page 2 of 2 
name and hospital number; patient's location, the due date and time to be administered, the 
base fluid and volume, total volume,  the drug name, and dose, the route of administration, 
the rate of administration , special instructions (where applicable) the initials of the 
preparer; and the expiration date of the preparation (which must include the day , month, 
and year), storage information or special handling instructions (where applicable) 
c. The words “Caution: Chemotherapy” or “Antineoplastic drug” shall be on the medication 
label, or accessory labels identifying the dose as a chemotherapy agent shall be utilized 
shall be applied as appropriate.  
 
REFERENCES:  
The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards; 2024 
The Joint Commission National Patient Safety Goals; 2024 
 
 
 
 