 NOP-033 
Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Medication 
Title: Automated Dispensing Cabinets (ADC) 
Policy 
Reference #: NOP-033 
Supersedes #: 5/02 
Date of Origination: July 1997 Review Date:  March 13, 2023 
Revision Date: October 14, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
The Automated Dispensing Cabinets  (ADC) will provide a secure limited access storage  area for 
medications, automate the documentation of medication dispensing and to  provide a tracking system for 
inventory control and drug utilization . Accountability for medications , accura cy of  documentation and 
efficiency with patient care will be enhanced by this system. 
 
POLICY: 
A. Nursing, Pharmacy, Respiratory and Anesthesia will use the ADC System point -of-use medication 
system for the primary distribution of medications. 
B. Staff may access the ADC on any unit to which they are assigned, including units to which they float. 
C. Users will use AD (AD) login and passwords, login ID’s and passwords are confidential. Disclosure 
of System Access Codes is grounds for immediate termination of employment. 
D. The Basic user tutorial on the use of the ADC will be taken during orientation with any unit specific 
training necessary to be conducted by the Unit Manager or designee. 
E. BioID (e.g., fingerprint identification) is the only acceptable method of accessing an ADC with 
exceptions granted only by the Senior Director of Pharmacy or Nursing Administration .  During 
BioId downtimes and for exemptions, staff  will use AD login and passwords.  L ogin ID’s  and 
passwords are confidential, and any disclosure of system access c odes is grounds for immediate 
termination of employment. 
  
DEFINITIONS: 
Medication Waste: is defined as all or part of a medication that is not in its original sealed package and not 
administered to a patient. 
Blind Stockout:  is defined as a stockout that occurs where the ADC unit still thinks the pocket should 
have medication, but in fact the pocket is empty.  The system will not notify pharmacy of this situation 
and require intervention by the user to report to pharmacy. 
BioID:  refers to the measurable physical characteristics of the user’s “fingerprint” that can be 
automatically checked by the ADC unit and is used to allow users to logon to the system verifying their 
identity. 
Controlled Substance:  a drug or chemical substance whose possession and use are regulated under the 
Controlled Substances Act designated as Schedules I through V depending on the potential for abuse.  
Drugs may receive a more stringent designation by State Law or  the hospital may choose to designate a 
drug as a controlled substance. 
 
Critical Override:  is defined as a setting on the ADC units all medications are available via override.  This 
is turned on only in the event of a downtime. 
  NOP-033 
Page 2 of 5 
Profile Driven ADC:  an automated dispensing cabinet that is linked to the electronic medical record.  
These devices require the patient orders to be verified before medications are removed with the exception 
of those medications that are on the hospital approved override list.    
 
PROCEDURES/GUIDELINES: 
 
System Access Codes 
1. Once employees have started their initial orientation process, FMOLHS IS identifies Pyxis users by 
their job role and add their name to the Pyxis AD folder, this list is then sent to the Pharmacy Rx 
Administrator, by FMOLHS IS.  
2. Pharmacy staff then grant the user access based on their job title and area of work.  The user name and 
password for Pyxis will be the same as the network user ID and password.  If the team member is not 
in the system and was not on the list provided by FMOLHS IS, the team member  should contact 
FMOLHS IS Help Desk. 
3. Clinical students, upon IS receiving documentation from instructors , will  follow same process as 
above. 
4. Individuals may have different levels of access assigned to them  based on the role in the organization 
and scope of practice .  This will be determined by  the Pharmacy Department in conjunction with the 
Medication Use Committee.  
 
BioID 
1. Once the user has successfully logged in the first time, the system will ask them to establish their 
BioID.  A user’s password can only be used in the following situations: 
a) The BioID reader on the device fails necessitating pharmacy to convert device to password. 
b) The user has documentation verified by pharmacy  director that none of the user ’s fingers can 
be read by the BioID reader  
2. In the event that the BioID fails, the nurse manager or charge nurse shall contact the pharmacy 
supervisor to set the device to password  and if users do not remember their password,  they should call 
FMOLHS IT to have their AD password reset. 
 
Termination/Resignation of Employees 
Upon termination and removal of user’s AD account, user will no longer have Pyxis access.  This happens 
automatically upon removal of user AD account by provisioning. 
 
Stocking of the ADC (Replenishment) 
1. The Pharmacy Department will be responsible for maintaining adequate inventory of all medications 
in ADC.  However, the proper removal & returns of medication is essential to the maintenance of 
inventory.   
2. Users will be required to verify controlled substance inventory with each medication removal and non-
controlled substance inventory when the ADC count indicated medication is at or below PAR level. 
3. Inventory levels will be checked daily via the medication c arousel software and  a picklist will be 
generated.  A list of medications will be dispensed by the carousel, checked by a pharmacist and 
delivered to the unit ADCs. 
4. If a medication supply is depleted, a stock out label is generated immediately by  the carousel and the 
medication is picked.  After the pharmacist checks the stockout, it should be delivered as soon as 
possible so that the ADC is restocked. 
5. In the event the ADC runs out of a medication, the Pharmacy Department will supply the needed 
medication by restocking the ADC or by dispensing a patient specific dose in the main pharmacy that 
is generated through the EPIC Pharmacy Application. 
6. If the hospital computer system is down, staff will follow computer downtime policies and procedures. 
  NOP-033 
Page 3 of 5 
Non-Stocked Medications 
1. Medications (which are not controlled substances) that are not stocked in the ADC can be obtained by 
requesting that the medication be added to the ADC. 
2. Medications that are not routinely stocked in the ADC will be supplied to the patient care unit by the 
Pharmacy fill process.    
3. Any one-time doses of controlled substance not stocked in the ADC can be obtained from the 
Pharmacy via the C-II safe.  
a. The authorized person obtaining the medication shall sign the controlled drug receipt as 
provided by the C-II safe system.  
b. Administration of the medication shall be recorded in the patient's medical record.  
c. All wastage of this controlled medication dose shall be witnessed by an authorized person and 
recorded in ADC. 
 
Stock and/or Inventory Level Changes 
Additions, deletions, and/or any changes to the ADC stock levels can be made by the Pharmacy 
Department in conjunction with the Nurse Manager. 
 
Smart Remote Managers 
On units that have medications stored in a refrigerator with a Pyxis Remote Manager, it will be the 
responsibility of the Pharmacy Department to monitor the temperature and act on any temperature 
deviations. 
 
Patient Information 
1. The patient’s name and medical record number should appear on the ADC census list.  This 
information is obtained via the hospital’s Admission, Discharge, and Transfer interface with the Pyxis 
ES Server. 
2. If patients do not appear on the ADC census list, the nurse/charge nurse should call the FMOLHS IT 
help desk to have the ADC Interface checked. 
3. Until the interface is re -established, the nurses will need to manually add patients to the ADC Census 
list to obtain medications. 
 
Returning Medications 
1. Any medication removed from the ADC that is in its original intact package and not administered to 
the patient will be returned to the original pocket  and/or original machine it was removed from .  In 
some circumstances, when single dispense drawers are used on a unit (mini drawers) or a medication 
is returned to a device from which it was not originally removed, the device will require the user to 
return the medication to the return bin.  Pharmacy will routinely empty the return bin to ensure that the 
medication was returned to the bin. 
2. Multiple medications may be returned during one transaction  by selecting multiple medications for 
return.   
3. Two nurses are required to return a controlled substance so as to document a witness for the return. 
4. Operating Room - unused controlled substance vials  
a. All unused controlled substance vials obtained from the ADC must be returned to the ADC 
by the Anesthesiologist/CRNA.  
b. Unused controlled substance  vials are not to be left in Surgery Rooms or in Anesthesia 
Trays. 
 
Wasting Medications 
1. If all or part of a medication originally taken from the ADC has been wasted it must be documented at 
the ADC by using the “Waste Med ” option.  Two licensed personnel are required while wasting a 
controlled substance so as to document a witness for the wasted medication.  NOP-033 
Page 4 of 5 
2. The wasted medication must be documented at the time the medication is wasted. 
3. Under no circumstances will the unused medication be stored for future administrations. 
4. The medication wasted shall not be left in the original container and shall be wasted in a manner so 
that it cannot be retrieved. 
a. Example 1 – a morphine 5 mg vial is used to draw up a 2 mg dose to be administered to 
the patient.  The remaining medication must be removed from the vial and discarded  in 
controlled substance medication disposal container in the presence of a witness.   
b. Example 2 – Fentanyl patches must be removed from patient prior to placing a new patch.  
The old patch must be folded together and discarded in the controlled substance medication 
disposal container. 
5. When a controlled substance is received from the main pharmacy and the full dose is not administered 
to the patient , a record of this waste must still be  recorded in the ADC  and witnessed by a second 
licensed practitioner per pharmacy policy.  
6. Non-controlled medications do not have to be recorded when wasted. 
 
Undocumented Waste 
When controlled substances are removed from Profile Driven ADCs, the ADC software matches the dose 
ordered against the dose removed.  If the dose removed exceeds the ordered dose and the user fails to 
waste the excess drug upon removal, the system tracks that there is undocumented waste that must be 
reconciled.  It is the user’s responsibility to ensure that all waste is documented in the system and 
compliance will be tracked.  Users failing to account for all waste will be subject to disciplinary action. 
 
Override Medication 
1. No nurse shall routinely bypass the profile screen and dispense via override in the ADC.  To do so 
bypasses patient safety checks.   
2. Override access to medications should only occur when immediate access to medications is needed for 
emergent conditions related to pain, patient comfort (nausea, vomiting, etc), or other indications 
requiring immediate treatment.  While this practice is discouraged, the patient’s condition should 
dictate the use of the override function and treatment should not be delayed in the presence of an 
appropriate condition. 
3. If a medication is removed on override prior to a pharmacist review, the nurse must verify the 5 
medication rights and assess the patient for allergies before administration (right patient, right drug, 
right dose, right route, and right time). 
4. The list of medications approved for override will be reviewed annually by the Medication Utilization 
Committee.   
 
Discrepancy Reports 
1. Each time a controlled substance  is removed from the ADC during dispensing a blind count is 
required. If the count does not match the quantity believe d to be correct by the ADC a discrepancy is 
created.  
2. A discrepancy icon will be displayed on the ADC whenever there is an unresolved controlled 
substance discrepancy. (See ADC Discrepancy Procedures below.) 
3. Any discrepancies involving an unscheduled (not a controlled substance) med ication will auto-resolve 
when the correct amount or count is entered. 
4. On the next day cycle, a discrepancy report will print a list of all discrepancies occurring during the 
previous 24 hours.   
5. Pharmacy will review all resolved and unresolved discrepancies for the previous 24 -hour period and 
the nurse manager will be notified of open discrepancies. 
 
ADC Discrepancy Procedures 
1. A discrepancy should be resolved at the time of discovery.  NOP-033 
Page 5 of 5 
2. Any unresolved controlled substance discrepancy shall be reported to the charge nurse and/or charge 
pharmacist.  Any controlled substance discrepancy not discovered at the time of occurrence must be 
resolved before shift change while the nurse discovering the error is still on duty. 
3. Discrepancies must be corrected in the ADC.  
4. All discrepancies must be resolved at the ADC with the resolution line being recorded and witnessed.   
5. Any unresolved discrepancy must be reported to the nurse manager or the house manager and a  
medication safety event report must be completed prior to shift completion.  
6. The nurse manager or the house manager must report all unresolvable discrepancies to the Director of 
Pharmacy.  
7. All un resolvable discrepancies must be reviewed by the Nursing & Pharmacy  and appropriately 
documented. 
8. Personnel who repeatedly cause discrepancies will be re -inserviced and/or have other appropriate 
disciplinary action taken. 
 
Controlled Substance Counts 
A weekly controlled substance inventory of each ADC must be performed each nursing unit in order to 
detect variances in a timely manner. 
 
Individual ADC Downtime Procedures 
Symptom:  ADC hardware failure or catastrophic loss of emergency power. 
1. ADC units are connected to the hospital’s emergency power system. 
2. Keys to allow access to the ADC units in case of emergency will be kept in the key management 
system (Keywatcher) located in the main pharmacy. 
3. In the event of a single ADC failure, the pharmacy supervisor or charge pharmacist will route the 
patient area of the affected device to the nearest ADC to allow the unit’s patients to populate the 
nearby ADC unit.  The patient’s profiles will be available in the nearby station allowing normal 
vending procedures. 
4. If the Pyxis must be unlocked to dispense medications , a Pharmacist will be available at the Pyxis to 
dispense needed doses.  
 
Pyxis ES Server or Intranet Downtime   
1. The ADC units will remain functional but will not communicate with the server.   
2. The ADC units will automatically go on critical override after a defined period of time. 
3. In the event the machines fail to switch over to “critical override”, pharmacy can manually convert 
each station to “critical override” by going to each machine and switching them manually.   
4. An audit should be conducted for the time period of the override to determine any inappropriate 
activity. 
 
EMR Downtime or Interface Delay/Downtime 
1. In the event of an EMR Downtime, Interface Downtime or Interface Delay, the ADC units will remain 
functional.   However, they will no longer receive patient information nor mediation updates.   After a 
defined period of time, the ADCs will switch to “critical override”.   
2. In the event the devices fail to go on “critical override”, pharmacy can place the ADCs on “critical 
override” through the Pyxis ES Server manually.   
3. Once the system is back and operational, the ADCs will automatically switch back to regular 
operation.  However, if the devices were manually put on “critical override”, they will require 
someone to manually place them back in to “profile driven” mode.   
4. An audit should be conducted for the time period of the override to determine any inappropriate 
activity. 