NPC-065 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Patient Care 
Title: Therapeutic Leech Therapy 
Policy 
Reference #: NPC-065 
Supersedes #: 1985 
Date of Origination: July, 1987 Review Date:   July 24, 2023 
Revision Date: August 12, 2024 
 
PURPOSE:  
To establish a process for therapeutic Leech Therapy which is used for restoring venous circulation. 
 
POLICY:  
Leech therapy will be conducted according to the procedures defined below.  
 
EQUIPMENT: 
1. Container of leeches (ordered by house manager from outside vendor) 
2. Container for placing leeches after they have fed.  This container should be labeled with the patient's 
name. To prevent cross contamination, fed leeches must not be placed with unfed leeches. 
3. Disposable bottle of sterile water. 
4. Container with common salt. 
5. Packet of gauze swabs. 
6. Scissors, non-toothed forceps. 
7. Small transparent dressing (optional). 
 
PROCEDURES:  
1. A hospital consent form should be completed for leech therapy. 
2. Verify orders to confirm which area to treat, how many leeches to attach, and how often to apply 
new ones. Anticipate antithrombotic and prophylactic IV antibiotic orders. 
3. Educate the patient on the procedure prior to implementing.  Warn against caffeine and nicotine use 
(vasoconstrictors). 
 
Procedure for applying leeches: 
1. Usually one or two leeches are sufficient to treat an area but a large flap may require 6 or more. 
2. The head (or biting end) of the leech can be recognized by its searching movements, while the tail 
end is used mostly as a sucker for attachment. 
3. Clean patient's skin thoroughly with soap and water to remove ointment, Doppler gel and substances 
with strong odor.  Rinse cleansed areas with plain water. 
4. To prevent leech wandering, form a barrier by one of the following methods: 
a. Cutting a 1 cm hole in the middle of dampened gauze square and locating the hole in 
close contact with the area to be treated. 
b. Placing a transparent dressing on the surrounding skin. 
5. Steer the leech's head to the area to be treated. Attachment generally occurs quickly; however, if the 
leech is reluctant to bite, make a small needle prick on the skin to produce a tiny droplet of blood, or NPC-065 
Page 2 of 3 
try another leech.  Persistent resistance to feeding may be symptomatic of poor arterial supply or an 
unhealthy leech.) 
6. Once the leech is attached, it is likely to remain safely in place until fully distended (approximately 
30 minutes)   
7. The gauze square can be removed and used elsewhere without disturbing the leech; however, it is 
important that the site be checked frequently to ensure that the leech has not moved. 
8. If the blood supply is poor, leeches may detach prematurely and attempt to wander to another site, 
for example to nearby normal skin. Migration can be prevented by simple physical persuasion, or 
precut holes as described in step 5b. 
9. Leeches should simply drop off the skin when satisfied and should not attempt to bite again.  Never 
pull them off the skin. The unit should place the detached leech in a sealed container with the 
patient’s ID label placed on the outside of the container.  The container is brought to the laboratory 
where 70% alcohol will be added. 
10. Documentation should include: each leech application (including the number of leeches applied) and 
the patient’s response in the nurses notes. 
11. The nurse should monitor for the following signs and symptoms of venous congestion. 
a. Skin color ... dusky or bluish. 
b. Capillary return ... Brisker than normal (note areas of fixed coloration). 
c. Pinprick response ... Bleeding should be rapid and dark. 
 
Post-bite care of wounds: 
1. The major therapeutic effect of leech application occurs during the post-bite period, and depends 
greatly on the care given to the bite wounds.  
2. Each bite should be encouraged to bleed by the gentle removal of any locally forming clot at regular 
intervals.   
3. Clinical response of the tissue being treated should be closely observed during this period.   
4. Only small sterile gauze is applied over the site to encourage oozing.  
5. Observe the area around the leech bite wound at least every eight hours for signs and symptoms of 
infection. 
6. If bleeding is present, the nurse should monitor hemoglobin levels as ordered by the physician.  
 
Post-therapy care of Leeches 
1. Return unused leeches to the LAB-Charge Tech in container provided. 
2. Leeches which have been used on a patient should be disposed of bysending them to LAB-Charge 
Tech in a labeled container. 
  
References:  
Chepeha, D., Nussenbaum, B., Bradford, C. & Teknos, T. (2002). Leech therapy for patients with 
surgically unsalvageable venous obstruction after revascularized free tissue transfer. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg, 128, 960-965. 
   
Upshaw, J. & O’Leary, J. (2000). The medicinal Leech: Past and present. The American Surgeon , 
66, 313-314.  
 NPC-065 
Page 3 of 3 
Weinfeld, A.B., Yuksel, E, Boutros, S., Gura, D.H., Akyurek, M., & Freidman, J.D. (2000). Clinical 
and scientific considerations in Leech therapy for the management of acute venous congestion: an 
updated review. Annals of Plastic Surgery, 45, 207-212. 