NPC059 
Page 1 of 2 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Patient Care 
Title: Hemodialysis 
Policy 
Reference #: NPC-059 
Supersedes #: 1985, 1991 
Date of Origination: January 9, 1987 Review Date:   October 23,2023 
Revision Date:   November 4, 2024 
 
PURPOSE:  
To define what steps are taken when a physician orders Dialysis treatment. 
 
POLICY:  
Hemodialysis will be performed as directed by physician’s order. 
 
PROCEDURES:  
 
1. Hemodialysis is ordered by a nephrologist.   
 
2. A hemodialysis contract service nurse will bring the equipment necessary and will perform the 
dialysis in the patient’s room or dialysis mini-unit or as indicated by the nephrologist. 
 
3. Hemodialysis contract service employees are responsible for care and management of the patient’s 
needs applicable to and during the hemodialysis treatment including,  
a. Reporting to the staff nurse any significant change during and after dialysis. A ticket to ride 
will be completed by the dialysis nurse upon transfer from the dialysis suite to the patient’s 
room.  
b. The staff nurse, along with the dialysis nurse, is responsible for monitoring the patient’s 
general progress during dialysis and meeting any patient needs not met by a dialysis nurse 
and documenting appropriately in the patient’s record.  
c. Documentation pertinent to dialysis on established flow sheet/machine and in the patient’s 
electronic medical record. 
d. Dialysis Cohorting for Isolation in the dialysis mini-unit 
a. An attempt should be made to run an isolation shift for hemodialysis when sufficient 
patient numbers exist. 
b. To cohort patients within a shift the room should be split into an isolation side and a 
non-isolation side.  When crossing over to the isolation side, nursing staff should don 
appropriate PPE including gowns. 
c. Appropriate patients to include in the dialysis shift are those that are nasal swab 
positive for MRSA or have been positive in the past for an organism requiring 
isolation but are no longer being treated for an active infection.   
d. Patients who must be dialyzed in their room: 
i. C. difficile 
ii. drug resistant acinetobacter infections (MDRA) 
iii. vancomycin resistant enterococcus (VRE) 
iv. open wound with pathogen that requires isolation (MRSA, etc) 
v. COVID-19 positive patients NPC059 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
4. Eating and drinking is discouraged during dialysis to decrease the risk of aspiration and 
contamination during the procedure.   Patients shall be allowed to have water or a snack if deemed 
necessary by the dialysis nurse.  All food and beverages shall be in disposable single-serve containers 
(OSHA Bloodborne Pathogen standard 1910.1030) 
 
 
5. Dialysis patients may be transported to the inpatient dialysis mini-unit. 
 
6. In the event of an emergency, the dialysis nurse calls the operator to call a Rapid Response Team 
(RRT)or Code Blue. A nephrology nurse will go to the dialysis unit to assist with the RRT or Code 
Blue and transfer the patient as appropriate.  The staff nurse will be contacted if necessary for 
additional information. 
 
7. Once the dialysis is completed the dialysis nurse will be responsible for calling the unit nurse to 
report off patient treatment and response to treatment. At that time the hemodialysis unit will notify 
transport to transfer the patient back to their room.  
 
Reference: 
 
Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference 