NPC-047 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Patient Care 
Title: Discharge of a Patient 
Policy 
Reference #: NPC-047 
Supersedes #: 1985 
Date of Origination: January 1987 Review Date:   November 4, 2024 
Revision Date:  July 27, 2022 
 
POLICY:  
Patients will be discharged as directed by physician order. 
 
EQUIPMENT:  
▪ Patient's personal belongings and durable medical equipment  
▪ Discharge prescriptions as physician orders. 
▪ Discharge Instructions 
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. Verify order for discharge.  Complete the discharge navigator which includes completing the care 
plan and education, medication reconciliation status, discharge information, belongings, and 
LDA removal.  
 
2. If applicable, give the receipt for valuables kept in the security office to the patient or a family 
member. Obtain the receipt for stored home medications and retrieve those medications from 
pharmacy prior to discharge and return to the patient or family member, if applicable. 
 
3. Reassessment of a patient’s condition is an ongoing process.  If at any time, significant changes in a 
patient’s condition occur they are reported to a physician.  The reassessment occurs with the review 
of systems prior to discharge. 
 
4. Assist patient with preparation for discharge. 
▪ Explain discharge process. 
▪ Discuss discharge instructions with patient/significant other.  Additional medication 
and/or specific post discharge care instructions may be printed from available reference 
resources.   
▪ Give patient/significant other the after-visit summary.  
▪ Document the name of the person who received the instructions on the Discharge 
Instructions/Summary Form. Indicate on printed form which prescriptions were given 
to the patient. 
 
5. If patient insists on leaving without physician's approval, notify the attending physician, the nurse 
manager/charge nurse and/or house manager.  Patient should sign a “Leaving Against Medical 
Advice" (AMA) form, which can be located in your unit forms (item #5411). 
a. According to Policy OC019, a safety event ticket should be entered via incident reporting 
system.   
 
6. Outpatients less than 17 years old will be discharged to care of parent or responsible person. NPC-047 
Page 2 of 2 
 
7. When discharged, document a discharge note.  
 
8. When the patient leaves the department/unit, complete the discharge in the computer system. 
 
9.  Return medications to pharmacy.  Hospital medications should not be given to the patient, patient’s 
family, caregiver or any others for home use. 
 
10. Clean equipment and return to the appropriate areas. 
 
11. Place remaining patient information in bin for Health Information Management to retrieve and scan 
into the electronic medical record.  