NPC-067 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Patient Care 
Title: Falls Prevention, Adult 
Policy 
Reference #: NPC-067 
Supersedes #: 1998 
Date of Origination: January, 1998 Review Date:    April 5, 2024 
Revision Date:  January 22, 2018 
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish a means of identifying patients at risk for falls in the inpatient and the ambulatory hospital 
setting.   
 
POLICY: 
On admission, all patients 15 and older will be assessed for risk for fall using the Hester Davis Fall 
Risk Assessment tool.  The registered nurse will develop a plan of care for risk for injury for 
patients with a score of 11 or greater.  Subsequent Hester Davis Falls Assessments will be 
performed each shift and in the event of a patient fall. 
 
Any patient who presents to the Emergency Department who is at risk for falls will be assessed for the 
falls using the KINDER 1 Assessment Tool. The registered nurse will implement fall precautions 
when a patient has a positive screening and has been identified as being at risk for falls in the 
Emergency Department. 
 
At OLOL the color coded fall risk ID indicator is yellow.   
 
For patients younger than fifteen (15) refer to policy: NPP034 Pediatric Falls Prevention    
 
PROCEDURE: 
Inpatient and Ambulatory 
1. Under the conditions of this policy, the nurse will use the Hester Davis scale to evaluate risk for 
falling.  The scale should be documented: 
▪ Upon admission 
▪ Every shift 
▪ Change in Level of Care (ex. ICU to floor) 
▪ After a fall 
 
2. The patient’s Plan of Care is reviewed every shift by the RN, and a Falls Risk Re-Assessment is 
completed every shift.   
 
3. According to the Fall Risk Assessment tool, the level of risk (i.e. - safety category) is calculated 
by the computer system.  
▪ With a score of 0-10 the nurse will document interventions in the Cares/Safety flow sheet 
“Safe Environment” section.   NPC-067 
Page 2 of 3 
▪ An in-patient with a score 11or greater, the nurse will document fall risk interventions in 
the Fall Risk Interventions section of the Cares/Safety flow sheet and implement fall 
precautions 
 
4. Safety Interventions are implemented according to Fall Risk Assessment score and as appropriate 
for the patient. Safety interventions are detailed below.  
a. Yellow Falls Risk armband placed 
b. Non-skid socks placed on patient  
c. Bed alarm activated  
d. Side rails are to be up at the nurse’s discretion (2-3 rails). Use of side rails is intended as a 
safety measure, not as a means of preventing the patient from freely exiting the bed. 
e. Educate patient and family on the purpose and risks of using side rails. 
f. Keep call light within reach. 
g. Keep bed in low position except when nursing care or treatments are in progress. 
h. Toileting every 2 hours in advance of need 
i. Hourly safety rounds 
j. Room door/curtain open, as per nurse discretion while maintaining patient privacy 
 
5. Side rails are to be up at the nurse’s discretion (2-3 rails) after assessment or upon physician’s 
order.  Use of side rails is intended as a safety measure, not as a means of preventing the patient 
from freely exiting the bed. 
a. The use of four (4) side rails is considered a restraint and requires a physician’s order 
b. Educate patient and family on the purpose and risks of using side rails. 
 
6. To prevent alarm fatigue, all Posey bed/chair alarms will have a standardized alarm tone or voice 
command set hospital-wide so that all clinical staff in the hospital will recognize the audible 
alarm as a bed/chair alarm and respond quickly to prevent a patient from falling. 
 
Bed/chair alarms should be suspended by any staff member who is removing the patient from the 
bed.  Using the suspend function before removing the patient from bed will prevent false alarms 
that lead to alarm fatigue.   
For patient care areas that have specialty beds with built-in exit alarms, alarms should have the 
same alarm tone set on every bed, so it is easily recognized by staff. 
 
All clinical staff (nurses, NA’s, nurse technicians, PT, OT, ST, etc.) are responsible for ensuring 
that a patient’s bed/chair alarm is armed prior to leaving the patient’s bedside.  All clinical staff are 
expected to respond to any bed/chair alarm that they hear in the hospital. 
 
 
Emergency Department 
1. Patient will be screened using the Kinder 1 Assessment Tool and will screen for the following:  
a. Anyone who presents due to a fall 
b. Anyone who is older than 70 
c. Anyone with altered mental status 
d. Anyone with impaired mobility 
e. Anyone who the nurse has concerns about falling NPC-067 
Page 3 of 3 
2. Any positive finding results in a positive screening and the patient will have safety 
interventions implemented as appropriate for the patient. Safety interventions are detailed 
below: 
a. Yellow Falls Risk armband placed 
b. Non-skid socks placed on patient  
c. Bed alarm activated when appropriate  
d. Side rails are to be up at the nurse’s discretion (2-3 rails). Use of side rails is intended 
as a safety measure, not as a means of preventing the patient from freely exiting the 
bed. 
e. Educate patient and family on the purpose and risks of using side rails. 
f. Keep call light within reach. 
g. Keep bed in low position except when nursing care or treatments are in progress. 
h. Toileting every 2 hours in advance of need 
i. Hourly safety rounds 
j. Room door/curtain open, as per nurse discretion while maintaining patient privacy 
 
Post Fall Procedure: 
1.  In the event of a fall the appropriate interventions will be implemented. Documentation is 
completed in the Assessment flow sheet “Shift Event” row within the Provider Notification 
section.  
2. The patient’s treating physician and family will be notified of the patient’s fall as soon as 
possible. 
3. The House Manager will be notified of the fall. 
4. A safety event should be entered  
 
References: 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Policy NPC150 - Clinical Alarms (Adult Patient Care Units) 