 NPC-143 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Patient Care 
Title: Room Services 
Policy 
Reference #: NPC-143 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: December 13, 2010 Last Review 
Date:     May 31, 2024 
Last Revision Date:  April 6, 2018 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define the nursing role and responsibility in relationship to the patient and Room Services. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
• FNS – Food & Nutrition Services 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Assessing and Qualifying Patients for Room Service 
 
A. Nursing will assess each patient according to these limiting factors.   
1. Decreased mental status 
2. Inability to operate telephone 
3. Speech difficulties 
4. Hearing difficulties 
5. Visually impaired 
6. Language barriers 
7. Patient states he/she does not want to participate 
8. Absence of family member/guardian to assist patient with limitations 
B. Nursing will designate if patient is appropriate to participate in room service program, and/or 
what level of assistance is needed at the time the diet order is entered into the Electronic 
Medical Record.  
1. Appropriate – Nursing will educate the patient on how to use room service; A Catering 
Associate will visit the patient to place his/her meal order, the Catering Associate may 
call the patient to place the meal order, or the patient may call the service line to place 
his/her order. 
2. Not Appropriate – the patient will receive a non-select tray.  This is NOT the preferable 
choice.  If in doubt, the nurse should select “Appropriate with Assistance”. 
3. Appropriate with Assistance – Once a diet order is received for room service 
Appropriate with Assistance a Catering Associate will visit with the patient or designated 
family member for lunch dinner and next-day breakfast orders.  If the patient was not 
seen, a Catering Associate will call the patient or designated family member.  
4. Appropriate with Timed Diabetic Delivery – the patient will be visited by a Catering 
Associate.  They will choose their food and it will be delivered at a specified time.   NPC-143 
Page 2 of 3 
C. A nurse or dietitian may change the level of room service participation at any time, according 
to the needs of the patient. 
 
 
II. Diet Orders/Changes and Fluid Restrictions 
A. Diet orders are required for all patients as follows:  
1. Diet Orders 
2. Diet Changes 
3. Tube Feeding Orders 
4. Tube Feeding Changes 
5. Fluid Restrictions 
6. Nutritional Supplements 
B.  The patient will be assessed by nursing for room service appropriateness.  
1. NPO Orders will not have the room service question on the diet order screen. 
C. Fluid Restrictions 
1. Nursing will enter the fluid restriction order into the electronic medical record 
2. When a fluid restriction order is written for fluid restrictions of a 1000 cc’s per day or 
more, FNS will send 240 cc per meal on each tray.  Nursing will supplement the 
remaining fluid for the day. 
3. If a fluid restriction of less than 1000 cc’s per day is ordered, no fluids will be sent 
with tray service from FNS.  Nursing will supply all fluids for less than a 1000 cc’s 
per day. 
D. Diet orders should be updated in the electronic medical record by 5:30AM for Breakfast, 
10:30AM for Lunch and 3:30 for Dinner to reduce likelihood of patients having to order 
duplicate trays for meal service. 
 
III. Meal Requests/Snacks 
A. Patient’s diet order must be entered into the electronic medical record prior to any room 
service delivery. 
B. The nurse will educate the patient on how to place room service orders. 
C. The patient, patient’s family or nurse can call ext. 5-5555 to order room service for the 
patient. 
 
 
IV.   Tray Delivery/Removal 
A. Nursing Team will remove tray from room and place in storage cart located in the soiled 
utility room on each unit. 
a. If there is a soiled tray in the room when the Catering Associate delivers the next 
meal, they will remove the tray and place in storage cart. 
B. After Hours Trays 
a. Patients arriving after 7 PM may receive food after hours from floor stock.  In 
addition, the nurse may obtain a cold boxed meal from Patient Services to help meet 
the patient’s needs. 
C. Special Considerations 
a. Isolation Rooms – The Catering Associate will contact nurse prior to delivering tray 
if ticket is marked “Check with Nursing”, or if sign posted on door indicate  NPC-143 
Page 3 of 3 
“Isolation”, the Catering Associate will deliver “Isolation” trays to the nursing station 
and nursing will complete the delivery process. 
b. PEC/CEC Status Patients – The Catering Associate will contact the nurse prior to 
delivering tray if sign posted on the door to indicate. These patients may not receive 
metal utensils or glassware.  
  
V.  Monitoring Patient Meal Requests 
A. After two (2) refused meals, the Catering Associate will notify nursing personnel.  The 
exception to this rule is patients on a diabetic or calorie controlled diet who will not be 
allowed to miss any meals. 
B. If the patient informs the Catering Associate that someone is bringing food in for them, 
nursing will be contacted. 
C. If a patient who is NPO calls for room service, the Catering Associate will call the unit to 
verify NPO status and request a diet order if appropriate. 
 
VI.    Guest Trays and Complimentary Trays 
A. Complimentary Meal Service will only be provided for a Pediatric Parent/Caregiver. 
a. One complimentary parent tray per meal period will be provided each day. 
b. Breastfeeding mothers are allowed three (3) meal trays per day. 
c. Additional guests in the room can purchase additional guest meals (See Nutrition 
Services Policy Room Service – Guest Trays and Complimentary Meals for 
instructions) 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
Nutrition Services Room Service Policies 
 
 