 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Patient Care 
Title: Pressure Injury Prevention Protocol 
Policy Reference #: NPC-151 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 2018 Last Date Reviewed: October  23, 2023 
Last Date Revised: January 2018 
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish a standardized program for the prevention and management of Hospital Acquired pressure 
injuries of admitted patients at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center. 
 
DEFINITIONS:   
• Pressure Injury: A pressure injury is localized damage to the skin and underlying soft tissue usually over 
a bony prominence or related to a medical or other device. The injury can present as intact skin or an 
open ulcer and may be painful. The injury occurs as a result of intense and/or prolonged pressure or 
pressure in combination with shear. The tolerance of soft tissue for pressure and shear may also be 
affected by microclimate, nutrition, perfusion, co-morbidities and condition of the soft tissue. 
• Stage 1:  Non-blanchable erythema of intact skin 
Intact skin with a localized area of non-blanchable erythema, which may appear differently in darkly 
pigmented skin. Presence of blanchable erythema or changes in sensation, temperature, or firmness may 
precede visual changes. Color changes do not include purple or maroon discoloration; these may indicate 
deep tissue pressure injury. 
• Stage 2:  Partial-thickness skin loss with exposed dermis 
Partial-thickness loss of skin with exposed dermis. The wound bed is viable, pink or red, moist, and may 
also present as an intact or ruptured serum-filled blister. Adipose (fat) is not visible and deeper tissues 
are not visible. Granulation tissue, slough and eschar are not present. These injuries commonly result 
from adverse microclimate and shear in the skin over the pelvis and shear in the heel.  This stage should 
not be used to describe moisture associated skin damage (MASD) including incontinence associated 
dermatitis (IAD), intertriginous dermatitis (ITD), medical adhesive related skin injury (MARSI), or 
traumatic wounds (skin tears, burns, abrasions). 
• Stage 3: Full-thickness skin loss 
Full-thickness loss of skin, in which adipose (fat) is visible in the ulcer and granulation tissue and epibole 
(rolled wound edges) are often present. Slough and/or eschar may be visible. The depth of tissue damage 
varies by anatomical location; areas of significant adiposity can develop deep wounds.  Undermining and 
tunneling may occur. Fascia, muscle, tendon, ligament, cartilage and/or bone are not exposed. If slough 
or eschar obscures the extent of tissue loss this is an Unstageable Pressure Injury.  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 4 
• Stage 4: Full-thickness skin and tissue loss 
Full-thickness skin and tissue loss with exposed or directly palpable fascia, muscle, tendon, ligament, 
cartilage or bone in the ulcer. Slough and/or eschar may be visible. Epibole (rolled edges), undermining 
and/or tunneling often occur. Depth varies by anatomical location. If slough or eschar obscures the 
extent of tissue loss this is an Unstageable Pressure Injury. 
• Unstageable: Obscured full-thickness skin and tissue loss 
Full-thickness skin and tissue loss in which the extent of tissue damage within the ulcer cannot be 
confirmed because it is obscured by slough or eschar.  If slough or eschar is removed, a Stage 3 or Stage 4 
pressure injury will be revealed. Stable eschar (i.e. dry, adherent, intact without erythema or fluctuance) 
on the heel or ischemic limb should not be softened or removed. 
• Suspected Deep Tissue Injury: Persistent non-blanchable deep red, maroon or purple discoloration 
Intact or non-intact skin with localized area of persistent non-blanchable deep red, maroon, purple 
discoloration or epidermal separation revealing a dark wound bed or blood-filled blister. Pain and 
temperature change often precede skin color changes. Discoloration may appear differently in darkly 
pigmented skin.  This injury results from intense and/or prolonged pressure and shear forces at the bone-
muscle interface.  The wound may evolve rapidly to reveal the actual extent of tissue injury, or may 
resolve without tissue loss. If necrotic tissue, subcutaneous tissue, granulation tissue, fascia, muscle or 
other underlying structures are visible, this indicates a full thickness pressure injury (Unstageable, Stage 3 
or 4). Do not use DTPI to describe vascular, traumatic, neuropathic, or dermatologic conditions. 
 
Additional Pressure Injury Definitions: 
• Medical Device Related Pressure Injury: 
This describes an etiology. 
Medical device related pressure injuries result from the use of devices designed and applied for 
diagnostic or therapeutic purposes. The resultant pressure injury generally conforms to the pattern or 
shape of the device. The injury should be staged using the staging system. 
• Mucosal Membrane Pressure Injury:  Mucosal membrane pressure injury is found on mucous 
membranes with a history of a medical device in use at the location of the injury. Due to the anatomy of 
the tissue these ulcers cannot be staged. 
• NPUAP: National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel, one of the leading panels of medical professionals 
who study, contribute to, and recommend the standard of practice for pressure injuries. 
• POA: Present On Admission, a term used to define whether an ulcer/injury was identified as being 
present when the patient was admitted to the acute care facility.  This must be documented in the 
patient record within 24 hours of admission. 
• Hospital Acquired: An injury whose initial occurrence started after admission to the hospital facility. 
• Community Acquired: An injury whose initial occurrence started prior to admission to the hospital 
facility. 
• Never Event : A hospital acquired injury staged as a Stage III, Stage IV or Unstageable  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 4 
 
POLICY: 
I. Skin Assessment 
A. Admission 
a. The RN will complete a head-to-toe skin assessment within the first 8 hours of 
hospitalization and document findings in the Admission Assessment. 
b. A 2nd Nurse Skin Assessment is also required within the first 8 hours of admission. 
c. Any skin breakdown or Present on Admission pressure injury noted should be 
reported to the physician. WOC nurse should also be consulted. The Braden Risk 
Assessment tool is to be completed on all patients on admission. The Braden is used 
for the adult population. The Braden Q is used for the Children’s Hospital. 
d. Any adult patient with Braden Score less than or equal to 18 will have the Pressure 
Injury Prevention Protocol implemented.  
B. Ongoing 
a. Head to toe skin assessment of the skin should be completed by the nurse at the 
beginning of every shift and with change of condition or procedures such as bathing, 
wound care, and preparation for transfer.  
b. The Braden is completed every shift on all acute care inpatients, patients with score 
of 18 or less will have the POC for skin integrity and Pressure Injury Prevention 
Protocol implement, if not done previously. 
c. The Braden Q is completed weekly for all patients whose score is above 22. It is 
completed daily for those scoring at or below 22. 
II. Patient/ Family Education 
• In addition to patient/family education provided by the bedside nurse: 
• A pressure injury prevention video is available is on the bedside patient education program via 
the television in the patient’s room Patient and family education are available via the WOC 
nursing department.  
III. Discharge 
• WOC nurse will assess for continual ongoing care of any patient with a wound on discharge, and 
will provide treatment recommendations as needed.  
 
REFERENCES: 
European Pressure Injury Advisory Panel and National Pressure Injury 
Advisory Panel. Prevention and treatment of pressure injuries: quick reference 
guide. Washington DC: National Pressure Injury Advisory Panel; 2009. 
Institute for Healthcare Improvement. Pressure Injury Prevention. Retrieved at www.ihi.org 
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators. Guidelines for Data Collection on the American 
Nurses Association’s National Quality Forum Endorsed Measures: Pressure Injuries.  
Retrieved at www.nursingquality.org 
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators. Pressure Injury Training.  Retrieved at 
www.nursingquality.org/NDNQIPressureInjuryTraining 
National Pressure Injury Advisory Panel. Pressure Injury Prevention Points. Retrieved at 
www.npuap.org  2007.  Policy Reference Number 
Page 4 of 4 
Wound, Ostomy, and Continence Nurses Society. Guideline for Prevention and Management of 
Pressure Injuries 6/1/2010. Retrieved at www.wocn.org 
Acute and Chronic Wounds. Current Management Concepts, 4th ed., R.A. Bryant, D. P. Nix 2007.  
 
National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel (2007). Pressure Ulcer Prevention Points. Retrieved October 7, 
2014, from http://www.npuap.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/PU_Prev_Points.pdf 
 
Institute for Healthcare Improvement (2011). How-to-Guide: Prevent pressure ulcers. Cambridge, MA. 
 
Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference 
 