 NPC-145 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE 
Policy Manual: 
 
PATIENT CARE SERVICES 
 
Section/ 
Chapter: Patient Care 
Title: Rigid Cervical Collar: Application and 
Maintenance 
Policy 
Reference #: NPC-145 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: October 11, 2012 Review Date:  January 31, 2024 
Revision Date: September 13, 2021 
 
PURPOSE: 
This policy guides the caregiver in the correct application of a rigid cervical collar and in 
promoting skin integrity under the collar.  
 
POLICY: 
A. The purpose of rigid cervical collars is to provide support and restriction of movement in 
patients requiring cervical spine immobilization. Cervical spine immobilization is 
maintained until the patient has been fully evaluated clinically and/or radiographically 
and either 1) Cleared of injury to the spine, OR 2) Known spinal injuries have been 
successfully treated.  There must be a physician’s order to discontinue the collar.  
 
B. Cervical collars should not be removed for skin care if the patient is uncooperative and/or 
agitated. The RN will notify the physician if the patient is too uncooperative to have the 
collar removed every shift for skin care. Cervical collar care should be planned around 
sedation and/or analgesia. Cervical immobilization is the primary goal and is not to be 
compromised for skin/wound care.  
 
PROCEDURE:   
A.  Application of collar 
1. Verify physician orders related to procedure. 
2. Determine the number of caregivers needed to safely perform the procedure. 
3. Assess the need for sedation. If the patient is restless and uncooperative, additional 
personnel including physician extenders (Physician, Physician’s Assistant, Nurse 
Practitioner, or Trauma Nurse Clinician/Rounding Nurse) must be present to assist with 
care.   
4.  Explain the procedure to the patient with clear instructions not to attempt to move his/her 
 head or neck during the procedure.  
5.   Instruct the patient to alert you immediately if any of the maneuvers causes increased 
neck pain, nausea, numbness or tingling of the extremities, or difficulty breathing. 
6. Assess and document baseline sensory-motor function.  
7. Position the patient supine with arms to the sides. 
8. Refer to online reference for steps on applying the collar. 
 
B.  Assessing proper fit of collar 
1. Ensure that no plastic on the collar is touching the patient. 
2. The front and back panels should be centered; and the straps of the hook-and-loop 
fasteners should be symmetrical. 
3. Insert index finger in front of the patient’s ear and pull forward toward the chin. Finger 
should only go to mid-jaw. If it goes beyond, the collar is too loose.  NPC-145 
Page 2 of 2 
4. Adjust fit as necessary according to type of collar used. 
5. Too tight a fit may compromise circulation. No changes in skin color should be seen.  
 
C. Care of the skin and changing pads 
1. Skin care, assessment for pressure breakdown, and and changing pads on the collar 
should be completed a minimum of every 24 hours unless contraindicated (e.g. unstable 
cervical fracture) or if orders specify otherwise. 
2. One provider maintains the cervical spine in neutral position while a second provider 
performs skin care and collar maintenance. The head and neck are supported along the 
sides, with thumbs placed anterior to the patient’s ears along the mandible and the fingers 
supporting the upper neck.   
3. Release the straps of the hook-and-loop fastener and remove the anterior section of the 
collar. 
4. Wash the neck with soap and water and pat dry with towel. Inspect the skin any alteration 
of skin integrity. 
5. Clean the plastic part of the collar with alcohol. 
6. Replace soiled or moist foam pads with clean dry pads.  
7. Address alterations in skin integrity. 
• If moisture is a problem or there is a red rash, especially in the neck creases, suspect 
yeast and consider the following options: 
                     Option #1. Fabric impregnated with antimicrobial silver complex (No Rx needed) –  
                     cut to size suitable to fit smoothly between skin and collar without bunching up.     
Option #2. Obtain a physician’s order for miconazole powder to be sprinkled on 
freshly washed and dried neck and creases during daily skin care.   
• If a reddened, non-blanchable, Stage I pressure area is identified, notify physician.    
Contact the Wound Ostomy Care (WOC) nurse for recommendations. Re-assess and 
document daily.    
• If there is an open pressure area beneath the collar, notify the physician, enter a referral 
to the WOC nurse, and provide wound care as ordered. Re-asses and document daily.  
 8.  Replace the front section of the collar and refasten the hook-and-loop fastener. 
 9.  Supporting the head and neck, logroll the patient to side-lying position. Release the hook- 
           and-loop fastener and remove the posterior section of the collar.  
 10. Repeat the same process of care, steps d. through g. 
 11. Replace the back portion of the collar.  
12.  Logroll the patient back to supine position. 
13. Re-assess collar for fit and patient comfort, adjusting as necessary depending on collar 
being used. 
14. Re-assess and document sensory-motor function.       
 
REFERENCES: 
American College of Surgeons (ACS). (2018). Appendix G: Skills: Secondary Survey: Apply a 
cervical collar in a simulated patient. In Advanced trauma life support: Student course manual 
(10th ed., pp.371-374). Chicago, Il 
 
Webber-Jones, J.E., Thomas, C.A., Bordeaux, R.E. (2002). The management and prevention of 
rigid cervical collar complications. Orthopedic Nursing,21(4), 19-27. 
 
 
 
Refer to Facility Online Reference   