 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Patient Care 
Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Suicide Prevention and Observation of the High-Risk 
Behavioral Patient in Non-Mental Health/Non-
Emergency Department Areas 
Section:   
Date of Origination:  November 2011 Supersedes:  
Date Last Revised: March 1, 2024 Serial Code:  NPC-144 
Date Last Reviewed:   March 14, 2022 
 PURPOSE: 
To protect and plan appropriate care for individuals at risk for suicide while receiving care and after 
discharge by identifying individuals with suspected or known suicidal ideations.  
To establish guidelines for observation of the high-risk behavioral patient and a patient who is placed 
under a Physicians Emergency Certificate (PEC), Coroner’s Emergency Certificate (CEC), Suicide 
Precautions, or other legal hold for mental health treatment while being treated as an inpatient within the 
hospital (excluding Mental and Behavioral Health units). 
Definitions: 
Legal status is defined by law and allows for the detainment and treatment of those persons suffering 
from mental illness, a substance related, or addictive disorder.  
Physician Emergency Certificate (PEC) State of Louisiana - legal form used to place involuntary hold 
on patient with mental illness who is a danger to self or others, or gravely disabled, for the purpose of 
observation, diagnosis, and treatment of mental illness or substance related or addictive disorder; 
implemented by any physician; good for 72 hours in which time the person should be evaluated by the 
coroner. 
Coroner’s Emergency Certificate (CEC); State of Louisiana - legal form to be completed by the coroner 
within 72 hours after the PEC has been implemented; must be completed by the coroner or his deputy; 
CEC and PEC together are good for a period not to exceed 15 days from the completion of the initial 
document. Either the PEC or CEC may be executed first. 
Judicial Commitment - Any person of legal age may file with the court a petition which asserts his belief 
that a person is suffering from mental illness which contributes or causes that person to be a danger to 
himself or others or to be gravely disabled or is suffering from substance abuse which contributes or 
causes that person to be a danger to himself or others or to be gravely disabled and may thereby request 
a hearing. 
Suicidal Patients – Any individual who is brought to the Emergency Department for treatment of  2 
attempted overdose and/or self-destructive, suicidal behavior. Any patient within our hospital that 
verbalizes a plan to end his/her life, threatens or attempts to harm self.  
Homicidal Patients – Any individual who verbalizes a desire and significant threats of bodily harm 
towards any person, in which the patient appears to be able to carry out. An actual physical attack (i.e., 
hit, slap, punch, kick, bite, grab, thrown object, etc.) towards another individual within our hospital or an 
unanticipated outburst of violent, angry, aggressive, impulsive, and/or destructive behavior that poses 
immediate danger.  
Psychotic Patients – Any individual, who’s thought process is altered as evidenced by hallucinations, 
delusions, paranoia, bizarre behavior, confusion, severe mania and/or non-reality-based thinking 
1:1 Observation for High-Risk Patients can only be performed by an Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center employee that has been deemed competent. Family members may not be the sole 
providers of close observation.  
POLICY: 
A Suicide Screening will be completed on patients upon admission to the hospital. If a patient is 
identified as being at risk for suicide, then suicide precaution interventions are implemented. Behavioral 
patients in a non mental health unit under suicide precautions, assessed as being at high risk, on PEC, on 
CEC or on other legal hold for mental health treatment will be observed using 1:1 unless deemed 
otherwise by a physician (For example, exceptions may be made for patients who are sedated and on a 
ventilator.)  Observation monitoring of behavioral patients is delegated from the Registered Nurse (RN) 
to an approved observer and the RN retains accountability and supervision.   
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. A patient may arrive on the unit with a legal status of OPC (Order of Protective Custody), PEC 
(Physician’s Emergency Certificate), CEC (Coroner’s Emergency Certificate) or Judicial 
Commitment. Any of the above legal statuses should be discussed with the attending physician 
so that the appropriate level of observation is established.  
 
2. Suicide precautions and 1:1 observation are initiated if the patient is determined to be at high risk 
for suicide or if the presenting problem is a suicide attempt.  Suicide precautions/interventions 
can be initiated by nursing staff, in the absence of a physician, with identified reasons for this 
decision.  This information is recorded in the medical record, and the patient’s physician is 
notified as soon as possible.  If the physician concurs, an order is written.  
 
Interventions may include consultation with Psychiatry (Consult MD, Psychiatry). The 
COPE (Crisis Oriented Psychiatric Evaluation) Team may prepare/assist with transfer of 
patient to a mental health program or facility for continued care when the patient is 
medically stable. 
  3 
3. Documentation of 1:1 Observation will be recorded manually (not electronically) using the 
Patient Observation Record to include:  
a. The patient’s location, activity, and behavior.  
b. The purpose and the level of observation as indicated by the RN.   
 
4. The patient’s right to privacy and personal space will be respected at all times with safety 
remaining the priority. Care or treatment, such as a physical examination or assessment, plan of 
care discussions, or medical treatment, will be offered in an area that provides for privacy of the 
patient.   
 
5. The physician is notified of any changes in behavior or condition. 
 
6. If the physician determines, either through his/her own assessment or through a psychiatric 
consult that the patient is no longer a threat to self or others, the physician will document the 
change in the patient’s status in the medical record and the interventions outlined above may be 
discontinued. If a Physician’s Emergency Certificate (PEC) has been completed prior to this 
assessment, the physician should write an order to discontinue the PEC/CEC or other applicable 
legal status.  
 
7. When the patient is medically stable and a physician determines that the patient continues to be a 
threat to self or others, the physician may request transfer to a mental health unit/facility. This 
may be coordinated by the COPE Team. 
 
8. Upon discharge, the patient and/or family are provided with the National Certified Crisis 
Hotline: 1-800-SUICIDE (1-800-784-2433). 
Suicide Precautions for Inpatient Units (excluding MBH):  
1) The Charge Nurse or designee notifies the Nurse Manager and House Manager for on-going staffing 
assistance.  
2) The observer documents every 15 minutes or more frequently on the Patient Observation Record. 
(a) The plan of care is modified by the RN to reflect the increased level of observation by 
using one of the following plans of care: Risk for self-injury/neglect 
(b) Risk for self-injury/mutilation 
(c) Risk for violence/aggression towards others  
(d) Suicidal thoughts/plan/attempts  
3) The patient/family should be educated as to the rationale for the precautions and the level of 
observation. Family should be educated as to strategies that may be used to assist in keeping the 
patient safe, including potentially harmful items not being given to the patient. Education is 
documented in the record.  4 
4) Visitation may be restricted at the physician’s or nurses’ discretion for the patient and/or staff safety 
and patient support.  
(a) Visitors will be directed to check in at the nurse’s station.  
(b) Only two visitors will be allowed visitation at one time.  
(c) Visitors are not permitted to bring any outside items into the patients’ room (purses, 
cell phones, etc.). These items will not be stored by the facility, the visitor will need 
to secure their own personal items. If the visitor refuses to secure their own items, the 
visitor will not be allowed in the patients’ room. 
(d)  Visitation will not be permitted overnight.  
(e) Observers are to remain present during all visitation observing for transference of 
contraband or any other items that may compromise the safety of the environment. 
(f) Rationale for visitation restrictions should be discussed with the patient/family and 
documented in the physician’s notes in the medical record 
Phone restrictions may be ordered by the physician when deemed necessary however 
rationale must be documented in the physician’s notes in the medical record. 
 
6. The RN reports the purpose and level of observation to the personnel performing the 
observation.  
 
7. The RN continues to re-assess the patient for risk to self/others and risk for elopement. The RN 
will utilize the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale to re-assess the patient every 12 hours 
and with significant patient events.   
 
8. The RN may contact mental health staff as needed for assistance. 
 
9. With a witness present, nurse and security will examine all personal belongings for hazardous 
items/ contraband such as: 
a. Smoking materials 
b. Matches 
c. Lighters  
d. Ink Pens 
e. Pencils 
f. Toothbrushes 
g. Shaving Kits 
h. Medicine/Medicine Bags 
i. Belts 
j. Belt Buckles 
k. Shoelaces 
l. Any type of jewelry includes necklaces, chains, earrings, rings, bracelets  5 
m. Cords in clothing  
n. Clothes hangers 
Items deemed as a safety risk will be either sent home with family or placed in the safe 
by security.  
 
10. Meals are provided on the unit and in the company of staff. Meals will be delivered by nursing 
unit staff.  Food service is provided on disposable trays. No metal food utensils, glassware, china 
plates are to be used. Finger foods not requiring utensils may be preferred for high risk patients.  
 
11. Medications without nurse supervision should be denied. The nurse must observe the patient 
while administering oral medication to assure all medication has been swallowed. 
 
12. The patient’s room environment will be assessed for safety hazards. Remove as many of the 
following items from the room as possible 
• All sharps or sharp instruments, such as glass, metal, knives (metal or plastic) or razors. 
• Medications - do not leave any medication in the room (even in the room safe). 
• Ropes, belts, or ties – send home with family, or send to the hospital safe. 
• All electrical devices with cords such as radios, laptops, I-Pod’s, phones, etc.- send home 
with family or send to the hospital safe 
• All non-essential medical equipment that is not necessary for medical treatment (may 
include tubes, hoses, suction canisters, IV poles, IV pumps, and oxygen/suction 
regulators) – The Registered Nurse to assess equipment needs and will remove and store 
non-essential medical equipment in the clean equipment room on the nursing unit.  
regulators)  
• Cords of essential equipment as much as possible –The Registered Nurse will assess the 
cords of all essential equipment and notify the observer of their location in the patient 
room  
• Glass containers – send home with family or send to the hospital safe. If medication must 
be provided in a glass container, the registered nurse will notify the observer.  
• Make-up cases – send home with family or send to the hospital safe 
• Toothpaste tubes & toothbrush – send home with family or send to the hospital safe  
• Plastic trash bags – Observer to remove all plastic trash bags and replace with paper bags. 
Paper bags to be supplied by materials management.  
• All non-essential furniture (may include the removal of the trash can, over bed table, 
guest chairs, recliner, sofa, side table, etc. Non-essential furniture will be moved by 
Environmental Service Personnel. The furniture will be tagged with the room number and 
will be stored until the patient is discharged 
• No extra linens are to be stored in the room. This includes: sheets, blankets, pillow cases, 
towels. Linen will be retrieved upon needed use of the particular item.  
• Any other items which may increase risk of harm 
 
13. Check bedding (sheets, pillowcases, spreads) and gowns for tears or hidden objects each shift.  6 
14. Search patient belongings and any gifts brought by visitors for harmful objects.  Send harmful 
personal items home or remove from the patient care area. Document search and items removed 
in the medical record. 
 
15. Purses and bags and cellular phones, including visitor’s purses or bags and cellular phones, 
should not be allowed in the patient’s room. 
 
16. The patient should have the following special identification items 
a. Green paper scrubs or a green three-hole arm gown 
b. Green nonskid socks 
c. Green and white striped armband 
d. Green rose sign placed on the outside of the patient’s door 
 
 
Level 1 - 1:1 Observation 
The patient is observed on a 1:1 observer/patient ratio when clinical assessment indicates the existence 
of a high level of risk for immediate or impulsive behavior that may be harmful to self or others.   
1:1 Observation includes the following elements: 
• One observer for one patient.  Observer may not monitor more than one patient at a time.  
• 1:1 staff accompaniment at all times, including times for personal hygiene, toileting and other 
self-care needs. 
• Observer should be of the same sex as the patient, as the staffing pattern allows.  If this is not 
possible, arrangements should be made for same sex staff to accompany the patient during times 
of personal hygiene, toileting and other self-care needs.   
• Patient may leave the unit for medical consult / testing.  Observer must remain within visual 
range with the patient. 
 
 
References:  
CM.07.001 Mental Health Legal Status 
https://fmolhs.sharepoint.com/sites/TeamLink/Policy/FMOLHS/Operations/Care%20Management/CM.
07.001_Mental%20Health%20Health%20Legal%20Status%20(01.20.2021).pdf 
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention (2012) Suicide Prevention: Saving Lives One Community 
at a Time. Retrieved from http://www.afsp.org/files/Misc_//standardizedpresentation.ppt 
John Dempsey Hospital Department of Nursing, The University of Connecticut Health Center (2010) 
Protocol for Care of the Behavioral Patient in the Emergency Department.  
Lynch, MA, Howard, PB, Wl-Mallakh P, et al (2008). Assessment and Management of Hospitalized 
Suicidal Patients. Journal of Psychosocial Nursing and Mental Health Services, 46(7).  7 
Mosby Nursing Skills (2009) Suicide Precautions. Elsevier, Inc. 
Centers for Disease Prevention and Control. (2010Suicide Prevention. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/ViolencePrevention/pdf/Suicide_DataSheet-a.pdf. 
Reducing the Risk of Suicide (2005). The Joint Commission. 
Sturis, I, (2002). Nursing Intervention and Treatment of the Acutely Psychotic Patient in the Emergency 
Department. Journal of the American Psychiatric Nurses Association, 8(6), S36-S39. 
Sullivan A, Barron C, Bezmen J, Rivera J, Zapata-Vega M (Spring 2005). The Safe Treatment of the 
Suicidal Patient in an Adult Inpatient Setting: A Proactive Approach. Psychiatric Quarterly, 76(1), 67-
83.  
Temkin TM, Crotty, M (2004). Suicide and Other Risk Monitoring in Inpatient Psychiatry. American 
Journal of the American Psychiatric Nurses Association, 10(2), 73-80. 
Torkelson, DJ & Dobal, MT (1999). Constant Observation in Medical-Surgical Settings: A 
Multihospital Study. Nursing Economics, 17(3).  
U.S. Preventative Services Task Force. (2004). Screening for Suicide Risk: Recommendation and 
Rational. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Retrieved from 
http://www.ahrq.gov/clinic/3rdupstf/suiciderr.htm. 
Worley, LM, Kunkel, JS, Gitlin, DF, Menefee, LA, & Conway, G (2000). Constant Observation 
Practices in the General Hospital Setting.  Psychosomatics 41:301-310. 
Peconic Bay Medical Center (2011). Continuous Observation Policy. 
 