 NPC-123 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services Section: Patient Care 
Title: Discharge from Hospital Criteria: Patient 
Receiving Anesthetic Agents 
Policy 
Reference #: NPC-123 
Supersedes 
#: 1987 
Date of Origination: October 1987 Last Review 
Date:   March 13, 2023 
Last Revision Date:  June 5, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish a policy for discharge of surgical/diagnostic patients who have received an anesthetic agent. 
 
POLICY: 
All patients must meet established criteria prior to discharge. A physician's order must be present on the 
medical record for discharge of patient. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
If the physician does not give a specific time for discharge, the discharge proceedings are initiated when 
the patient is sufficiently recovered according to the criteria listed below. All patients must meet or 
exceed these criteria prior to discharge: 
 
1. A minimal stay time will be 30 minutes in recovery, (Post Anesthesia Care Unit/ Post-procedural 
area) after the last dose of a sedative, and at last 30 minutes after the last dose of any new 
medication, with the following exceptions: 
a. Patients who have had local anesthesia 
b.Children who have undergone pressure equalizing tube insertion procedure, without 
sedation.  
c. Any exception which is directed by specific physician order 
 
2. The patient is awake, alert, and oriented (or has returned to preoperative state). 
 
3. The patient has tolerated oral fluids unless contraindicated, with an absence of protracted nausea. 
4. Vital signs should be stable according to the following criteria: 
a. Circulation (systolic blood pressure) Comparison baseline with preanesthetic systolic blood 
pressure within  20% of  preanesthetic level. 
b.Pulse > 50 and <100. Consideration is given to pre-procedural rate. 
c. Respirations:  patient should be able to cough and deep breathe freely (based on pre-
procedural condition). 
d.Temperature must be greater than 96.8 degrees and less than 101 degrees Fahrenheit. 
 
5. If above vital sign criteria are not met, notify the physician. 
 
6. The patient’s skin must be warm and dry.  NPC-123 
Page 2 of 2 
 
7. Stable wound site as appropriate to procedure performed. 
 
8. The patient must be able to ambulate consistent with age and surgical procedure. 
 
9. The patient should be able to void without difficulty if any urological procedure is performed, or as 
appropriate to other surgical procedures/physician orders. 
 
10. Patient should return to the same or better Aldrete Recovery Score as recorded from the preoperative 
assessment and or original Aldrete score. 
 
11. Patient should return to motor/sensory control, adequate pain control, and ability to remain awake 
for at least 20 minutes. 
 
12. After Endoscopic Procedures the Patient Shall: 
a. Meet the general discharge criteria (see policy SPP007 “Criteria for Discharge from Post 
Anesthesia Care Unit”). 
b.Lower- Have soft, pain-free abdomen, no covert bleeding 
c. Upper – Be able to swallow, no epigastric pain 
 
13. Moderate Sedation 
a.  Minimum time before discharge from hospital after the last dose of a sedative or narcotic 
is 30 minutes.  
b.Patient should meet all of the same discharge criteria as outlined above. 
c. If an antagonist (reversal agent) is given, the patient must remain in the hospital for at least  
two hours after the last administration of an antagonist (eg, naloxone, flumazenil),   and the 
discharge criteria is met. 
d.Discharge may be delayed when the patient receives morphine, experiences postoperative 
nausea and vomiting, receives dexmedetomidine, or has obstructive sleep apnea. 
e. Pediatric patient discharge may be prolonged when the child receives a medication with a 
long half-life (e.g. chloral hydrate) AND only one responsible adult is accompanying a 
child recovering from moderate sedation/ analgesia. If there are two adults, the nurse 
should provide instructions on careful observation of the child’s head position to avoid 
airway obstruction and the importance of the role of one adult to serve as the driver, and 
another adult to serve as an observer. 
 
14. The patient must have arrangements for safe transportation from the institution to their discharge 
destination.  
15. The nurse must review discharge instructions with patient and family/accompanying responsible 
individual as appropriate and provide written discharge instructions. 
 
REFERENCES: 
AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practice, 2021. 
 
ASPAN Perianesthesia Nursing Standards Practice Recommendations and Interpretive Statements, 
2021-2022. 