 NPC-142 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Patient Care 
Title: 
Admission/Discharge Criteria for 
Designated Stroke Beds on Neuroscience 
Unit 
Policy 
Reference #: NPC-142 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: August 9, 2010 Last Review 
Date:  October 8, 2024  
Last Revision Date: March 16, 2020 
 
PURPOSE: 
To state the admission/discharge criteria for patients admitted to the designated stroke beds on the 
Neuroscience/Neuroscience Critical Care Nursing Units and to meet the American Stroke Association’s 
Guidelines for the management of stroke. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Neuroscience Unit: - Designated Inpatient Acute Care Stroke Unit 
Neuroscience Critical Care: Designated Critical Care Stroke Unit 
 
POLICY: 
1. Patient criteria for admission to Designated Stroke beds on Neuroscience/Neuroscience Critical 
Care Units. 
a. Diagnosis of Stroke: ischemic or hemorrhagic 
All patients will receive remote cardiac monitoring per physician order for the 
first 24 hours. Continued monitoring will be as per physician orders. 
 
2. Priority for admission is determined by intensity of nursing and medical care needs. 
 
3. Bed availability shall be determined by the House Manager as requested by the attending 
physician. 
a. Stroke patients are admitted to units with cardiac monitoring capability and will have a 
NIHSS certified nurse available to complete the NIHSS assessment at designated times. 
 
4. Patients who do not meet admission criteria for designated stroke beds on the acute care 
Neuroscience Unit should be transferred to appropriate level of care. 
a. Patients requiring constant vital sign monitoring, continuous ventilator assistance, or use 
of hemodynamic monitoring  need to be on a critical care unit. 
b. Patients requiring administration of intravenous medications which require critical care or 
stepdown monitoring. 
c. Patients requiring monitoring post intervention such as thrombolytic therapy, mechanical 
endovascular therapy, or both need to be on a critical care unit. 
 
 
  NPC-142 
Page 2 of 2 
REFERENCES 
 
Powers et al. (2019). Guidelines for the early management of patients with ischemic stroke: 2019 update 
to the 2018 guidelines for the early management of acute stroke. A Guideline for healthcare 
professionals from the American heart association/American stroke association. Stroke, 50. doi: 
10.1161/STR.0000000000000211 
 
 