NPCLA-02 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Child Life  
Subject:  Child Life Programing  Section:  Administrative 
Date of Origination:  August 26, 1994 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
May 12, 2005 
 August 23, 2024 Serial Code:  NPCLA-02 
  
PURPOSE: 
To state policy related to programs offered by the Child life Department 
 
POLICY:   
 Believing that hospitalization is a potentially traumatizing event in a child’s life, the Child Life Department is 
designed to provide emotional support and information to children and their families as they cope with the 
stressful experience, inherent illness and/or surgical procedures. 
 
I. Programs Offered 
A. Patient Visitation 
Child Life Specialists will visit those patients on Pediatrics Medical Unit, Surgical Unit, 
Hematology-Oncology Unit, Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU), Universal Care Unit (UCU), 
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU), Same Day Surgery, Imaging Services Department and the 
Emergency Care Unit (ECU) who rank highest on the Child Life patient ranking system.  Child Life 
receives a daily census which is checked for patient’s name, age, length of stay, contact precautions, 
physician, and diagnosis.  Patients are then ranked using a scale which identifies those in greatest 
need of services.  When children are admitted on units other than those mentioned above, they are 
seen as scheduled. 
 
B. Pre-Surgery Teaching/Education 
Designed to help prepare children and parents for surgical procedures and hospitalization in a 
positive manner.  This opportunity will allow the patient and family to become familiar with the 
environment as well as provide what to expect during and after their surgical experience.  The 
information provided will assist to alleviate fears and misconceptions of the hospital and hospital 
procedures. 
 
C. Pre-Admission Program 
Parents of Same Day Surgery patients should call the Child Life Office to make an appointment for 
teaching prior to day of surgery.  Using the various developmentally appropriate educational tools to 
prepare a child for surgery/hospitalization, misconceptions and fears maybe properly answered.  
 
D. Medical Play/Therapeutic Play 
Child Life staff will provide an opportunity for the pediatric patient to demonstrate misconceptions 
and fears relating to medical procedures.  Pediatric patients should handle “real” or “play” medical 
equipment to reveal questions the Child Life Specialist can properly answer. 
  
E. Recreational Play  NPCLA-02 
Page 2 of 2 
The Child Life Specialist, as well as volunteers, will be the main source to provide routine play 
activities as a means of helping children continue normal growth and development. 
 
F. Procedural Support 
Child Life Staff will provide sensory and procedural education prior to procedures.  Distraction and 
coping techniques will be facilitated during the procedure. 
 
  
G. End of Life/Anticipated grief and Bereavement 
Child Life Specialist will provide support to families at End of Life/Anticipated grief and 
Bereavement.  The Child Life Specialist will identify families in need of support. Consults can be 
made by other disciplines.  Child Life Specialist will assess the family’s needs. Child Life Specialist 
will gather pertinent information from interdisciplinary team members.  Introduce services and 
assess family dynamics and coping styles. We will identify need for possible sibling support, 
preparation, visitation, conversation explaining the death/anticipated death of patient.  Gather 
appropriate resources and identify opportunity to offer memory making, create prints and lock of 
hair. 
 
H. Teen Night Out 
A program designed to meet the psychosocial needs of the chronically ill pre-adolescent and 
adolescent patient population.  To create the opportunity for patients to gain independence from the 
family unit, develop peer relationships, and peer support. 
 
I. Parental Support 
Along with offering support and information to the child, Child Life also offers support and 
information to the parents. 
 
J. Community Awareness 
To provide programs for the well child by educating them about hospitals and health care 
professionals.  “Class Tours” are available and can be scheduled by calling the Child Life 
Department. 
 
K. Multidisciplinary Education 
Designed to educate disciplines about Child Life Services.  This orientation promotes age- 
appropriate interactions and language with the pediatric patient as well as the emotional needs of the 
patient and family.  Playroom policy is discussed during this orientation. 
 
 