NPCL-002 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Child Life 
Subject:  The Children's Hospital Playrooms, Activity 
Spaces and leaving assigned unit 
Section:  Child Life 
Date of Origination:  December 6, 1999 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
March 26, 2007; 1/7/08; 
10/01/12; 7/18/19 
 
 
August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPCL-002 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide a therapeutic and nurturing environment supporting children’s normal growth and development.  
This policy is to ensure the safety of the pediatric patient while participating in playrooms, activity spaces and 
other approved areas of the hospital.  The approved areas of travel other than those specifically listed below for 
a pediatric patient include Cafeteria, Outside Garden, Gift Shop, Chapel and Family Resource Center. 
 
POLICY: 
Activities available to pediatric patients 
I. Guidelines for all playrooms 
A. Toys and activities may be brought to patient by the Child Life Staff, any member of the Children’s 
Hospital staff, the parent, or a volunteer.  Any toy that is removed from the Playroom must be returned 
to the dirty toy bin for proper cleaning. 
 
B. Basic rules of the Playroom are established for the protection of the patients. 
1. No food or drinks are allowed in the Playroom. 
2. All children must be accompanied by an adult.   
3. Clean up play materials after use for the safety of others. 
4. The Playroom can be used only by the patients, siblings, and visitors of the Children’s Hospital. 
5. No child placed on isolation will be allowed in the Playroom.  Visitors, including siblings, of the 
isolated patient will not be allowed to enter the playroom. 
6. No child with fever, vomiting, or diarrhea within the past 24 hours will be allowed in the Playroom.   
7. Shoes or non-skid socks must be worn in the playroom at all times. 
 
C. Absolutely no medical procedures or physical exams will take place in the Playroom (“Safe Zone”). 
 
D. Mobile game units are available for patient use based on availability.  Games are available for checkout.  
Units must be cleaned by staff between patient use. (Cleaning of Toys and Equipment – NPCL-008) 
 
 
II. Guidelines for area specific playrooms 
A. PICU/UCU Playroom 
1. A physician order must be obtained prior to playroom participation.  Based on physician 
assessment, it will be determined if the patient will need to be accompanied by a nurse during 
playroom participation. NPCL-002 
Page 2 of 2 
2. UCU patients and children with complex medical needs will require approval from the nurse 
prior to playroom participation. 
3. Any patient with a tracheostomy will need to be accompanied by a caregiver who is competent in 
tracheostomy care. 
 
A. Operative Playroom 
1. Patients will require approval from the nurse prior to playroom participation. 
 
B. Teen Room 
1. Teen patient will be accompanied by an adult. 
2. The Teen Lounge is for ages 13 and up.  
3. Siblings and visitors of Children’s Hospital patients only ages 13 and up. 
4. Only caregivers of teen patients are allowed. 
5. Disruptive behavior will not be tolerated, and the patient will be asked to return to their room. 
6. Child Life Staff or a volunteer will provide access to room and activities.  
7. A physician order must be obtained prior to patient leaving floor. 
8. The nurse will complete a travel sticker. 
 
C. Off Floor Activity or Visiting Hospital Approved Areas  
When a patient travels off of their assigned floor for purposes other than clinical reasons: 
1. A physician order must be obtained prior to patient leaving floor. 
2. The nurse will complete a travel sticker. 
 
D. Multi-sensory Room 
1. A physician order must be obtained prior to patient leaving floor. 
2. The nurse will complete a travel sticker. 
3. Refer to Multi-sensory Room Standard Operating Procedure for patient use 
 
 
 
 