NPCL-003 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Child Life 
Subject:  Child Life Documentation Section:  Child Life 
Date of Origination:  December 6, 1999 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
August 12, 2021 
 
 August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPCL-003 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide Child Life Staff with documentation guidelines and uniform charting practices.  
 
POLICY: 
Each Child Life Specialist is responsible for charting all pertinent information on each of his/her patients.  
Notes kept by the Child Life Specialist in the patient’s medical record are a form of legal documentation and 
serve as historical records.  
  
1. Chart entries will follow organizational standard for patient chart documentation (OrgClin/017). 
 
2. The need for medical record documentation will be assessed by the assigned child life specialist based 
on risk, length of stay and medical staff request.  Documentation will be considered a high priority in the 
following cases, but not limited to: 
a. Observed developmental concerns 
b. Medical educational needs 
c. Preparation for procedure  
d. Support for procedure 
e. Observed hospital/illness adjustment difficulties (patient or family members) 
f. Length of stay over 5-days 
g. To document pre-operative or pre-procedural teaching 
h. Medical staff referral 
i. Sibling preparation 
j. New chronic diagnosis 
k. Bereavement 
 
3. Child life documentation will reflect the role and expertise of the Child Life Specialist, patient/family 
involvement in Child Life programming, and coordination of care among members of the health care 
team, which includes Child Life.  Documentation may include: 
a. A psychosocial profile and assessment of the child, focusing specifically on his/her reactions to 
hospitalization, illness, physical restrictions, medical procedures, developmental level, separation, 
and on his/her individual coping skills. 
b. A psychosocial profile of the family where this may have an impact on the child’s adjustment or 
psychosocial well-being. 
c. Pre-operative or pre-procedural teaching and the child’s degree of understanding and anxieties. 
d. Anxieties specific to the child or family member in relation to the child and plans for Child Life 
support. 
e. Child Life intervention and patient/family participation in activities. NPCL-003 
Page 2 of 2 
f. Evaluation of Child Life intervention. 
 
4. Electronic Medical Record (EMR) documentation does not substitute for verbal communication between 
members of the health care team.  Child Life staff participates in interdisciplinary rounds and patient 
care conferences.  In addition, any significant concerns about psychosocial adjustment or developmental 
issues will be passed on verbally to the appropriate members of the health care team, particularly in an 
effort to keep the patient’s physician informed. 
 
5. Child Life documentation is recorded in EMR.  Child Life documentation is recorded in the following 
forms: Child Life Visit/Assessment/Evaluation, Preparation for Visit, Care Plans and can be found in 
Flowsheet and/or Notes. 
 
6. Child Life interns will document in EMR.  Child Life intern will gain appropriate access to EMR for 
documentation and will be sufficiently trained by an Organizational Development Specialist and a Child 
Life Specialist on EMR documentation.  A Child life Specialist will supervise the Child Life Intern 
during online documentation as well as cosign all documentation charted by the intern. 
 
7. Late and Mistaken Entry – Chart entries will follow organizational standard for documentation of late 
and mistaken entry (OrgClin/008). 
 
  
 
     
 
 
 