NPCL-006 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:   
Subject:  Entertainers and Visitors Section:  Child Life 
Date of Origination:  December 1, 1999 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
04/02, 10/03 
August 23, 2024 
Serial Code:   NPCL-006 
  
PURPOSE: 
To protect patient and families by evaluating developmentally appropriateness, the individual needs of each 
patient and family, and respecting confidentiality and privacy at a time when families are most vulnerable to 
stress. 
 
POLICY:  
1. All requests to visit in patient care areas at the Children’s Hospital should be channeled to the Child Life 
Department.  The Child Life Department will schedule no more than two groups a day to visit the 
patients and families. 
 
2. In consideration of the Infection Control Guidelines, no visiting group will be allowed to visit a patient 
in isolation.  It may be determined at any time that canceling a visiting group may be in the best interest 
of all involved.  We ask that no member of the group having signs and symptoms of illness attend the 
scheduled visit. 
 
3. The Child Life Department reserves the right to determine whether the proposed service is beneficial to 
and appropriate for the patients and families.  Child Life will arrange a schedule for approved events and 
designate a guide for each event.  The Child Life Department reserves the right to cancel a visit before 
or during the visit if it is determined the group is not appropriate for our patient population. 
 
4. Appropriateness is determined by the following guidelines including developmental level of the patient 
and the reason for the services proposed. 
a. Could the dress attire or service represent misconceptions about the hospital environment? 
b. Could the dress attire or service cause fears or fantasies about bodily harm and/or death? 
c. Does the dress attire or service respect cultural values and religious beliefs? 
d. Does the dress attire or service avoid medical themes that might confuse patients about their 
experience here? 
e. Does the dress attire or service reflect conservative nature and mission of Our Lady of the 
Lake Children’s Hospital? 
 
5. No excessive jewelry permitted such as dangling or heavy chains, long earrings, noisy bracelets, large 
rings, or keys on ropes or chains.  Dress attire specifically used for sleepwear, evening, or leisure 
(shorts, miniskirts, low-cut tops, halter or tank tops, midriff-baring, and see-through items, etc.) are not 
permitted.  (Dress code based in accordance with OrgOps/HR/E/009). 
 NPCL-006 
Page 2 of 2 
6. The designated guide shall: 
a. Provide entertainers and visitors the Children’s Hospital “Guidelines for Entertainers” form 
by mail, e-mail or fax in advance of scheduled event. 
b. Meet, greet, and accompany performers or visitors while on the unit.  All visiting groups 
must be escorted by staff, appropriately trained volunteer or trained group representative, and 
staff will ask permission of patient or family prior to visitor entering patient room. 
c. Provide a verbal orientation to visitors upon arrival. 
d. Be responsible for completing an expression of appreciation to those who presented the 
service. 
 
 
 
 