  NPD-011 
Page 1 of 4 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Children’s Hospital Section/ 
Chapter: Administration 
Title: Behaviors that fail to support Culture of 
Safety within the Children’s Hospital 
Policy 
Reference #: NPD-011 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: March 9, 2019 Review Date: April 23, 2021 
Revision Date:  
    
 
 
Policy: 
The objective of this policy is to describe measures team members will take to respond to behaviors 
which threatens the therapeutic environment for patients and/or undermines a culture of safety. This 
policy applies to all areas within the Children’s Hospital. Incidents of unsafe behavior by a patient/family 
or guardian should also be documented in a safety event report. 
 
If the unsafe individual is a minor, or otherwise considered legally incompetent, involvement of a legally 
authorized representative is desired. However, the use of appropriate means to prevent harm to patients, 
family/legal guardian, guests, medical staff, and/or Children’s Hospital team members, with or without 
the presence of an authorized representative will be utilized when necessary. 
 
Definitions: 
 
1. Unsafe Behavior – Patient/family behavior that intimidates, threatens patient care or the safety of 
team members and/or undermines a culture of safety. These situations include, but are not limited to: 
• Refusal to comply with reasonable requests from medical staff and/or Children’s Hospital 
team members, including refusal to comply with medical protocol and/or OLOL rules and 
regulations. 
• Possession or use of illegal drugs, alcohol, and use of tobacco products on Children’s Hospital 
premises. 
• Use of prescription medications that are not prescribed to the user. 
• Use of substances or procedures that are not approved in writing (or electronically) by a 
member of the Children’s medical staff. 
• Disruptive confrontations, threats or verbally or physical intimidating behavior. 
• Intentional failure to adhere to organizational rules and/or policies. 
 
2. Disorderly Conduct – Any person who solicits anyone to engage in, or who engages in, lewd or 
dissolute conduct in any public place, or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view. 
These situations include, but are not limited to: 
• Soliciting handouts and continue after being asked to stop. 
• Drunkenness, under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug or controlled substance. 
• Family and Civil Disturbances on hospital property (including any physical or violent act) 
• Making unreasonable noise and continue after being asked to stop (this includes loud music). 
• Use of offensive or abusive gestures or language. 
• Loitering or wandering on property without visible or lawful business (not seeking medical 
treatment or visiting a patient) 
   NPD-011 
Page 2 of 4 
 
3. Escalating Behavior- A change in behavior from acceptable to unacceptable with increase in 
intensity.  For example, an individual can be calm and quickly progress to verbal aggression; or an 
individual pacing or overtly anxious may become physically and verbally challenging. 
 
4. Administrative Discharge - A discharge when the optimal course of treatment would be for the 
patient to remain in the facility, however, his/her behavior has threatened the ability to provide a safe 
environment. 
 
5. Family – Legal guardian or genetic parents. 
 
6. Guest – An individual visiting the patient who is not a parent and/or legal guardian. 
 
7. Escalating Behavior – Behavior that tends to escalate becoming more aggressive and disruptive. 
Team members should attempt to de-escalate the behavior before it becomes disruptive.   Care should 
be taken to maintain personal safety at all times with an individual who is demonstrating escalation.  
Precipitating factors may include: patient or family/guardian current medical/mental status; anxiety or 
fear of the unknown; a previous negative experience in a healthcare setting; patient or family concern 
that they are not being listened to by the health care team or a personal patient/family situation. 
 
I. Behaviors that Do Not Support Culture of Safety 
 
A. Notification and Documentation: 
1. At the first instance of escalating or unsafe behavior, Children’s Hospital team member(s) and/or 
physician(s) will: 
a. Counsel the patient/family/guest. 
b. Document in the Electronic Health Record (EHR):  the behavioral problem, that patient/family   
was informed that such behavior is unacceptable; and the expected behavior. 
c. Discuss incident on rounds with health care team. 
2. If the same behavior reoccurs, The Charge Nurse and Unit Director should be notified and informed 
of unsafe behavior and actions taken. If the Unit Director is not available, notify the House 
Supervisor.  The Unit Director and/or House Supervisor will repeat the following actions: 
a. Identify unacceptable behavior and previously discussed behavior expectations. 
b. Document in the EHR that the patient/family/guardian was informed that such   
behavior is unacceptable and what the acceptable behavior is. 
c. Inform them that their unsafe behavior may interfere with continued treatment 
3. If necessary, inform ancillary team (i.e., Social Worker, Pastoral Care, etc.) members to speak or 
collaborate with the unit’s team before approaching a disruptive patient, family/legal guardian or 
guest. 
4.Each instance of unsafe behavior should be documented within the EHR to establish a pattern of 
repetitive disruptive behavior or otherwise unacceptable conduct.  Once a pattern of behavior has 
been established and addressed with supporting documentation, the Unit Director, Social Worker 
and Physician will meet with the individual and clarify expectations and establish a plan for how 
these expectations can be met.  
a. Prior to the discussion with patient/family, the team will meet to decide the best approach and 
options to be offered in an effort to redirect behavior. 
b. If the event the behavior continues to be exhibited after the above actions have been taken, the 
Children’s Hospital Administrator on call should be notified.  The Administrator will be 
responsible for identifying appropriate actions.   These actions may include notification of 
Department of Child Family Services; consultation with Risk Management; dismissal of parent 
for designated time and other interventions as deemed appropriate.   
   NPD-011 
Page 3 of 4 
 
B. Procedure: 
1. Every effort should be made to maintain a positive patient/hospital relationship including: 
a. Seeking to understand the behavior from their perspective and/or why the opposition 
continues to be exhibited. 
b. Counseling the patient, or family, focusing on the safety of the patient and the 
consequences (i.e., discharge) of continued inappropriate behavior.  
c. Engaging the patient’s family and physician for input and support. 
d. Consulting Mental and Behavioral Health, Medical Management, and/or Pastoral Care.  
e. Moving the patient (if applicable). 
2. When communicating with a disruptive person it is important to be calm and polite. This can be 
difficult in instances where a disruptive individual often provokes conflict. 
3. Use special sensitivity and caution when dealing with mentally ill and/or physically aggressive 
patients. 
a. If assistance is needed with a mentally ill or physically aggressive patient, parent and/or 
visitor, a Code White (ECSE007) should be called to prompt appropriate available team 
members to assist. 
b. Should restraint be warranted, minimal force should be utilized to maintain control and 
prevent harm to the patient or anyone else.  
c. If restraint and/or seclusion are necessary, the Restraint and Seclusion Policy must be 
followed. (Org/Clin/036) 
 
II. Disorderly Behavior 
 
A. Guest - When unsafe, disruptive or disorderly behavior involves a guest, they may be asked to 
leave. If they refuse, the House Supervisor/Administrator on Call or designee and Security 
should be contacted immediately. Before any guest is asked to leave, the House Supervisor 
and security will speak with the individual to: 
1. Make him/her aware that his/her behavior violates the organizational rules. 
2. Advise the individual that the behavior will not be tolerated and to cease such behavior. 
3. Ask the individual to leave if the disruptive behavior continues. 
B. Parent/Legal Guardian - When disruptive behavior involves a parent and/or legal guardian the 
House Supervisor will be notified in conjunction with Security.  The following will be 
conveyed:   
1. Inform him/her aware that his/her behavior violates our organizational rules. 
2. Advise the individual that the behavior will not be tolerated and to cease such behavior. 
3. Any further instances of disruptive and/or disorderly behavior will require a care  
                        team discussion which may include Risk Management to determine best option to  
                        ensure safety of all parties. 
C. Guest and Parent/Legal Guardian - Depending on the nature of the behavior, the following 
additional actions are to be considered and enacted as deemed appropriate:  
1. Activate a “Code White”. 
2. Ask Children’s Hospital Security to escort the individual off-property.  
3. House Supervisor, Administrator on Call or designee or Security may engage law 
enforcement for assistance and for possible arrest. 
4. Employee(s) who are victims of violent behavior from family/legal guardian and/or of 
a guest may press criminal charges against the individual. 
 
 
 
III. Administrative Discharge from the hospital 
   NPD-011 
Page 4 of 4 
 
A. Administrative Discharge 
1. When the patient’s medical condition permits, according to the attending physician or 
his/her designee, and all other efforts to induce compliance noted above have failed and 
have been documented, the patient may be Administratively Discharged. The following 
procedure outlined in the Children’s Hospital Administrative Discharge policy NPD-012 
should be carefully followed and each step documented.  