NPD-003 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Administrative 
Subject:  Safety Regulations  Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  December 1, 1987 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
April 12, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPD-003 
  
PURPOSE: 
To promote and define safety regulations for the pediatric patients. 
 
POLICY: 
Specific safety guidelines are followed for the hospitalized pediatric patient. 
 
I.  General Care Considerations 
 
1. Each patient and care giver must have an identification bracelet on either the ankle or wrist. 
2. Crib/stretcher side rails are to be raised and secured when parent/caregiver is not standing immediately 
at bedside.  Top two side rails on standard beds should be raised when patient is in bed. 
3. A caregiver will remain with the child during the Emergency Department visit, if available. 
4. Electric beds/stretchers will be placed in the lowest position with the side rails up. 
5. Infants under the age of one year will be required to sleep in a crib or a bassinet.  Children 13 months to 
2 years will also be placed in a crib.  In certain circumstances, a crib release form may be used for this 
age (13 months to 2 years to 24 months) at the request of the parent.  See safe sleep policy NPP-044 for 
crib/cribette selection.  
6. Oxygen precautions: oils and oil-based petroleum products should not be used on the patient when O2 is 
in use. 
7. Toy precautions:  Patients will be offered age-appropriate toys.  Smaller children are not to have objects 
which they might swallow, or inhale (coins, beans from beanbag, marbles).  Sharp edged toys or easily 
breakable plastic toys should be avoided for all age groups. 
8. Infants should be held for feeding, diagnosis permitting.  Parents are instructed not to prop bottles 
because of the potential for aspiration.   
9. Disinfectant wipes will not be left in patient rooms. 
10. Non-drinkable fluids will not be placed in baby bottles, such as liquid soap. 
11. All luer lock syringes should be placed in sharps containers; oral syringes maybe placed in trash. 
12. Any commercially manufactured device (bouncy seats, highchairs, infant carriers, etc.) that an infant is 
placed in must have the safety belt in place and the belt must be utilized at all times while in the 
Children’s Hospital.  This includes devices owned by the hospital and devices brought in by the 
caregiver.   
13. If a hospital infant/toddler device does not have the proper safety belt, remove the item from patient care 
and   
notify the unit Director.  If a parent has an infant in a device and does not have the infant  
secured properly, inform the parent of the policy, and proceed to secure the infant properly or  
remove the infant from the device. 
 NPD-003 
Page 2 of 2 
 
14. Appropriate options for warming a pediatric patient and/or extremity are:   
a. infant heel warmers,  
b. K-pad, blanket from blanket warmer, and/or other commercially available warming device. 
c. warmed by luke-warm tap water and/or washcloth.  
15. Microwaving non-food item is not permissible. 
16. The use or delivery of latex balloons is discouraged in the hospital.   
17. An order must be obtained for an inpatient to leave their assigned floor.  
18. Patients admitted to an in-patient area are not allowed in other patient’s rooms   
unless permission is obtained from the nurse and/or physician and the child is accompanied by the 
caregiver/guardian. 
19. Minors visiting the hospitalized patient cannot serve as the primary caregiver and should not be                 
left unattended 
 
II. Release of information to legal guardian/outside protective agencies 
      
1. On admit, the legal guardian of the patient will be given a patient specific code to allow updates  
             to be provided via telephone when the legal guardian is not able to be present at the hospital. 
2. Outside protective agencies will be provided a separate code to allow information to be conveyed  
            via telephone. 
  
 
REFERENCE: 
 
Bowden, V.R., Greenberg, C.S. (2016).  Pediatric Nursing Procedures (4th Ed.) Philadelphia, PA:  Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins. 
 