NPP-036 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Phototherapy Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  March 26, 2007 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
October 23, 2020 
November 8, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPP-036 
  
PURPOSE: 
      To provide guidelines on nursing care for the infant receiving phototherapy 
 
         EQUIPMENT: 
 Overhead phototherapy lights 
         Giraffe isolette, radiant heat warmer or bassinet 
 Radiometer (Device to check light intensity) 
 Eye shields 
 Tape measure 
 Bili bed (Bili boat) 
         Bili blanket 
I.   Protocol: 
 A. The Bili Bed and the Bili Blanket can be used in conjunction with overhead or spot phototherapy 
light(s) as ordered   per the physician.  
 B. Place the Phototherapy Lights over the infant.  
C.  A warmer may also be used in conjunction with phototherapy as ordered by provider.  
 
For the NeoBLUE LED Phototherapy System:   
      The bottom of the light should be at a distance of 12 inches from infant as defined in the the NeoBlue 
LED Phototherapy System User Manual.  This distance should be documented on initiation of therapy and 
daily every 12 hours thereafter for the duration of therapy.  This system has a high and low intensity 
setting.  The high setting will be utilized unless specified otherwise by the physician/NNP.  
      See NeoBlue LED Phototherapy System User Manual  
 
 D Measuring the Intensity of the device 
1. For the NeoBLUE LED Phototherapy System – Using the NeoBlue LED Phototherapy Radiometer, 
verify the intensity of the lights by holding the sensor against the infant’s body as near to the 
umbilicus as possible and aim the sensor at the center of the phototherapy light.  This product is only 
suitable for measuring with NeoBLUE products.  It does not accurately measure broadband sources in 
other products.  For the high intensity setting the light should be calibrated to deliver 35 uW/cm2/nm 
and at the low intensity 15 uW/cm2/nm at the 12 inches from the infant. Changes in the distance or 
angle of the light to the patient will change the irradiance the patient receives, requiring new 
measurements to be taken. The intensity should be documented on the initiation of therapy and every 
12 hours thereafter for the duration of therapy.  Notify BioMed of abnormal readings and remove 
equipment from patient use. 
See Manufacturer Instructions for NeoBLUE LED Phototherapy Radiometer  NPP-036 
Page 2 of 3 
 
2. Bili Bed – Using the NeoBLUE Radiometer, verify the intensity of the lights by placing meter in 
center of mattress face down on top of disposable cover to take measurement.  If the intensity of the 
light falls less than 30 uW/cm2/nm, remove device from service and send to BioMed. 
See NeoBlue Cozy LED User Manual   
 
3. Bili Blanket – Using the NeoBLUE Radiometer, verify the intensity of the lights by placing meter in 
the center of the blanket face down on top of disposable cover.  If the intensity of the light falls less 
than 30 uW/cm2/nm, remove device from service and send to BioMed.   
See NeoBlue Blanket LED Quick Guide  
 
E A new disposable cover will be placed on the bili bed mattress and bili blanket with every use.  The 
device will be placed inside any infant bed, plugged into an electrical outlet, and turned on.  Care should 
be taken not to block any of the air vents at the head and foot of the Bili Bed. 
F. Infant should be nude, except diaper to cover gonads.  Infants under phototherapy should have as much of 
their body surface area exposed as possible.  Large surface areas, such as the back and abdomen should be 
exposed for maximum therapy.  As a result of increased body surface area exposure, an additional heat 
source may be needed.  Infants on a Bili Bed or on a Bili Blanket can have an infant blanket placed over 
them as long as the air vents are not covered. 
G. Use eye shields on all infants and with all phototherapy devices.  Ensure that the eyes are closed prior to 
application.  Eye shields should be checked frequently and removed every 4 hours for at least 15-30 
minutes (phototherapy is held during this time period).  The eyes should be inspected at this time for any 
drainage, excessive pressure on the lids, or corneal irritation. 
H. Phototherapy should be turned off during assessment, lab draws, and care activities. 
I. Infants are turned every 2-3 hours as infant’s condition allows. 
J. Record temperature every 2-3 hours.  Notify physician of abnormal body temperature reading. 
K. Baby may be taken off of phototherapy for 1 hour every 24 hours unless otherwise specified by provider. 
L. Infant should breastfeed or take formula every two to three hours following the infant’s   feeding schedule  
M. No lotions or ointments should be used on the skin as burns may occur. 
N. Infants receiving phototherapy treatment are weighed daily. 
O. Ensure bilirubin monitoring is completed as ordered by the physician. 
P.  At the completion of therapy, all equipment must be cleaned with hospital approved disinfectant and    
        stored in designated area.  
 
II. Patient/Family Education: 
Family members are informed of: 
A. The reason for phototherapy 
B. The necessity of the eye shields 
C. The importance of having the infant under the phototherapy as much as possible (time will be given for 
family bonding with the infant) 
D. Side effects of phototherapy, such as lethargy, agitation, temperature instability, skin rash and loose green 
stools 
 
III. Documentation: 
A. Type and number of phototherapy devices in use 
B. Begin and end time of phototherapy 
C. Proper shielding of the eyes 
D. Distance between surface of photo therapy lights and infant, documented daily 
E. Photometer measurement of light intensity every 12 hours 
F. Skin color, including extent of jaundice NPP-036 
Page 3 of 3 
 
G.  Skin integrity, including rashes and skin related issues 
H. Eye care every four hours 
I. Temperature every two hours 
J. Turning every two hours 
K.  Strict Intake and Output  
L. Daily weight 
M. Occurrence of side effects 
 
See Ebsco Health Online Resource for Phototherapy 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
Bowden, V.  & Greenburg, C. (2016).  Pediatric Nursing Procedures (4th Ed.).  Philadelphia:  Wolter Kluwer. 
 
Natus Medical (2019).  NeoBLUE LED Phototherapy System User Manual 
 
Natus Medical (2012).  User Manual NeoBLUE Phototherapy RadioMeter 
 
Natus Medical (2018).  NeoBlue® blanket LED Phototherapy. 
 
Natus Medical (2016).  NeoBlue® Cozy LED Phototherapy 
 