                                                                                                                                                              NPP-045 
Page 1 of 4 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Administration of Nitrous Oxide (N20) for 
Procedural Purposes in Pediatric Patient 
Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  January 2020 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
February 28, 2025 
Serial Code:  NPP-045 
  
PURPOSE: 
To guide the practice of administering nitrous oxide (N20) with oxygen (02) outside of the operating room for 
pediatric patients during minor procedures that cause anxiety and/or pain for minimal sedation.  N20 is an 
inhaled gas that has a rapid onset (1-5 minutes) and peaks within 5 minutes by crossing the blood brain barrier.   
 
The gas is eliminated through the lungs. 
▪ Minimal Sedation/Anxiolysis – Nitrous Oxide (N 20) in a concentration of 50% or less produces a 
minimal state of sedation; minimal sedation will apply. 
▪ Moderate Sedation – N20 between 51% – 70% and when N 20 is combined with other sedatives or 
analgesics (local anesthetics excluded), a state of moderate sedation is more often produced and 
therefore, the current hospital policy for moderate sedation will apply.  Maximum of 70% N 20 will be 
administered with a minimum of 30% 02 for any procedure.  
 
POLICY:  
I. Administration  
A. Nitrous oxide will only be administered by a credentialed physician order.  A minimum of two 
healthcare providers (nurse and physician) must be present for all nitrous oxide sedation 
procedures. 
a. Nursing Competency 
• Complete education module and nursing competency checklist 
• Documentation of prior nitrous oxide training, OR monitoring of three (3) supervised 
cases 
B. Only nursing staff with nitrous oxide documented skill competency can monitor patient receiving 
N2O.  
C. Female staff and family members who are pregnant will be advised to leave the room during 
N2O administration. 
D. Maximum continuous patient exposure to N2O should be no more than 30 minutes. 
E. N2O may be administered to children who are 12 months of age or greater gestational age. 
 
II. Indication 
A. Moderate sedation involving nitrous oxide: 
1. N2O between 51% - 70%. 
2. Administration of any additional sedatives or analgesics (local anesthetics excluded). NPP-045 
Page 2 of 4 
3. Any additional sedatives or analgesics (local anesthetics excluded) within one hour of N2O 
administration. 
4. Informed consent is required when used for moderate sedation. 
B. Refer to organizational policy NNA-089 Sedation for Procedures for patient care standards 
regarding NPO guidelines, patient assessment, equipment, monitoring, documentation, post-
procedure criteria. 
 
III. Consideration and Contraindications for N2O 
A. Procedures to consider N2O administration include but are not limited to: 
1. Dressing changes/wound care 
2. Urinary catheter insertion 
3. Simple laceration repair 
4. Simple abscess incision and drainage 
5. Lumber puncture 
6. Gynecologic /sexual assault exam 
7. Nasogastric tube placement 
8. Radiologic/imaging procedures (VCUG, CT, Echo). 
9. Gastrostomy tube change 
10. Peripheral IV insertion/venipuncture 
11. Fracture reduction 
B. Patient Contraindications 
1. ASA score > III 
2. Pregnant patients 
3. Craniofacial abnormalities 
4. Know difficult airway 
5. Those who cannot inhale adequately due to anatomy or disease induced obstructions: 
a. Stridor 
b. Wheezing 
c. Increased work of breathing 
d. Allergic rhinitis 
e. Severe sinusitis 
f. Tachypnea 
6. Trapped air syndromes: 
a. Chest (trauma, pneumopericardium, gas embolus, bullous emphysema) 
b. Head (trauma, sinusitis, OM, tympanoplasty, diving, <24º) 
c. Abdomen (trauma, intestinal obstruction, ileus) 
7. Recent eye surgery, and/or increased ocular pressure 
8. Vitamin B deficiencies 
9. Those who cannot sustain and tolerate the nasal mask: 
a. Uncooperative and combative patient 
b. Severely phobic 
c. Cognitively impaired 
10. Received Nitrous Oxide within last 7 days 
11. Altered level of consciousness 
12. Bleomycin administration 
13. Current state of drug or alcohol intoxication 
14. History of substance abuse 
C. The following are NOT contraindicated for N2O use: 
1. Controlled asthma NPP-045 
Page 3 of 4 
2. Sickle Cell Disease 
3. Stable congenital cardiac conditions  
4. Personal and/or family history of malignant hyperthermia 
 
IV. Equipment 
A. N2O will only be administered by approved delivery device with scavenging system 
B. Provider is responsible for reviewing medical history prior to ordering N2O 
C. Standard sedation equipment including cardiac monitor, wall suction, crash cart, resuscitation 
bag, oral/nasal airways readily available prior to N2O administration 
 
V. General Principles 
A. N2O will only be administered by approved delivery device with a scavenging system 
B. Provider is responsible for reviewing medical history prior to ordering N2O 
C. NPO status is preferred but is not required for minimal sedation/anxiolysis; for moderate 
sedation NPO guidelines must be followed as outlined in NNA-089 Sedation for Procedures 
policy 
D. Topical/local anesthetic may be utilized as indicated (i.e., suturing, LP. Etc.) 
E. Place oxygen device/mask on patient and ensure tight seal 
F. Instruct patient to take deep breaths and exhale slowly when developmentally appropriate 
G. Provider will titrate N2O up to the maximum concentration 
H. Patient will be allowed to breath N2O for at least two minutes prior beginning procedure 
I. Avoid unnecessary conversation with patient to limit breaking seal and exhalation of N2O into 
room 
J. Monitor patient for dizziness, tearing/crying/agitation, decreased arousability, nausea /vomiting, 
diaphoresis/pallor, hallucinations, hiccups, hypoxia, or other unmanaged pain symptoms: 
a. If patient has altered response, the provider will decrease the gas or discontinue the use and 
consider alternative sedation plan. 
K. Once N2O is discontinued, provide 100% oxygen for five minutes 
L. If the patient receives N2O for minimal sedation/anxiolysis, the patient will be observed for 10 
minutes or until discharge criteria is met: 
a. Pulse oximetry within 3-5% of pre-procedure readings on room air 
b. Return to baseline level of consciousness 
c. Return to baseline motor function (i.e., perform finger to nose test if developmentally 
appropriate) 
d. Absence of nausea/vomiting 
M. Failure to meet discharge criteria requires the nurse to notify physician and document any 
additional interventions/instructions 
N. If the patient receives N2O for moderate sedation, monitoring and discharge guidelines will apply 
per hospital policy NNA-089 Sedation for Procedures 
 
VI. Documentation 
A. All documentation of N2O administration will occur in the electronic medical record.  This 
should include: 
a. Percent of gas mixture and total time of N2O administration in minutes 
b. Response to procedure and any side effects 
 
VII. Environmental Testing 
A. Periodic environmental testing for ambient nitrous oxide will be done in accordance with OSHA 
guidelines NPP-045 
Page 4 of 4 
VIII. Nitrous Oxide Gas Security 
A. Flow meter system will be secured after each use and stored in secure location.  Only authorized 
personnel will have access to retrieve flow meter system.  Mobile Gas Security. 
B. Immediately following procedure, nitrous tank must be turned off and stored in secure location 
 
REFERENCES: 
See Ebsco Online Resource Administering Nitrous Oxide for Procedure Sedation and Analgesia 