 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Death of a Patient/Autopsy Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  December 2018 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
November 8, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPP-043 
  
PURPOSE:  
To define the process for the disposition of the deceased patient and his/her valuables and the procedure 
for handling autopsies. 
 
POLICY:  
Deceased patients and their families are treated with respect, dignity, and compassion at all times.  
Definition of autopsies: 
• Coroner – Coroner deems necessary.  Consent is not required from the victim’s family (see 
OrgClin 004)  
• Medical – Deemed necessary by medical staff and/or offered to families free of charge; requires 
physician order; hospital obtains authorization and arranges transportation of body to contracted 
facility for autopsy. 
• Private forensic – Only available from limited list of agencies.  Will provide to families per their 
request.  List is obtained from Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) 
pathology.  Family is responsible for all arrangements independent of hospital; family 
responsible for financial fees including transportation of body.  The hospital will not obtain 
authorization for this examination.  The decedent will remain in morgue until arrangements 
have been made by the family.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Notification 
a. At the time of death of a patient, the patient’s physicians, patient care services and pastoral 
care should be notified and coroner (if applicable) 
b. The coroner must be notified of all deaths.  
c. For all patient deaths, complete the Organ Procurement Referral in EPIC.  
d. If medical autopsy requested, notify pathology. 
 
2. Belongings 
a. Personal belongings are given to the relative in attendance (see OrgClin/004). A description 
of valuables and the name of the relative who takes these shall be entered in the nurses’ 
notes.  
b. If no family member is present, the articles left in the patients’ room shall be turned into the 
nurse’s station for purpose of record, and then transferred to the Security Office for 
subsequent handling (see OrgClin/022) 
c. Any dental device, if applicable, should be placed in a cup, labeled and sent with the body. 
 
3. Nursing Responsibilities 
a. Life-sustaining measures are not discontinued until a physician has seen the patient.  b. The patient is not legally dead until pronounced by the physician.  
c. Every possible courtesy is extended to the family. The body is to be handled with dignity 
and respect.  
 
4. Documentation 
The nurse should complete an Expiration Note in the electronic medical record, indicating the 
date and time of death, the physician pronouncing the patient deceased, disposition of valuables, 
and post-death arrangements. Additional documentation will be necessary if the patient’s death 
is deemed a coroner’s case (see OrgClin/004). 
 
5. Disposition 
a. The nurse should request the name of the funeral home before the family leaves. If a funeral 
home is not known, the family is instructed to call Patient Care Services as soon as a 
decision has been made. Disposition is charted in the Expiration Note.  
b. The house supervisor, nurse or ancillary team member will retrieve the body hold cart (if 
needed) and Morgue Log Book. The log is completed by the attending nurse. The body will 
be covered, secured and transported to the morgue. At this time, the funeral home chosen by 
the family is contacted by the nurse on the unit and documented in the medical record by the 
nurse.  
c. In the event the body is for autopsy, the nurse should notify the funeral home that the body 
cannot be released until an autopsy is performed. Pathology will notify the funeral home that 
body is ready for transport after the autopsy has been performed.  
d. Funeral home representatives are responsible for obtaining signature of physician on death 
certificates. 
 
6. Coroner’s Cases 
Refer to policies OrgClin 004 Coroner’s Cases and policy HIMR37 Coroner’s Request for 
Medical Information if a medical record is requested.  In the event organ procurement is being 
considered the coroner must be contacted. 
 
7. Preparation of the Body 
a. After the family has left the hospital, the body is prepared and transported to the morgue.  
The body is cleansed, all personal valuables are removed, ensure that an ID bracelet is 
placed on the patient, and all indwelling tubes are removed (except in the event an 
autopsy is requested).  A gown is placed on the body, then the body is placed in a plastic 
zippered body bag and tags to be placed on great toe, the zipper on the outside of the 
bag, and on any valuables. 
1. For Coroner case, the decedent should not be cleansed unless specified 
otherwise by the Coroner. 
b. For infectious cases identify the infectious disease on the back of the great toe tag and 
body bag tag prior to taking the body to the body hold.  The House Manager or designee 
assisting the funeral home personnel will inform them of measures necessary for 
precautions, if indicated.  For special communicable diseases that have high 
pathogenicity refer to the Special Communicable Disease policy (IC 2013) 
Louisiana revised statute RS 40:1271.2 states that each hospital which requests a funeral 
director to transport a corpse where there is actual knowledge that the corpse is infected 
with a contagious disease be notified during the initial telephone communication.  
Further notification shall include a clearly visible, external tag that is readily discernible 
from other identification markers and a written statement that clearly indicates the name 
of the contagious disease or causative agent infecting or infesting said corpse. Such 
notification shall be made in a manner that protects the confidentiality of the deceased and the funeral director or embalmer handling the corpse. For Coroner’s cases no 
cleansing of the body should be done.   
 
8. Body hold verification process 
a. Patient body delivery to the morgue: The House Supervisor will verify the ID of the 
patient’s body as it is delivered to morgue. 
1. The house supervisor will verify the patient’s ID with the attending nurse by 
checking that, all three identifiers (bag tag, toe tag, and patient armband) are 
consistent with each other.  
2. The house supervisor must sign, date and document the time of delivery in the 
Morgue Log Book next to the name of the patient.  
b. Patient body release to funeral home or pathology transport service: The house 
supervisor will verify the ID of the patient’s body as it is released to the funeral home.  
1. The house supervisor will verify the patient’s ID by checking that, all three 
identifiers (bag tag, toe tag, and patient armband) are consistent with each other 
before the release.  
2. The house supervisor, funeral home witness and other witness must sign, date 
and document the time of release in the Morgue Log Book next to the name of 
the patient.  
c. In the event a family doesn’t have a funeral home chosen upon leaving the Children’s 
Hospital, the House Supervisor will verify with the family their funeral home decision 
prior to releasing the body to a funeral home.  
 
9. Disposition of Fetus 
a. Louisiana law states that each spontaneous fetal death of twenty (20) complete weeks 
gestation or more, calculated from the date the last normal menstrual period began to the 
date of delivery; a weight of three hundred fifty (350) grams or more; or a live birth 
which occurs in this state shall be reported within five days after delivery to the vital 
records registry or as otherwise directed by the state registrar.  This reporting will be 
done by the Health Information Management Department at OLOL.   
b. Fetal weights will be obtained by laboratory. The Nursing unit will place all of the 
products of conception into a laboratory-supplied container and will bring to Laboratory 
for weighing.   
c. The infant must be buried/cremated if it is 350 grams or more, is 20 weeks gestation or 
more, born with a heart rate, has respiratory action, or has movement of voluntary 
muscles.  The infant will only be examined in the Pathology laboratory if an autopsy is 
requested. 
d. If the fetus is born without a heart rate, is less than 350 grams, or less than 20 weeks 
gestation, burial is not required; however, Louisiana state law requires notification to 
parents or mother the option to bury or cremate.   This notification will be done within 
24 hours by providing The Disposition of Fetal Remains form # 91743 to the parent (s) 
with the explanation and expectation that the form be signed by the parent and returned  
by the family to the Patient Care Services office within 48 hours should there be a desire 
to bury or cremate After inspection by the doctor, all products of conception of less than 
350 grams, or less than 20 weeks gestation, shall be sent to the Pathology laboratory 
with a request slip for tissue examination. Should burial or cremation be requested 
Pathology Group of Louisiana histology lab compliance officer will be notified by 
Patient Care Services of the family’s intent. Within one business day the products of 
conception will be returned and logged into OLOL Morgue after routine histopathologic 
examination.  Products of conception will only be released to licensed funeral homes. 
 e. Failure of the family/mother to notify the hospital facility of the desire to bury/cremate 
the fetal remains within 48 hours of receiving form # 91743 will allow the hospital 
facility and or its authorized agent to dispose of the products of conception according to 
their customary tissue disposal practice. 
10. Anatomical Donations 
 Refer to Policy Org/Clin 002 Bodies Willed or Donated to Medicine 
 
11. Medical Autopsy 
a. Ensure physician order has been obtained for medical autopsy prior to obtaining 
authorization form signed. 
b. An "Authorization for Autopsy” form must be completed and signed by the patient's 
next of kin before the procedure is started, except in a case where the Coroner has 
jurisdiction (see OrgClin/004). The form must be completed in full, indicate the extent of 
procedure to be done (trunk, head, partial, or total), and signed by two witnesses.    
c. The nurse will notify the physician/coroner’s office if the family requests an autopsy.  
When the autopsy authorization form has been properly signed, the body (with bag tag, 
toe tag, and patient armband) is taken to the morgue.  The “Authorization for Autopsy” 
will be scanned into the medical record by HIM.  The House Supervisor will provide a 
copy to the entity transporting the body.  The name of the funeral home must be 
identified at the time the authorization is signed.   
d. Decedent will be transported to outside contracted facility for autopsy.  
e. The contracted agency performing the autopsy will notify the funeral home when 
autopsy is complete for transport.  For a Coroner’s case, the nurse notifies the Coroner 
after the patient has been pronounced dead.  The Coroner will provide orders concerning 
release of the body in accordance with OrgClin/004. The nurse should notify the coroner 
if the next of kin requests an autopsy.  If the Coroner orders an autopsy, nursing will 
request a copy of the patient’s chart from Health Information Management (HIM). A 
copy of the patient’s chart should be sent with the patient.   
f. The preliminary autopsy report will be completed within 2 working days and the final 
autopsy report will be completed within 60 calendar days.  Report will be available in 
patients’ chart once finalized. 
Attachments:   
Authorization for Autopsy and Disposition of Remains #91911 
Disposition of Fetal Remains # 91743 
 
Cross Reference policies: 
Coroner’s Care OrgClin 004 
Patient Valuables and Home Medication Safe Keeping OrgClin 022 
Coroner’s Request for Medical Information HIMR37 
Bodies Willed or Donated to Medicine 0C002 
Special Communicable Disease Management Plan IC2013  
  
REFERENCE: 
Louisiana revised statute RS 40:1271.2. Mandatory Identification of infected corpses. (2015). Retrieved from: 
http://law.justia.com/codes/louisiana/2015/code-revisedstatutes/title-40/rs-40-1271.2 
 
Louisiana revised statute RS 40:1191.2 Final disposition of fetal remains; rights of parents; notice required; 
exception. (2016). Retrieved from: https://law.justia.com/codes/louisiana/2016/code-revisedstatutes/title-40/rs-
40-1191.2/ IF AUTHORIZATION IS SIGNED BY ONE OTHER THAN THE SURVIVING SPOUSE, THE FOLLOWING BE SUPPLIED: 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL, INC 
BATON ROUGE, LA 
 
 
AUTHORIZATION FOR AUTOPSY AND DISPOSITION OF REMAINS 
I (We) here represent that I am (we are) the (state relationship)                                                                                         
Of the deceased (name of patient)  and I (we) have the right to control the 
disposition of the remains of said deceased. 
 
Other surviving relatives are named below: 
Adult children:                                                                                                                                                                            
Minor Children (under 18 years):       
Father:    
Mother:    
Adult brothers and sisters:                                                                                                                                                    
Minor brothers and sisters (under 18 years):       
Grandparents:    
On behalf of myself and the surviving relatives of the deceased (name of patient    
    including all those relatives named above, l request and authorize the physicians 
and surgeons in attendance at Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOLH”), and third-parties arranged by or 
affiliated with OLOLH, to perform a complete autopsy on the remains of the deceased (name of patient) 
   and I authorize the removal and retention or use for diagnostic, scientific, 
educational or therapeutic purposes of such organs, tissues and parts as such physicians, surgeons, and third- 
parties deem proper. I authorize the attendance at the autopsy of medical and paramedical students and 
personnel for educational purposes. 
 
This authority is granted subject to the following restrictions: (If no restrictions, write “NONE”) 
Permission for the following special examinations is granted: 
 
I (We) wish the remains to be released to:     
(Name of undertaking establishment)  (City)  (State) 
Person Providing Authorization (Print Name):       
Signature:  Date:  Time:     
Witness (Print Name):     
Signature:  Date:  Time:    
Witness (Print Name):       
Signature:  Date:  Time:    
Person Obtaining Authorization (Print Name):       
Signature:  Date:  Time:     
 
Item #91911 AUTHORIZATION FOR AUTOPSY 
Org 01/2022 Rev 05/2024                                                                                                                 
 
Patient Label 
 