NPP-039 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care  
Subject:  Transport (In-house) of the Neonate & 
Pediatric Patient 
Section:  Patient care 
Date of Origination:  August 3, 2012 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
June 2, 2023 
June 7, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPP-039 
  
PURPOSE: 
To facilitate the safe transport of the neonate and pediatric patient form one area of the hospital to another and 
to identify appropriate devices utilized in transporting the patient. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. Neonate in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) 
A. Transporting the Neonate Patient 
1. Neonates will be transported by a nurse in the appropriate transport device in accordance with 
their clinical condition. 
2.  Designated test/procedure should be performed in the infant's room and/or on unit when 
possible. Visitors should be avoided to the extent possible in transporting the neonate (i.e., only 
nurse, and neonate and parent in the elevator).  
3. Confirm with department that area is ready for neonate prior to transfer.  Neonate should not 
wait in designated area for procedure. 
4. The nurse transporting the neonate is responsible for assisting with positioning and making sure 
the infant stays warm during the procedure. 
5.  NICU patients are to be transported on a transport monitor. 
6. Respiratory Therapy must be present for all patients transported on ventilator. 
II.  Pediatric Intensive Care Patient (PICU) 
            A.  Transporting the critical care Pediatric Intensive Care Patient 
                   1.  Critical care patients in the PICU will be transported by a critical care nurse to a 
procedure/ordered test off of the unit and remain with the patient 
                   2.  Critical care PICU patients will be transported on a transport monitor with any life sustaining 
supplies/medications based on clinical status of the patient. 
 
                   3.  Critical care patients in the PICU who are going to surgery, will be escorted to the OR area by 
OR nurse and anesthesia/CRNA after hand-off is provided. 
                   4.  For the non-intubated critical care patient, post procedure the patient will be recovered in Post 
Anesthesia Care Unit (PACU).  The critical care nurse will provide handoff to PACU and he/she will return to 
PICU.  Once the PACU nurse determines that the patient has recovered from anesthesia, report will be called to 
the PICU and patient will be transported on a monitor back to the unit.  PACU will handoff when patient arrives 
in PICU.  
                   5.  For the intubated patient, post operatively/post procedure the patient will return to PICU with 
anesthesia/CRNA and the PICU nurse will resume care of  the patient until the patient has returned to baseline. 
The unit and attending will be notified that the patient is returning to the unit and handoff will be provided.    NPP-039 
Page 2 of 3 
      
  
III. Pediatric Patient 
A. Transport of the stable pediatric patient 
1. All stable pediatric patients 14 years or younger will be transported with transport personnel and 
caregiver in accordance with Organizational Clinical policy – 018 Patient Identification/Alert 
Bands. 
2. If no caregiver is available nursing department personnel will accompany pediatric patient 14 
years or younger to the department where procedure is being done and will handoff care to a 
member of that department.  Children’s Hospital House Supervisor should be notified and when 
possible, consideration should be given to any available Children’s Hospital staff who could 
accompany patient in the absence of the parent. 
3. Transport personnel will follow their department procedure for transporting patients safely. 
 
B. Transport of the pediatric non PICU patient with a tracheostomy: 
1. Any pediatric patient with a tracheostomy will be transported to any procedure with a nurse 
and/or caregiver trained in the emergency reinsertion of a trach in attendance.  Emergency 
equipment for potential trach reinsertion will accompany patient.  This equipment will include 
resuscitation bag with mask, extra trach tube (same size and smaller size), water soluble jelly, 
trach ties and suction catheter kits. 
2. Any pediatric patient with a tracheostomy and on home ventilator will be transported to any 
procedure with a nurse and respiratory therapists in attendance.  These patients will be placed on 
a portable pulse oximetry and emergency equipment for potential trach reinsertion will 
accompany patient.  This equipment to include resuscitation bag with mask, extra trach tube 
(same size and smaller), water soluble jelly, trach ties, suction catheter kits and portable oxygen 
tank.   
3. If the patient who is alone on a home ventilator and is going for a sedated procedure or surgery, 
the patient will be accompanied by qualified personnel from sedation, anesthesia and/or surgery 
department. 
 
C. Transport of the pediatric patient on telemetry 
1. If a pediatric patient is on telemetry, the assigned nurse will verify with the attending physician 
the need for the patient to be monitored during transport and procedure.  If the physician verifies 
the need for continued monitoring, the patient will be accompanied by the nurse during transport.  
If qualified nurse is available, care can be transferred to the department where the procedure is 
being done.  If the physician verifies that monitoring can be discontinued during transport and 
procedure, an order will be entered in the patient’s medical record.  Telemetry monitoring will be 
resumed when patient returns from procedure. 
2. If the patient is going for a sedated procedure or surgery and the need for continued monitoring 
has been verified by the physician, the patient will be placed on transport monitor and be 
accompanied by qualified personnel from sedation, anesthesia and/or surgery. 
 
IV. Transport Devices for the Pediatric Patient 
A. General Considerations 
1. Appropriate infection control precautions must be followed when a patient is transported. 
2. Hospital staff and caregiver will accompany the pediatric patient when being transported for 
discharge.  The exception is in the Emergency Care Unit. 
3. For children 14 years and younger, a parent and/or designed adult must accompany the child on 
any transport for a procedure. NPP-039 
Page 3 of 3 
4. In the instance that a minor does not have a parent and/or designated adult present and consent 
has been obtained in accordance with the Organizational Clinical policy – 012 Informed Consent 
the child can be taken for the procedure without the adult and 2 ID will be performed between 
sending and receiving care teams. 
5. Inpatients transported should be in a crib, bed, wheelchair, stretcher, stroller, or wagon. 
 
B. Infant Considerations 
1. The caregiver will be encouraged to hold the infant in the wheelchair. 
2. Parents may carry the infant carrier for transport if appropriately secured. 
3. Infant carriers may not be placed in wheelchairs unless caregiver places carrier in their lap while 
seated in wheelchair. 
 
C. Wagon Considerations 
1. Wagons may be utilized for 
a. Children who can developmentally sit unassisted and/or those who can be safely positioned 
with staff assistance 
b. Patient discharge 
c. At the discretion of the Child Life Specialist 
d. By family members in the Children’s Hospital to stroll the pediatric patients 
2. Wagons can be utilized for transport of the pediatric patient across departments. 
 
D. Pediatric Emergency Room 
1. Pediatric patients transported from Pediatric Emergency Room to floor will be transported by 
stroller, crib, infant warmer, wheelchair, or stretcher. 
2. Pediatric patients transported from Pediatric Emergency Room to PICU will be transported on a 
stretcher with side rails raised, on a cardiac monitor continuous pulse oximetry, and a Registered 
Nurse in attendance. 
3. Pediatric patients admitted with orders for telemetry monitoring will be transported to the unit on 
a stretcher with side rails raised, on a cardiac monitor with continuous pulse oximetry, and 
Registered Nurse in attendance. 
 
 
 
Policies Referenced: 
 
OrgClin-018 Patient Identification/Alert Bands  
OrgClin-012 Verification of Hospital/Informed Consent for Operations and Other Procedures 
 