   NPP-038 
Page 1 of 5 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Children’s Hospital Section/ 
Chapter: Patient Care 
Title: Children’s Hospital Code 
Blue/Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 
Policy 
Reference #: NPP-038 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: June 27, 2011 Review Date: June 3, 2022 
Revision Date: November 8, 2024 
    
 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
The purpose of this policy is to define the Children’s Hospital (CH) Code Blue response, outline the 
procedure, and delineate the responsibilities of participating health care providers. 
 
POLICY: 
 
The Children’s Hospital code team is continuously on-call to provide personnel and equipment specific 
for the pediatric patient to the following areas in which a pediatric code blue is called at Our Lady of the 
Lake Children’s Hospital (CH) encompassing all areas housed within the main facility,  outpatient lab, St. 
Jude Clinic, and out-patient Infusion Suite (2nd floor MOB).  
 
I. A Code Blue Response will include: 
1. Hospital Response: Code Blue will be called for any of the following:  
a pediatric in-patient  
b. pediatric visitor  
c. adult in-patient  
d. adult outpatient 
e. adult visitor 
f. pediatric out-patients in hospital common area (i.e. Landing, gift shop, cafeteria, etc.) 
  
2. Medical Office Building (MOB): For any Code Blue response needed within the MOB:       
        a. basic life support will be initiated  
        b. 911 activated  
        c. House Supervisor notified 
 
3.  For areas on the hospital’s property not specified in this policy, personnel will follow the 
directives of the Emergency Services Policy, ADM-01 on Triage and Medical Screening Exam 
(Number 1, A-D). 
 
II. Activation procedure: 
CH personnel shall initiate resuscitation procedures and activate a Code Blue for cardiac arrest or life-
threatening situations.  
A. Activation of the Code Blue can occur by pressing the Code Blue designated button on the patient 
call system and/or dialing 5-3333. 
B. Exclusions for activating code blue may include: 
1. The attending physician has written an order to the contrary    NPP-038 
Page 2 of 5 
 
2.  PICU 
3. NICU 
4. PACU 
5. Pediatric ER 
6. Operative suites 
 
C. The employee informs the operator that a Pediatric Code Blue needs to be called and the location 
of the emergency situation. 
D. The operator will notify the Pediatric Code Team via Voalte. 
 
 
III.  Procedure: 
1.  The employee first identifying the emergency situation initiates appropriate emergency procedures 
(CPR, etc.) until the Code Team arrives. 
 
2.  Basic life support procedures will be continued until the arrival of a physician and/or an order is 
received from a physician to cease resuscitation efforts. 
 
3.  The Emergency department (ED) physician, the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) physician or a resident 
under the guidance of attending may direct the code. 
 
4.  Any physician in the hospital may direct the Code Team until the ED or ICU physician arrives. 
 
IV.   Color Coding System 
1. The crash carts are designed utilizing the Broselow color coding system. 
2. If the patient’s weight is not known, the Broselow tape will be utilized to evaluate a patient’s estimated 
weight in a code blue situation.  Once the estimated weight is identified on the tape, the corresponding-
colored bag can be utilized.  The Broselow tape may also be utilized as a reference for equipment 
selection. 
 
V.  Advanced Life Support Protocols 
1. The Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS) protocols and/or Neonatal Resuscitation Program (NRP) 
will be initiated for resuscitation of the pediatric patient and/or neonate.  The NRP algorithms will be 
available in the NICU. 
2. The Emergency Drug Dosing reference sheet for the patient’s weight is the suggested guide for 
medication dosing and administration.  If the reference sheet is not available in a code situation, then the 
Broselow tape can be used as a guide for drug dosing.  The PALS algorithms will be on each cart. The 
Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support (ACLS) protocols will be initiated for resuscitation of the adult 
patient.  The ACLS algorithms will be on each cart.  
 
VI.  Code Team Composition 
 The following personnel constitute the “Code Team” and will respond to a Code Blue notification/call: 
 
A. ED Physician/ ICU Physician 
B. Resident/Intern/Student as assigned to the patient and PICU Resident if available 
C. PICU RN  
D. Transport RN and/or ED RN 
E. House Supervisor 
F.     NPP-038 
Page 3 of 5 
 
G. Unit nurse assigned to the patient 
H. Respiratory Therapist 
I. Laboratory Technician 
J. Radiology Technician with portable X-ray machine 
K. Pharmacist (as available) 
L. Pastoral Care (as available) 
M. Child Life Specialist (as available) 
N. Additional staff should only respond as needed and at the request of the code team. 
 
VII.  Responsibilities of Code Team Members 
 
A. The patient’s unit nurse and/or other unit staff: 
1. Activate Code Blue and initiate CPR. 
2. Have crash cart and back board brought to the patient’s room/location and connect 
leads/pads from defibrillator to patient. 
3. Remain with the patient to provide pertinent patient information/history. 
4. Completes code event charting in Electronic Medical Record (EMR). 
5. Notify attending physician of events. 
6. Notify family. 
B. ED Physician/ ICU Physician 
1. The ED Physician will direct the Code Team until the PICU Physician arrives.   Once 
PICU physician arrives ED physician may return to his/her duties in the ED. 
a. If multiple physicians are present, the lead physician must be clearly identified. 
2. Assures roles of Code team members.  
 
C. Resident/Intern/Student 
1. The resident/intern/student will direct the code team under the direct supervision of the 
attending. 
2. Assist with CPR 
D. ICU Nurse  
1. Initiates ACLS/PALS/NRP protocols. 
2. Serves as Code Team Leader until physician arrives. 
3. If pharmacy not present, prepares for medication administration 
4. Responsible for directing Code team members with continuous assessment of situation. 
5. After resuscitation efforts are initiated, remain with and accompany the patient to a higher 
level of care unit. 
 
E. Transport Nurse/ED Nurse 
1. Performs duties as assigned by Code Team Leader. 
2. Helps to ensure PALS/ACLS/NRP protocols are followed. 
 
F. House Supervisor 
1. Assists in keeping number of people in the area to the necessary participants. 
2. Arranges for critical care bed and/or assists with transport of patient to critical care unit as 
needed. 
3. Brings IO device/needles. 
4. Obtains written consent from family if autopsy is requested. 
5. Communicates with coroner and funeral home in the event of a death.     NPP-038 
Page 4 of 5 
 
6. Will appoint PPE Spotter for patients on isolation if role has not been self-assigned on 
House Supervisor’s arrival to the code 
 
H.  Respiratory Therapist 
1. Sets up suction equipment. 
2. Establishes airway (may include intubation) and maintains adequate ventilation. 
3. Ensures removal of oxygen source from patient’s bed prior to defibrillation. 
4. Obtains arterial blood gases (ABG) as directed. 
5. Assists with CPR as needed. 
6. Assists with transport of patient to critical care unit. 
 
I.  Pharmacist based on availability) 
1. Dispenses emergency medications. 
2. Prepares IV fluids. 
3. Obtains additional medications as needed. 
 
J.  Radiology Technician 
1. Brings portable x-ray machine to location of Pediatric Code Blue. 
2. Provide stat x-rays as ordered by physician. 
 
K.  Laboratory Technician (based on availability) 
1. Draws requested blood work. 
2. Delivers specimen to laboratory. 
 
L.  Pastoral Care (based on availability) 
1. Supports the family and/or patient 
2. Provides spiritual support 
 
M.  Child Life Specialist (based on availability) 
Assist with any sibling needs or end of life situations 
 
N.  All members of the Code Team will remain with the patient until dismissed by the physician 
directing the code. 
 
VIII.  Emergency Equipment 
 
A. Personnel will bring resuscitation equipment from the nearest location to the emergency site. 
 
B. Crash Carts 
 
1. Crash cart supply drawers are stocked and secured by Central Supply to ensure all supplies are 
in place and are locked.  Medication drawers are stocked and secured by Pharmacy to ensure 
medications are in place and locked. 
 
2. Carts are placed in areas that allow for staff observation when not in use. 
 
3. Checking the Crash Cart 
a. The crash cart is checked daily by the charge nurse or designee.  The completed crash cart 
log is retained on the unit.  If a medication tag with an expired medication date is found    NPP-038 
Page 5 of 5 
 
upon daily checks, the nurse should contact the pharmacy department to have it exchanged. 
 
4. Crash Cart Exchanges – See standard operating procedure. crash cart and specialty cart 
management – SOP-NGSOP004 
 
Cross Reference Policy: 
Emergency Service Policy, ADM-01 Triage and Medical Screening Exam 
 
References: 
 
 American Heart Association (2016).  Neonatal Resuscitation. 
American Heart Association (2020). Pediatric Advance Life Support. 
 