NPP-035 
Page 1 of 2 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Children’s Hospital Rapid Response Team 
(RRT)/Condition H  
Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  March 26,2007  Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
November 8, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPP-035 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide a standardized response to assist with the identification, assessment, and early intervention 
of the Children’s Hospital patient at risk for clinical decline within the non-ICU areas.  For the ICU 
areas (which includes ED, PICU, NICU, UCU, PACU, and OR), the Rapid Response button on the wall 
console will be used to activate an internal designated team for quick assistance with a patient situation.     
POLICY: 
The Rapid Response Team (RRT) can be activated for any patient of Hospital, St. Jude Clinic and out-
patient Infusion Suite (2nd floor MOB).  It can be activated by any team member noticing a decline or 
change in a patient’s condition. 
A Condition H (Help) can be activated by a family member or guest who notices a decline or change in 
a patient’s condition. 
Rapid Response Team activation should not delay physician notification of acute changes in patient 
status.  All changes in patient condition will be reported to the attending physician. 
RRT members will respond within 5 minutes when called.  RRT members are on site 24 hours per day 
and have the skills needed to competently assess patients. 
I. Composition of Rapid Response Team 
House Supervisor  
Respiratory Therapist 
Transport/ICU Nurse  
 
II. Minimum Qualifications of Responder 
Current Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS) and Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support 
(ACLS) 
 
III. Activation of Rapid Response Team for any question or concern the nurse has about: 
a. Level of consciousness 
b. Blood pressure 
c. Heart rate 
d. Respiratory rate 
e. Oxygen saturation 
f. Irritability 
g. Acute, unrelieved pain NPP-035 
Page 2 of 2 
 
h. Questionable seizure activity 
i. Parent feels “something is not right” 
j. Any other concern 
 
IV. Activation of Condition H may include any one of the following: 
a. When a family member or guest notices a sudden medical change 
▪ Difficulty breathing 
▪ Sudden onset of confusion 
▪ Less responsive 
▪ When there are serious concerns about how care is being managed 
▪ Decline in patient status 
 
Rapid Response Team/Condition H Procedure (see attached flowchart) 
I. Notify unit charge nurse. 
II. Press wall console button on nurse call system and/or call the Paging Operator at extension 5-
3333 and ask the operator to activate the RRT Team to the patient’s location. 
III. Condition H is called by a family member dialing extension 5-1776 (as identified on 
communication boards).  The operator will activate the Condition H and provide the room number 
for the team to respond. 
IV. Responsibilities of Primary Nurse of patient 
a. Provide brief report to RRT 
b. Remain at patient’s bedside to facilitate ongoing care. 
c. Have anticipated equipment/supplies needed placed at patient’s bedside. 
d. Complete electronic documentation. 
V. Responsibilities of RRT Nurse 
a. Perform advanced assessment. 
b. Interventions within scope of practice. 
c. Provide education and support to primary nurse. 
d. Assist with transfer, if necessary. 
VI. Responsibility of House Supervisor 
a. Assists in keeping number of people in the area to the necessary participants. 
b. Arranges for critical care bed and/or assists with transport of patient to critical care unit as 
needed. 
c. Assists as needed. 
VII. Responsibilities of RRT Respiratory Therapist 
a. Perform advanced respiratory assessment. 
b. Interventions within scope of practice. 
c. Complete electronic documentation. 
VIII. If warranted, place call to the attending physician.  If the attending physician is unable to respond 
to the patient’s needs within 10 minutes, the RRT nurse will call the Hospitalist/Intensivist. 
 
REFERENCES: Kutty, S., Jones, P. G., Karels, Q., Joseph, N., Spertus, J. A., & Chan, P. S. (2018). 
Association of Pediatric Medical Emergency Teams with Hospital Mortality. Circulation, 137(1), 38–
46. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.029535 NPP-035 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
YES 
NO 
Primary Nurse 
notifies Charge 
Nurse & calls RRT 
If warranted, call placed 
to attending MD 
RRT Arrives 
Attending 
MD 
returns 
call w/in 
10 min? 
MD arrives and 
directs care 
Code Blue 
Called 
Patient stabilized 
& remains on 
unit 
Patient transferred 
to ↑ level of care 
Patient Declining 
RRT calls 
Hospitalist  
Orders 
received & 
initiated 
Assessment 
by RRT 
Continue to 
Monitor 