NPP-029 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Human Milk Handling & Storage Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  May 15, 2006 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
August 6, 2021 
February 28, 2025 
Serial Code:  NPP-029 
  
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safe handling and storage of human milk.  This policy applies to all caregivers providing care to 
the patient who is breastfeeding and/or being provided human milk.   
 
POLICY: 
All staff involved in the handling and storage of human milk will adhere to hand hygiene.   
 
I. Preparation for Collecting Human Milk: 
 
A. Obtain breast pump from unit and accessories from Material Management as needed. 
B. Review operation of breast pump and document education.   
C. Inform caregiver that /human milk will be discarded if the mother is on any medications 
contraindicated for breastfeeding. 
D. Instruct caregiver on the Children’s Hospital collection and storage of human milk policy and 
document education.   
E. Nurse to enter human milk label order as protocol order. 
F. Provide caregiver with patient human milk labels, clear storage bags, and the appropriate collection 
container, 2-ounce gradu-feeder bottles (preferred), on admit.  Storage bags specifically designed for 
human milk are suitable for home storage but not preferred in the health care setting. 
G. The caregiver will place a patient human milk label on each container prior to releasing the milk to 
clinical staff.  The label should have the date and time when human milk was collected. 
H. At the time human milk is released to the clinical staff, the caregiver and staff member must verify 
the patient’s name and a second patient identifier (i.e., CSN or date of birth) on human milk label.  
This information must match the information on the patient identification armband. 
I. Place human milk in clear properly labeled storage bag, prior to removing the milk from the room. 
 
II. Storage of Human Milk: 
 
A. Human milk that will not be used in 48 hours, will be placed in storage container in freezer. 
B. Freeze human milk in two-ounce or four-ounce portions.  Smaller amounts thaw quicker; and waste 
will be less if baby consumes less than anticipated. 
C. Use frozen human milk in the order in which it has been expressed, using oldest milk first. 
D. Fresh human milk may be stored in a storage container in the human milk refrigerator for up to 48 
hours at <39°F. Human milk initially stored in refrigerator that is not used in 48 hours should be 
placed in freezer. 
E. Frozen human milk may be stored in -4º freezer for up to 12 months.  
F. Once frozen human milk is fully thawed, it may remain in refrigerator for up to 24 hours.  The time 
the milk is removed from freezer and relocated to refrigerator must be noted on the label. In addition, NPP-029 
Page 2 of 3 
the time the milk is fully defrosted should be placed on label.  In the event the fully defrosted time is 
not noted on the label, the move time to the refrigerator will be used for determining discard time.  If 
the fully defrosted milk is not used in 24 hours, it must be discarded.  Thawed human milk may not be 
refrozen.    
G. Human milk remaining in bottle after feeding an infant should be discarded.  Maximum length of time 
freshly expressed human milk may remain at room temperature is 4 hours. Additives will be added 
prior to infant feeding with the precise amount poured into a clean measuring device and then added to 
the human milk. 
H. Parents should be notified prior to discarding human milk.  Human milk may be discarded in sink and 
patient label will be removed prior to placing in trash receptacle. 
I.   On admission, parents will be asked preference for a door sign posted (Breastfeeding Mother) and 
parental response documented in EMR. 
J.   Human milk stored at home should not be brought to the hospital unless clinically needed, pump 
volume is insufficient and/or for the neonate in the NICU.   Human milk that is stored at home and 
then brought into the hospital may have a shorter shelf life than human milk stored in hospital freezer.  
Discuss with family member home storage practice to determine hospital storage.  
K. Donor human milk will only be accepted from an approved human milk bank.  See NPP-046 
Pasteurized Donor Milk Policy. 
L. Human milk for non-patients (i.e., siblings) can not be stored in nourishment refrigerator.  An 
insulated bag can be offered if available and/or human milk should be transported home.   
 
III. Preparing Milk for Feeding: 
 
A. To Thaw Frozen Human milk: 
1. Perform proper hand hygiene before handling human milk. 
2. Remove previously labeled human milk from freezer. Denote time from freezer to refrigerator 
on label. 
3. Place in refrigerator to thaw (usually 8 to 12 hours is sufficient).   
4.      The bottle may be placed under warm running water if commercial milk warmer is not 
available.  Do not submerse cap in water. Protect label in warming process.  
5. Do not leave frozen human milk to defrost at room temperature. 
6.      Do not use a microwave to thaw human milk. 
7. Use within 24 hours after milk is thawed. 
8. Do not refreeze. 
9.     Do not use warming units to defrost frozen human milk. 
 
 B. To Warm Milk for a Feeding: 
1. Warming should take less than 15 minutes and feeding should not be warmed to greater that 40° 
C (104° F). 
2. Perform proper hand hygiene before handling human milk. 
3. For warm-water baths and running water - 
a. Place container of human milk in warm water or under warm running water. 
b. Water should not reach the level of the nipple ring. 
c. Lid should not be submersed in the water. 
4. For warming units – 
a. Follow manufacturer’s recommendation for the individual warming unit. 
 
C. Tube Feeding Human Milk: 
1. Only place 4 hours volume of human milk in a container at a time. NPP-029 
Page 3 of 3 
2. Change syringe and tubing every 4 hours. 
3. The recommended position for a syringe pump infusion of human milk is at a 180° angle for 
continuous tube feedings to allow the fat to rise to the top. 
4. Do not overfill syringe to ensure baby receives nearly all the milk in the syringe and tubing, 
including the fat. 
 
D. Prior to Feeding: 
1. Human milk will be prepared in a dedicated area. 
2. Milk will be obtained from refrigerator and warmed appropriately.  Protect label in warming 
process. 
3. A nurse must bring the human milk to room prior to a feeding in order to scan. 
4. While at the bedside, the nurse will scan patient ID and human milk label on container.  If human 
milk does not match patient record, an alert will display.  If correct, the administration window 
will open, and nurse will click accept. 
5. In the event the human milk label becomes unscannable; the nurse will verify label with 
parent/caregiver/second nurse in the room and scan a new human milk label. 
 
E.  Discharge: 
1. At the time of discharge, all human milk should be scanned and returned to parent/caregiver. 
2. Bins will be disinfected after each patient use. 
      
IV. Human Milk Storage Guidelines:  
 
 Room 
Temperature 
Refrigerator Freezer 
Human Milk  <39° F -4° F or lower 
Freshly Expressed 
or Pumped 
Not to exceed 4 
hours  
48 hours 12 months 
Thawed, 
Previously Frozen 
1-2 hours 24 hours Never refreeze 
human milk after it 
has been thawed 
Left over from a 
feeding 
Use within 1 hour after the baby is finished feeding 
 
Cross Reference Policy: 
NPP-046 Pasteurized Donor Human Milk 
 
REFERENCES: 
Wong’s Nursing Care of Infants and Children 12th ed. eBook;2023 
Steele, C. & Collins, E. (Eds).  (2019). Infant and Pediatric Feedings: Guidelines for Preparation of Human 
Milk and Formula in Health Care Facilities (3rd ed).  Chicago, IL:  Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics.    
 
See Ebsco Online Resource 
 
Educating About storing Colostrum and Human Milk 