NPP-034 
Page 1 of 3 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Pediatric Falls Prevention Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  March 26, 2007 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
September 4, 2020 
June 7, 2024 
Serial Code:  NPP-034 
  
PURPOSE: 
To establish a means of identifying patients at risk for falls in the pediatric setting. 
 
POLICY:  
Inpatient, Emergency Services and Ambulatory Hospital Setting 
 
A Pediatric Falls Risk Assessment will be performed by a registered nurse on all pediatric patients between the 
ages of 2-14 years, excluding intubated pediatric patients.  All patients less than two years of age are at risk for 
developmental falls hence a Pediatric Safety General Care Plan and standard pediatric safety precautions will be 
initiated.  For patients 15 years and older, refer to Falls Prevention, Adult Policy #NPC-067.  Once a patient has 
been extubated, the fall risk assessment will be performed when the plan of care is reviewed.  A pediatric falls 
risk assessment will be documented in the electronic medical record: 
• At time of triage in the Emergency Department and in the event of a fall 
• On hospital admission and then twice daily and in the event of a patient fall 
• Upon patient transfer/receiving of the patient 
 
A. Inpatient 
1. In the event of a fall, the patient is re-assessed using the Pediatric Falls Risk Assessment and appropriate 
interventions will be implemented.  The patient’s attending physician and family will be notified of the 
patient’s fall as soon as possible. A safety event must be entered on any fall that occurred. Document the 
patient fall in the EMR (Electronic Medical Record) under the Assessment Flow Sheet “Shift Event” 
row (select fall).  A Post Fall Evaluation sub-section will appear within the Provider Notification 
category.  Based on the selections made on the tool, the fall score will automatically calculate a score. 
a. With a score of one (1) or less, the nurse will implement Standard Safety Precautions for all 
inpatients. 
b. For the pediatric patient with a score of two (2) or greater, the nurse will implement Standard Safety 
Precaution and Fall Precautions with appropriate age interventions. 
2. Safety Interventions are implemented according to Pediatric Fall Risk Assessment score and as 
appropriate for the patient. Safety interventions are detailed below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Select nursing intervention based on total score and as appropriate for the patient. NPP-034 
Page 2 of 3 
Score of 1 or less Score of 2 or greater 
Implement Standard Pediatric Safety 
Precautions. 
 
 
* Verify patient identification band is correct and 
on child   and parent. 
*Do not leave infant unattended on any elevated 
surface (ie crib, couch, etc.) 
* Side rails up  
* Call bell in reach. 
* Bed in lowest position or appropriate height 
and locked. 
* Family/caregiver stays in room with child. 
* Familiarize patient and/or caregiver with 
environment. 
* Instruct to call for assistance as needed. 
* Offer toileting every 2-4 hours. 
* Bedpan/urinal in reach. 
* Place personal items within reach. 
* Instruct family/caregiver on age-appropriate 
bed while hospitalized. 
* Instruct family/caregiver on Infant Safe Sleep 
Practices when appropriate. 
* Use supplemental lighting when appropriate. 
* Keep floor clear of objects, linens and toys. 
*Safety straps must be used in infant devices (ie 
bouncy seats, swings, car seats, high chairs, etc.) 
*Do not place infant devices on high surfaces (ie 
bouncy seats, car seats, etc.) 
Implement High Fall Risk-Precautions and the Plan of Care 
with interventions appropriate to the patient: 
 
* Apply color coded fall risk armband. 
* Educate patient/family/caregiver on fall prevention. 
* Apply non-skid socks for the ambulatory child. 
*Instruct family to call for assistance prior to ambulation. 
* Request a caregiver stay with child at all times. 
* Use bubble-top device for small child. 
* Instruct caregiver to set appropriate limits to ensure safety 
of child. 
* Monitor effects of medications. 
* Place patient in close proximity to nurse’s station. 
* Remain with patient when up to bathroom or bedside 
commode. 
* Use bed alarms when appropriate. 
*Consider use of additional staff when assisting patient 
*Collaborate with PT/OT for mobility strategies 
*Include fall status in shift hand-off 
 
3. Use of side rails is not intended as a means to restrict the patient to the bed; however, they are intended 
as a means of safety for the young pediatric patient to prevent falling out of the bed. 
a. Educate patient/caregiver on purpose of using side rails. 
b. Beds are routinely kept in low position except when nursing care or treatments are in progress.   
c. If a patient\caregiver refuses to have side rails raised, document in the electronic record. 
 
B. Emergency Department 
1. The patient is assessed using the appropriate fall risk assessment based on age. For the patient 2-14yrs 
the Graf-Piff scale will be utilized. For patients 15yrs and above the Kinder Scale will be utilized. 
2. In the event of a fall, the patient is re-assessed using the appropriate Falls Risk Assessment. The 
patient’s attending physician and family will be notified of the patient’s fall as soon as possible.  The 
Unit Director must be notified. 
3. For the pediatric emergency room patient with a score of two (2) or greater, the nurse will implement 
safety interventions as appropriate for the patient. Safety Interventions are detailed below: 
a. Call bell in reach and stretcher in lowest position except when nursing care or treatments are in 
progress. 
b. Apply color coded fall risk armband. NPP-034 
Page 3 of 3 
c. Educate patient/family/caregiver on fall prevention and instruct to call for assistance if needed. 
d. Apply non-skid socks for the ambulatory child. 
e. Instruct the family to call for assistance prior to ambulation. 
f. Request a caregiver stay with child at all times. 
g. Monitor affects of medications. 
h. Include Fall status in shift hand off. 
i. Hourly safety rounding 
j. Room door/curtain open as per nurse discretion while maintaining patient privacy. 
 
4. Post Fall Procedure: 
a. In the event of a fall, a safety event will be entered. 
b. Post Fall Documentation will be completed in the EMR – Narrator under Screening Assessments – 
Post Fall Evaluation and appropriate safety interventions will be implemented and documented. 
 
C. Clinic Settings 
1. Refer to Falls Risk Screening in the Clinic Setting, NG1017 
 
 
 
Cross Reference Policy: 
Falls Prevention Adult Policy NPC-067 
Falls Risk Screening in the Clinic Setting NPG1017 
 
REFERENCES: 
Graf, Elaine (2016).  General Risk Assessment for Pediatric In-Patient Falls.  (4th Ed.) . Chicago, Illinois, 
Children’s Memorial Hospital.  
 