NSCL10 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Clinical Nutrition 
Subject:  Emergency Department, Same Day Surgery Section:   
Date of Origination:  April 22nd, 2003 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: November 2017 Serial Code:  NSCL10 
Date Last Reviewed: July 2019 
 
POLICY 
 
Any patient who receives a written consult and/or falls within the screening requirements of nutrition 
services will be seen by Clinical Nutritional Services (reference policy NSCL01).  Patients needing diet 
education after discharge can be referred to the Outpatient Diabetes and Nutrition Center. 
  
PROCEDURE: 
 
Nutritional Screening and Assessment: 
 
Please refer to Policy NSCL01 for complete details on initial screening, prioritization, and assessment.  
 
In-patient Nutrition Education: 
 
Nutrition counseling or diet instruction will be performed by a Registered Dietitian Nutritionist (RDN) or 
Nutrition Care Technician per physician’s order. If education is warranted, a physician consult should be 
placed at least 48 hours prior to patient’s discharge to provide adequate time for effective patient counseling. 
If a sufficient amount of time  cannot be allowed for the RDN/Nutrition Care Technician  to perform the 
instruction, diet information with the Clinical Nutrition office phone number (225-765-8366) will be mailed 
to the patient. Education will be documented in the patient’s medical record.   
 
The Diabetes and Nutrition Center  should be consulted for the following:   
1. Newly diagnosed patients with diabetes  
2. Patients with poorly controlled diabetes as demonstrated by an A1c greater than 9% 
3. Patients whose treatment plan has changed (oral agents to insulin) 
4. Patients on insulin pumps 
Refer to Policy DMO-02 for details on the in-patient diabetes education.  
 
Nursing can provide nutrition education materials through the Academy of Nutrition & Dietetics’ Nutrition 
Care Manual.  To access these materials from TeamLink: Go to Applications; click on Lake Applications, 
and click References.   
 
Outpatient Nutrition Consultation: 
 
Outpatient nutrition consultation is completed by the Diabetes and Nutrition Center and can be reached at 
225-765-8020. NSCL10 
 
 
 