NSCL02 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Nutritional 
Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Clinical Nutrition 
Subject:  Registered Dietitians / Nutrition Care Technicians Section:   
Date of Origination:  April 1st, 1991 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: July 2017  Serial Code:  NSCL02 
Date Last Reviewed: July 2019 
 
REGISTERED DIETITIANS & NUTRITION CARE TECHNICIANS 
 
 
Responsibilities: 
 
The Registered Dietitian Nutritionist (RDN)’s practice is one that focuses on food and nutrition and related 
services that enhance health and well -being of patients/clients, and deliver quality products, programs, 
and services including Medical Nutrition Therapy (MNT) across all focus areas in accordance with 
evidenced ba sed guidelines. Focus areas may include but are not limited to Nutrition Assessment, 
Nutrition Diagnosis, Nutrition Intervention, Nutrition Education, Nutrition Monitoring and Nutrition 
Evaluation. 
 
The RDN and/or the Nutrition Care Technician provides or directs the counseling to patient/family members 
as ordered by the physician and conducts any required nutritional screens/assessments. The RDN assesses 
and conducts routine monitoring of all patients receiving enteral or parenteral nutrition support.  
 
When education needs are identified through the nutrition assessment process or ordered by a physician, it is 
the responsibility of the RDN and/or Nutrition Care Technician to assure that proper education, including 
nutrition counseling and educational literature, is given to the patient. Verification of counseling and literature 
provided is then documented in the Education section in the RDN or Nutrition Care Technician’s note, which 
can be found in the notes section in Epic.  
 
The Nutrition Care Technician completes nutrition screenings on patients and refers any patient who may be 
at high risk to the RDN. The Nutrition Care Technician, under the supervision of the RDN, assures that the 
patient receives the appropriate foods as determined by the diet order. The Nutrition Care Technician will 
communicate with the appropriate team member to provide food preferences for the patient and will 
communicate to the RDN if a patient is requesting an oral supplement, in which the RDN will verify and 
order the appropriate supplement for the patient.  
 
The RDN and/or the Nutrition Care Technician participates in the development and implementation of 
policies and procedures in nutritional care, participates in and conducts continuing education programs as 
appropriate, and participates in the evaluation of nutritional care provided. The RDN and the Nutrition Care 
Technician aids in the orientation of new staff and dietetic interns. 
 NSCL02 
Credentials/Education Requirement: 
 
All dietitians on staff are registered or registration eligible as noted by the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics 
(AND) Commission on Dietetic Registration and are licensed or provisionally licensed by the State of 
Louisiana board of licensure for dietitians/nutritionists. This licensure/registration must be maintained in 
accordance with the hospital policy on licensure. All dietitians will have a minimum education of Bachelor 
Degree preferably in the field of Food and Nutrition and/or Dietetics and will have successfully completed 
an AND accredited dietetic internship program. 
 
All clinical Nutrition Care Technicians will have a minimum education of an Associates Degree preferably 
in the field of Food and Nutrition and/or Dietetics or are enrolled in a Bachelor Degree in nutrition related 
field.  Preferred (optional) Certification / Registration: Registered as a Dietetic Technician as noted by the 
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. 
 
All registered clinicians through AND are required to maintain continuing education hours. Job competency 
is reviewed in an on-going manner by the Clinical Nutrition Manager. 
 
Committee Participation 
 
To further the relationship of the Nutritional Service Department with other departments and patient care 
units as well as to assure that quality nutritional care is provided to patients, representatives of the Nutritional 
Service department (Clinical Nutrition Manager or Registered Dietitians) serve on the following committees 
and specialized health care teams: 
 
• Commission on Cancer Committee 
• Nutrition Support Team - TPN Management Clinical Pharmacy & Clinical Nutrition 
• TNCC Multidisciplinary Care Rounds 
• ICU Multidisciplinary Care Rounds 
• ICU Operations Meeting 
• Pressure Ulcer Committee 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 