NSCL01 
Page 1 of 8 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Clinical Nutrition 
Subject:  Standards for Nutritional Care Section:   
Date of Origination:  July 1st, 1988 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised:  February 2021  Serial Code:  NSCL01 
Date Last Reviewed: February 2021  
 
 
 
STANDARDS FOR NUTRITIONAL CARE 
 
Diet Manual: 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center has adopted the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics (AND) 
Nutrition Care Manual1 as the official diet manual. The diet manual is reviewed and updated by AND 
annually. This diet manual serves as the official guideline for ordering diets, writing diets, and conducting 
patient counseling. The diet manual is an evidenced based resource for the Registered Dietitian Nutritionist 
(RDN). The diet manual provides a standard of practice for the RDN that practices in the facility.  
 
The department purchases an annual subscription to both the Nutrition Care Manual and the Pediatric 
Nutrition Care Manual. Both diet manuals are available on-line and may be accessed by all medical center 
staff via TeamLink (Applications → Lake Applications → References → Nutritional Care Manual). In the 
event of a computer downtime, healthcare providers may find a hard copy of the diet manuals in the 
Nutritional Services department. Medical center staff can request nutritional material and the department in 
turn, will fax or hand deliver the material to the nursing unit requesting the information. Nursing staff is 
educated on where the diet manual is located electronically and where it is located during downtime 
procedures.  
 
If a physician orders a diet not currently in the diet manual, the operator is responsible for notifying the 
dietitian covering that unit. The dietitian will contact the physician for clarification of the diet and to aid 
him/her in selecting a diet from the diet manual.  
 
Medical Nutrition Therapy Ordering: 
 
Diet orders and nutrition related services are ordered via the electronic medical record upon physicians’ 
order. The diet order is transmitted to the nutritional services system to be prepared for and delivered to the 
patient. Diet orders and nutrition related services or consults are viewed by the Registered Dietitian 
Nutritionist (RDN) or the Nutrition Care Technician within the electronic medical record. The RDN or 
Nutrition Care Technician will provide services ordered in the timeframe established as noted below.  
 
Within the scope of practice and as approved by the Medical Executive Committee, all RDNs at this facility 
are able to order the following in the electronic medical record using Per protocol: cosign required, verbal, 
or telephone orders:  NSCL01 
Page 2 of 8 
 
➢ Calorie Count: 
o RDNs have the ability to initiate and discontinue calorie counts as part of RDNs 
assessment to evaluate patient’s oral intake adequacy and need for alternative nutrition 
support.  
➢ Diet Orders:  
o For changing diet texture to a more restrictive order based on a patient’s tolerance, 
difficulty chewing or swallowing related to mouth sores, broken dentures, weakness, etc., 
consistency as recommended by a Speech Therapist, or per a patient’s request (i. e. 
Regular to mechanical soft or pureed). A physician order is necessary to upgrade a diet (i.e. 
pureed to mechanical soft), unless the diet was downgraded by the RDN and it doesn’t 
exceed the texture of the original diet order. 
o To modify room service appropriateness on diet orders and allow the patient to participate 
or opt out of meal selections.  
o To modify diet orders as necessary for patients on medications that may have food –drug 
interactions; such as MAO-inhibitors and theophylline. Reference policy: NSCL05 
➢ Nutritional supplements:  
o To allow RDNs the ability to initiate, modify, and discontinue oral nutrition supplements 
and modular diet components based on the RDN’s nutritional assessment or patient 
request according to the availability within the formulary. The justification/rationale for 
the order or modifications are documented in the medical chart.  
➢ Tube feedings:  
o To allow the RDN the ability to implement and modify enteral feeds and modular 
components determining product formula, rate, strength, and length when a consult for 
the “RDN to implement and manage feeds” has been placed. 
➢ Speech Therapy Consult 
o To allow RDNs to consult speech therapist with concerns for dysphagia 
➢ Weights:  
o To order daily or weekly weights when needed for completion of nutrition assessment or 
reassessment or for monitoring purposes for patients on total parenteral nutrition or who 
are being closely monitored by an RDN for other medical reasons, i.e. refeeding  
syndrome, malnutrition, etc.  
 
 
PURPOSE:  
 
This policy sets forth guidelines for patients identified at nutrition risk during the initial screening shall 
receive a comprehensive assessment in accordance with the ADIME guidelines.  
 
POLICIES:  
 
An initial screening, assessment, and prioritization process is implemented to identify patients who may 
require medical nutrition therapy(ies). Patients identified at nutrition risk during the initial screening will 
be further evaluated with comprehensive assessment and receive nutrition  intervention(s) when 
applicable.  
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
RDN is available on site from Monday through Friday and on Sunday from 7:00 A.M. – 3:30 P.M. On NSCL01 
Page 3 of 8 
 
Saturday and major holidays, the RDN is on call. To get in contact with someone from the clinical nutrition 
team during the weekday and Sunday, call the clinical nutrition office (225)-765-8366. On the weekends 
and holidays, call the weekend pager (225)-378-4317. 
 
Initial Screening: 
 
Nursing 
 
• An initial screening assessment and prioritization process is implemented to identify patients 
who may require medical nutrition therapy(ies). Patients identified at nutrition risk during the 
initial screening will be further evaluated with comprehensive a ssessment and receive nutrition 
intervention(s) when applicable.  
 
• Nursing completes Nutrition Screen in the electronic medical record within 24 hours of 
admission. Based on results of screening, the nurse will select option for “Dietitian Screening 
Needed”. The Nutrition Care Technician or RDN acts on information/consults resulting from the 
nursing admission screen within designated timeframes. 
 
a. Have you recently lost weight without trying? If yes, how much weight have you lost?  
b. Have you been eating poorly because of decreased appetite? 
c. Difficulty Chewing or Swallowing 
d. Pressure Ulcer or Non-Healing Wound 
e. Home Diet 
f. Home Nutrition Support 
g. Dietitian Screening Needed 
 
• The Malnutrition Screening Tool (MST) is the only nutrition screening tool in the adult, acute care 
population that has demonstrated both reliability and validity to capture under nutrition; therefore, 
its two questions regarding unintentional weight loss and appetite will be adopted into the nursing 
nutrition screen process.  
 
1. Have you lost weight recently without trying? Yes (comment), No 
If yes, weight loss amount?  
2-13 lbs 
14-23 lbs 
24– 33 lbs 
> 33lbs 
Unable to determine 
2. Have you been eating poorly because of a decreased appetite? Yes (comment), No 
If the nurse answers yes to two or more of the questions above, then the “Dietitian Screening Needed” 
should be selected.  
Registered Dietitian/Diet Technician NSCL01 
Page 4 of 8 
 
• Once the nutritional screen is completed, the RDN or Nutrition Care Technician will review the 
patient list to determine which patients need further screening. Further screening will consist of a 
review of the medical record for nutritionally significant factors (weight loss, labs, wounds, and 
nutrition support) and a visit to the patient/caregiver to obtain additional information regarding the 
patient’s nutritional status and diet history. The RDN/Nutrition Care Technician will generate a short 
note to document screening results in the electronic medical record.   
 
• All screens from the MST must be completed within 48 hours by the RDN or Nutrition Care 
Technician. The Nutrition Care Technician is responsible for referring high risk patients to the RDN. 
All screens from the MST without the above parameters (loss of weight, decreased appetite), the 
RDN or Nutrition Care Technician will have 72 hours to complete.  
 
• The RDN or Nutrition Care Technician will further screen the “Dietitian Screening Needed” 
referrals to determine if the patients are at nutritional risk. Further screening will consist of a  
The Registered Dietitians and Diet Techs will complete further screening checking patients for the 
following criteria: 
o TPN/PPN 
o New Enteral (NG, PEG) 
o Consults  
o ICU Patients on Ventilator 
o NPO or Clear Liquid > 5 days 
o Pressure Ulcers stage II, III, and IV. 
o Length of Stays 
 
 
Assessment: 
 
 Levels of Acuity 
Prioritization Table 
 
**Deemed Stabled defined as: TF @ goal rate per RD recommendation or 2 consecutive notes with recommendation and no changes made my MD, and Tolerating 
TF (+bowel sounds, BM, Residuals WNL)** 
 
 
When a patient has been identified at nutrition risk, the following will be completed by the RDN within 
established time frames: 
(High) 48 Hours (Moderate) 72 Hours  (Low)  
Consults Pressure Ulcer Stage II  Length of Stay (LOS) 
New Enteral (NG, PEG) Poor Appetite > 3 days  
TPN/PPN   
ICU Patient on Ventilator      
Malnutrition Risk   
NPO/Clear Liquid greater than 5 
days (assessed on day 5) 
  
Pressure Ulcer Stage III & IV   
Tech Referall   NSCL01 
Page 5 of 8 
 
• assessment of the nutritional needs of the patient based on available data 
• development and implementation of a nutrition care plan 
• reassessment (to monitor nutrition care plan and adjust as necessary) until goals are met 
• documentation of all nutrition care in the medical record 
• education of patient and/or caregiver, as appropriate 
 
The nutrition care provided to the patient will be based on their degree of nutritional risk.  
• Low Risk: Patient may be followed by a Nutrition Care Technician for ongoing screening and 
referral to the RDN as appropriate. (Low risk patients on ICU floors will be seen by RD’s only). 
• Moderate and High Risk: Patients will be further investigated by  the RD for  comprehensive 
nutritional assessment and an appropriate nutritional care plan will be implemented. 
 
Risk Level Documentation 
Low Risk The RDN/Nutrition Care Technician will generate a note to document screening 
results in the electronic medical record. The RDN can document a nutritional 
assessment if warranted. 
Moderate Risk The RDN will generate a note to document screening results in the electronic 
medical record.  
High Risk The RDN will generate a note to document a nutritional assessment in the 
electronic medical record. 
 
   
 
Based on nutritional risk, the RDN will perform nutritional assessments within 48 hours on patients deemed 
high priority and within 72 hours on patients deemed moderate or low priority. Consults received from 
physicians, nurses, and/or patients or patient’s family member will be considered high priority. These high 
priority patients will receive nutrition intervention within the same time frame as high risk patients for 
evaluation or assessment from the RDN. Patients identified at low nutritional risk for length of stay, will 
complete a nutrition screen within 72 hours after notification in EMR. During the initial assessment the RD 
or Nutrition Care Technician will state the patients level of nutritional risk. This will determine when the 
patient will be followed up on. See Follow up guidelines chart below.  If the screen indicates the need for 
nutritional intervention, the patient will be referred to the RDN for a nutritional assessment. (Refer to the 
Levels of Acuity Table for the criteria and intervention above). After resolution of the nutrition risk and 
after all goals are met, the RDN/Nutrition Care Technician may sign off for the patient. 
 
Consults 
 
Registered Dietitian 
• Will complete the nutrition assessment within 48 hours of receiving Physician consult.  
 
Diet Tech 
• Will complete the following consults: 
o Diet Educations (Except new dialysis and new diabetes) 
o Increase PO intake 
o Supplements 
o Food preferences (is not a clinical issue, this is a food service issue) Diet techs will refer 
this consult to the Patient Services Team.  NSCL01 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 
 
In “Comfort Care” events, the RDN or Nutrition Care Technician can provide palliative care as needed, 
focusing on a diet as patient desires or as needed to keep the patient comfortable within medical guidelines. 
In such cases, a full assessment may be deferred and documentation in the medical record will be made by 
the RDN or Nutrition Care Technician to indicate notification of comfort care measures. The patient will be 
re-assessed if status changes or if a nutrition consult is requested.  
 
Documentation of nutrition assessment, and particularly the care plan, should be carried out using 
documentation tools such as an interdisciplinary plan of care and interdisciplinary patient education 
whenever possible. The RDN will also document using the standardized language of the Nutrition Care 
Process. 
 
Discharge planning for nutritional care requires the collaboration of Nutrition Services with the patient, 
family, and other health care professionals to ensure the continuity of nutritional care for the patient after 
discharge. The RDN will identify discharge planning needs during the course of the nutrition assessment. 
 
Hand off Communication: When the care of a patient transfers from one dietitian to another, there is a 
“hand-off” of information about the patient.  While the information may be documentation from the 
electronic medical record or verbal, there must always be the opportunity to ask and respond to questions, 
in a timely fashion. Information communicated during the “hand -off” includes the patient’s current 
condition, nutrition interventions implemented and the patient’s response to the interventions. 
Documentation in the medical record shall only include hospital approved abbreviations and at a 
minimum, do not use the Dangerous Abbreviations, Acronyms and Symbols as published by the Joint 
Commission.2 
 
Reassessment (Patient Monitoring) 
 
Follow-Up Guidelines 
 
 
 
Reassessment will occur according to established time frames and when there are significant changes in 
patient condition or diagnosis. The RDN will be made aware of these changes by rounds, visits to the 
High Risk Moderate Risk Low Risk 
2X/Week 
Or as identified by RD/designee 
1X/Week 
Or as identified by RD/designee 
7-10 Days  
Or as identified by RD/designee 
 New or unstable TPN Stable Tube Feeding LOS 
New or unstable Tube feeding Pressure Ulcer Stage II or > Stable weight or no significant 
weight loss 
Severe Malnutrition Moderate Malnutrition   
NPO/Clear Liquid greater than 5 
days 
PO intake < or = 25%  
ICU Patients on Ventilator   
Decubitus stage II or > with PO 
intake  < 25% 
  NSCL01 
Page 7 of 8 
 
patient care areas, and communication with other members of the health care team. RD’s can follow up 
on a patient more often then these guidelines if they feel it is necessary, but at minimum will follow 
these guidelines.  
 
Reassessment are based on what information is obtained during initial screening and assessment. During 
initial assessment the RD or Nutrition Care Technician determined the patient nutritional level of risk. This 
level determines when the patient will be followed up on. Patients receiving nutrition support (tube feeding 
or TPN) may require additional follow-up as deemed necessary by the RDN. 
 
At reassessment, patients may be reviewed for (a) appetite, (b) percent meals consumed, (c) presence of 
nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea, (d) lab values, and (e) changes in weight, diet or nutrition support that may 
affect the patient’s nutritional status. At reassessment, the RDN or Nutrition Care Technician may document 
a change in the patient’s level of acuity according to changes in medical status or intervention. 
 
 
 
Other processes that will alert dietitians for reassessment may include by are not limited to: 
• Change in patient’s medical status as obtained from medical rounds or other interactions 
• Initiation of nutrition support 
• Initiation of calorie counts 
 
Nutrient Intake Analysis (Calorie Counts) 
 
Calorie counts will be performed upon a physician order, RDN order, or as part of a nutritional consult. The 
clinical nutrition team is notified of the calorie count order via the electronic medical record. The Registered 
RDN is responsible for completing the initial nutrition assessment noting the patient’s caloric and protein 
needs. If the Nutrition Care Technician is able to hang the calorie count collection envelope before the RDN 
can see the patient and complete the nutrition assessment, the Nutrition Care Technician may do so. Calorie 
Counts will be conducted for three days unless otherwise indicated by the physician or RDN. The nursing 
team will document the percentage or amount of each food and/or drink consumed on the patient’s menu 
ticket and place the tickets in the calorie count envelope. The Nutrition Care Technician or RDN will collect 
the menu tickets and record the results. Providing the patient is not on tube feeding or receiving any form 
of parenteral nutrition, the Nutrition Care Technician may end the calorie count.  
 
In-patient Nutrition Education 
 
Nutrition counseling or therapeutic diet instruction will be performed by a RDN or Nutrition Care 
Technician per physician’s consult. If possible, a physician consult should be placed at least 48 hours prior 
to a patient’s discharge to provide adequate time for effective patient counseling. If a sufficient amount of 
time cannot be allowed for the RD N or Nutrition Care Technician  to perform the instruction, diet 
information will be mailed to the patient and will include the Clinical Nutrition office phone number. 
 
Education materials can be acquired through the Academy of Nutrition & Dietetics’ Nutrition Care Manual.  
These materials can be accessed from any hospital computer on the TeamLink webpage: (Applications → 
Lake Applications → References → Nutritional Care Manual).   
 
New onset of Diabetes should be referred to the Diabetes and Nutrition Center (see below). 
 NSCL01 
Page 8 of 8 
 
Outpatient Nutrition Consultation 
 
Outpatient nutrition consultation is completed by the Diabetes and Nutrition Center 225-765-8020. 
 
Nutrition Care Documentation 
 
All nutrition care documentation is located in the electronic medical record: 
• Epic → Notes → Progress Notes or Consults 
Type of Documentation: 
• Nutrition Assessment 
• Nutrition Reassessment 
• Nutrition Risk Factor Screen 
• Nutrition Risk Factor re-screen 
• Malnutrition Risk Screen 
• Patient Education  
• Plan of Care  
• Calorie Count  
• Tube feeding Recommendation  
• TPN Recommendation  
• Nutritional Recommendation  
 
 
REFERENCES: 
1 Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics.  (2020). Nutrition Care Manual®. http://nutritioncaremanual.org 
2 www.http://www.jointcommission.org/assets/1/18/dnu_list.pdf (accessed on 9.28.16) 
 
 
 