Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Departmental 
Subject:  Mission, Goals and Objectives Section:  
Date of Origination: February 1995 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: August 2011 Serial Code: NSDP02 
Date of Last Review: July 2018 
 
Mission, Goals, and Objectives 
 
Mission: The Mission Statement of the Hospital is inspired by the vision of St. Francis and in 
the tradition of the Roman Catholic Church, we extend the healing ministry of Jesus 
Christ to God's people, especially those most in need.  We call forth all who serve in 
this healthcare ministry, to share their gifts and talents to create a spirit of healing - 
with reverence and love for all of life, with joyfulness of spirit, and with humility 
and justice for all those entrusted to our care. We are with God's help, a healing and 
spiritual presence for each other and for the communities we are privileged to serve.   
 
Department 
Mission: To create and offer services that contributes to a more pleasant way of life for people 
whenever and wherever they come together. 
 
 
Goals: The Nutritional Services Department is dedicated to providing the highest quality 
medical nutrition therapy and prepares and serves meals in the most cost -effective 
manner; w hile at the same time providing the best possible service within the 
framework of the latest clinical nutrition information in partnership with the 
Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady, Administration, Division of Ancillary 
Services, and staff of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center.  We are 
dedicated to our core values of service, reverence and love for all of life, joyfulness 
of spirit, humility and justice. We display these core values in our courteous 
interaction with all those we have the privilege to serve. 
 
 The Nutritional Services Department prepares all meals in a sanitary environment, 
adhering to state and federal guidelines so that all foods are served in an attractive 
and nutritious manner. In doing so, the Nutritional Services department 
accomplishes this by utilizing its resources in the most cost -effective and efficient 
manner. It is our goal to consistently meet or exceed  the overall mission of the 
hospital. We are customer satisfaction focused and adhere to confidentiality, 
courtesy, communication and accountability. 
 
Objectives: 
The objectives of the Nutritional Services Department are to provide the best 
possible food at a cost consistent with the policy of the institution, based upon established standards for planning menus, preparing and serving food, and 
controlling meal costs. 
 
 
Provide high quality nutritional care based upon the latest scientific studies in 
nutrition and to translate his information to patients, staff and the community. 
 
 Provide for departmental and interdepartmental conferences at regular intervals to 
establish good communication and relations for the purpose of providing high 
quality service for our clients. 
 
 Stride to improve the department as measured by Patient Satisfaction, Employee 
Satisfaction, Operational Excellence and Financial Success in conjunction with the 
Mission Statement of the hospital. 
 
 