Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Departmental 
Subject:  Purchasing Section:  
Date of Origination: August 1985 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: April 2015 Serial Code: NSDP11 
Date of Last Review: August 2018 
 
PURCHASING - FOOD 
 
 
The Nutritional Services Food Services Director  (FSD), Operations Manager and/or 
Storeroom Supervisor purchase all food items for use in the Nutritional Services 
Department.  Orders for the type and quantity of all food items are recorded on a customized 
order guide.  An web ordering system with appropriate item code numbers is utilized for 
order. The US Foods and SYSCO orders are placed on the vendors’ computerized programs 
and transmitted by computer.  This accounts for 90% of the purchasing which is done 
through the prime vendors.  Some purchasing is done locally.  These orders are given 
directly to a Sales Representative, electronically transmitted or called in to the company.  A 
copy of all orders with appropriate purchase order number is sent to the Accounts Payable 
office and one copy remains in the Food Service Department files. The FSD and/or 
Operations Manager shall verify all purchase orders before sending to Accounts Payable by 
affixing a date and signature to each invoice and insure they are posted to the correct 
accounts.  
 
Careful comparative shopping for quality and cost are the guidelines for food purchasing. 
The FSD and/or Operations Manager in conjunction with the foodservice management team 
choose vendors and food items based on; availability, dependability, service, cost, quality 
and sanitary conditions.  Only Government inspected meat, meat products, poultry, poultry 
products and fish are purchased.  Only pasteurized milk and milk products are purchased. 
All purchasing must adhere to HACCP guidelines. Temperature sheets must be kept on 
hand file in the account clerk’s office to verify compliance. 
 
Rebates on Food Purchases: 
 
See contractual agreement with Morrison and OLOL  
 
 
 
 
 PURCHASING - NON-FOOD ITEMS 
 
Non-Food item supplies (listed below) are requisitioned from the Medical Center 
purchasing department on a weekly basis.  A Food Service Supervisor is responsible for ordering supplies on Monday morning.  The Supervisor fills out the sup ply requisition 
approved by the Operations Manager or designated Manager and delivers the requisition to 
the Purchasing Department.  All orders must be in by 8 a.m. for same day delivery.  After 
the order is filled and delivered by Central Supply a food service helper is assigned to put 
supplies in their proper places. 
 
The Food Services Director or Managers will order other non-food supplies weekly from 
approved vendors.  These may be ordered by computer from our main food service 
distributor or be placed on separate purchase orders for individual supply companies.  These 
purchase orders are processed in the same manner as those for food. Certain specialty items 
are obtained by placing the order on a special purchasing requisition form and forwarding 
the order to the purchasing department for processing. 
 
 
 PURCHASING - SMALL EQUIPMENT 
 China, Silver, Glasses, etc. 
 
The Food Services Director  and/or Operations Manager approve purchases of all small 
equipment and supplies that are necessary for the efficient operation of the department.  The 
need for replacement china, silver, glasses, etc. is determined by the Nutritional Services 
FSD.  These items are ordered directly from the Supply Company utilizing numbered 
purchase orders.  These are processed in the same manner as purchase orders for food. 
 
 
 PURCHASING - LARGE EQUIPMENT 
 (Value greater than $500) 
 
In order to purchase large equipment the Food Services Director  must substantiate the 
department need for the equipment.  The FSD must obtain two or three price bids and 
submit the information on a capital equipment form to the Vice President over Nutritional 
Services.  From there the price bids are given to Material Management.  If the purchase for 
the large equipment is approved, the Food Services Director has the authority to fill out a 
purchase order form stating price and specifications and submit to the purchasing agent for 
processing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RECEIVING 
 
The Storeroom Supervisor and the Storeroom Staff are responsible for the receiving of all 
goods. All food items and non -food items purchased are checked in using the duplicate 
purchase order form.  Each item is physically inspected and checked for: temperature, accuracy in quantity and specifications and quality of product received.  Over amount of 
goods, wrong specifications or poor quality is returned to the vendor.  Items not in stock or 
missing from the delivery will be reported immediately to the Food Services Director and/or 
Operations Manager so an alternate order plan can be formulated.  Weight, sizes, and 
temperatures are checked and any discrepancies reported.  Receiving hours will be 6:30 a.m. 
to 2:30 p.m. 
 
 STORAGE 
 
All shelving in the ingredient room storage area will be 6" from the floor.  All non -food 
items are stored in separate area from food items.  All staple food items are stored on 
shelves.  If cases are opened, the new stock is placed behind the same food stock on the 
shelves so the older stock will be used first.  All perishable items are stored in either 
refrigerators or freezers maintained at a temperature of 40 degrees F or below or below, 
respectively.  No food items will ever be permitted to be stored on floor of refrigerator or 
freezer.  Materials are date stamped.  All food and non-food items are clearly labeled.  Shelf 
identification labels are affixed to shelves.  Stock will be rotated on shelves according the 
FIFO principle. Materials are assigned a priority for storage with frozen and highly 
perishable items stored to correct temperature controlled environment before dry and canned 
goods. 
 
 ISSUANCE 
 
Storeroom Staff or nutritional service supervisors will issue all food and non -food items.   
The Storeroom Supervisor and Storeroom Staff are directly responsible for issuing goods 
based on the Menus and/or Pull Sheets for all areas of the department. The Food Services 
Director and/or Operations Manager will work with Management Team utilizing  POS to 
accurately forecast the needs and incorporate them into issuing and production guides along 
with accurate order guides. Any deviation must be brought to the attention of the manager or 
supervisor requisitioning supplies, as well as, the Food Services Director and/or Operations 
Manager. 
 
Food for patient consumption will be issued daily using standard base amounts for the 
average patient census of 400.  Amounts issued will be adjusted up or down according to the 
actual daily census.  The count sheets from the diet office will issue daily add-ons/write-in 
requests from patients. 
 
Food issued to the cafeteria production cooks will be based on amounts determined by the 
Chef, Operations Manager and/or Food Services Director. 
 
 
Food and non-food supplies for other departments will only be issued with a signed request 
form with the name and cost center number for the department on the request.  Requests 
through the CaterTrax System for patient care units will also be filed.  Supplies for patient 
care units are sent to the units with the patient food carts. 
 The receiving department must pick up supplies for departments.   
 
Storeroom Staff should initial all requisition sheets that they issue. 
 
 INVENTORY 
 
The employees in the Nutritional Services Ingredient room take a physical inventory on the 
last Thursday of each month (or on the agreed upon date) using supplied inventory forms.  
The cost of this inventory is calculated using Excel Spread Sheet. The financial information 
received from the inventory pricing is used in the monthly report for the Medical Center 
Controller. 
 
 FOOD PREPARATION 
 
Standardized recipes are used for all food preparation . All recipes must include the 
following: production methods, production location, nutrient analysis, serving sizes, and 
yields. The Chef is responsible for the standardization of recipes, maintaining the recipe file 
and supervising their use. Standard serving portions are established and posted in the food 
preparation area.  Food is prepared to conserve nutritive value, flavor and appearance.  Food 
is tested by the employees preparing the food and Chef during the preparation and a final 
check before serving.  Correct procedures for tasting are followed.  A meat thermometer is 
used in the cooking of roasts.  The food production supervisor and trayline supervisor 
checks the tempera tures of foods on a daily basis to see if food served to patients is 
maintained at acceptable standards as set forth by HACCP guidelines for food production, 
holding, trayline preparation, and service. 
 
SERVICE 
 
Top priority in the Nutritional Services Department is high quality service to our patients, 
physicians, guests and employees.  Courtesy is extended at all times and a conscientious 
effort is made to present the food displays and patient trays as attractively as possible.  Trays 
are checked routinely by supervisors for accuracy and correct positioning of food items and 
condiments. Management, supervisors, and staff for accuracy, appearance, temperature, and 
taste review test trays at least weekly.  Specific provisions are made to provide 13.5 hours of 
service for our physicians, guests and employees. The department provides breakfast and 
lunch in the physician’s lounge Monday through Friday. On Saturday and Sunday a 
continental breakfast is available for physicians in the physician’s lounge.  The department 
satellites hot meals, snacks, and supplies seven days per week to the Tau Center. 
 
 
 
 
 
2- Portion Control 
 
Portion control is the measuring of food when it is served.  This assures that all patients receive the same amount of food so the ingredient room personnel can assure that enough 
food is cooked.  On some special diets, the sizes of portions of food are limited to help 
control their disease, ex: diabetes. 
 
 
 
  STANDARD SERVING PORTIONS 
 
Breakfast Items 
     Juice.............................…….1/2 cup - 4 oz. 
     Cooked Cereal......................6 oz.   
     Dry Cereal........................... 1 individual box 
     Egg..................................      1 large or #16 scoop  
     Bacon................................    2 strips 
     Milk...............................…...1 cup - 8 oz. 
     Sausage Patty........................2 oz. cake 
     Sausage Link.........................(2) 1 oz. links 
     Biscuits...........................…   1 biscuit (2 1/2 inches) 
     Fruit..............................…….1/2 cup or #8 scoop or average size piece of fruit   
 
                        Lunch and Dinner Items 
     Entrees 
     Meats.............................……………3 oz. cooked meat 
     Combination/Casserole Dishes........8 oz. serving 
     Starches..........................…………..1/2 cup or #8 scoop 
     Vegetables.........................………..1/2 cup or #8 scoop 
     Salads 
     Tossed Green......................………1/2 cup 
     Cole Slaw or Waldorf Type...........1/3 cup or #12 scoop 
     Congealed Type....................…….2 X 2 1/2 inch square 
 
     Soups..............................…………3/4 cup ladle 
     Broths……………………………..1 cup ladle  
 
     Desserts 
      Puddings and Pudding Type Desserts..1/2 cup or #8 scoop 
      Pies..............................………..1/10 of a 9 inch pie 
      Sheet Cakes..................……….2 X 2 1/2 inch square 
      Other Cakes..................………3/4 inch slice 
      Cookies.........................………1 cookie (2" diameter) 
 