Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Departmental 
Subject:  Departmental Key Policy Section:  
Date of Origination: July 1988 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: April 2018 Serial Code: NSDP06 
 
DEPARTMENTAL KEY POLICY 
 
     The Nutritional Services Department is in operation 17 hours a day from 4:30 a.m. to 
9:30 p.m.  During the closing hours of the Department the master key for opening the doors 
is kept in the Nutrition office. It will be designated as the responsibility of the Supervisor to 
obtain the master key ri ng from the Nutrition office  each morning and unlock the 
Department at 4:30 a.m. 
 
During the working hours of the Nutritional Services Department the following procedure 
will be followed for the safekeeping and issuance of departmental keys. 
 
    1. The Trayline Supervisor will obtain keys from the Nutrition office  and unlock 
Nutritional Service Department, Cafeteria. 
 
    2. The Trayline Supervisor will obtain keys from the key cabinet, unlock Store Room, 
office areas and refrigerators, and return keys to key cabinet and lock. 
 
    3. The Nutritional Services Department key and cabinet key will be kept in 
Supervisor's personal possession. 
 
    4. Throughout the working day the Supervisor will be responsible for the issuance of 
keys. 
 
    5. The last employee scheduled for the Store Room will be responsible for locking the 
door upon the end of their shift. 
 
    6. The Ingredient Room should be kept locked when unattended. The storeroom door 
should be closed at all times. 
 
    7.  At 8:45 p.m. the Supervisor will: 
1. Lock all areas and boxes in the Nutritional Services Department.  
2. Keys are returned to the Nutrition office at the following times:   
 Nutritional Services: 9:30 PM                
            3. Lock the Nutritional Services Department.    Double check that all doors are 
locked. 
4. Deliver Department master keys to the Nutrition office lock box. 
 
 
In case of emergency the following personnel will be permitted to obtain the master key and 
unlock the department in order to begin the daily operations.  The designated persons are as follows: 
 
       Nutritional Services Secretary  
       Food Service Supervisors 
 
Backup sets of keys are located in the Directors office and Food Service Managers office 
and kept in a locked desk drawer. 