Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Departmental 
Subject:  Ancillary Food Services Section:  
Date of Origination: July, 2008   
Date of Last Revision: April 2018                              Serial Code: NSDP07 
  
 
ANCILLARY FOOD SERVICES 
 
UNIT KITCHENS 
Patient care unit kitchens are for the convenience of nursing units for providing patients with 
in-between meal nourishments and coffee. The nurse manager of each unit determines the 
nourishment supply for all nursing units.  The orders must be received by Nutritional 
Services before 3:30 pm to be delivered to the unit the next day.  All orders received after 
that time will be delivered the following day.  If items are needed on an emergency basis 
and can not be borrowed from another unit, managerial approval is required  (production 
manager, operations manager, sous chef, and/or clinical nutrition manager).  Once approved, 
orders are delivered on Mon, Wednesday and Friday to each unit that has placed an order.   
 
Nursing Service personnel dispense these nourishments to patients throughout the day. Dry 
goods are placed on top of the lunch food cart and delivered to the unit and are put up by the 
unit staff as soon as the cart arrives to the floor.  Floor stock requiring refrigeration or 
freezing is delivered by the nutritional services trayline staff  Infant formulas are stored in 
the patient care unit kitchens; however, the Nutritional Services Department does not buy or 
stock infant formulas.  The Pediatric Unit requisitions infant formulas from Central Supply 
and Purchasing.  A 24 hour supply of ready to hang enteral feedings prescribed by the 
physician are prepared and delivered to patient care units each day with the breakfast carts.   
 
It is the responsibility of the nursing staff to rotate stock, check and record temperatures of 
refrigerators, and clean the nursing pantries. Nutritional Services will do a monthly 
oversight checking of food refrigerators located in the nursing units . Monthly Nutritional 
Services will check for proper daily logging of temperatures, all items are within expiration 
date, all opened items are labeled with date and item, general cleanliness of refrigerator and 
any patient items are discarded after 24 hours .  Any discrepancies will be reported to the 
Nurse Manager or Charge Nurse. 
 
Satellite Meal Service 
The Nutritional Services Department provides satellite meal service three times each day to 
TAU Center.  In accordance with the agreement the Nutritional Services  Department 
provides three meals  and a morning and afternoon snack for each participant.  A 
nutritionally balanced meal and snack program is planned appropri ately for the patient 
population with therapeutic diet needs taken into consideration.  This service is provided 
Monday through Sunday.  The hot meals are prepared on site (TAU Center) for each meal period (breakfast, lunch, and dinner).  
 
CAFETERIA SERVICE 
 
PERSONNEL 
 
Meal service is provided in the Cafeteria for Medical Center personnel at the following 
times: 
 
         Breakfast         6:30 a.m.-----10:00 a.m. 
         Lunch/Dinner       11:00 a.m.------8:00 p.m. 
         Grill; Grab and Go 11:00 a.m. ------8:00 p.m. 
          
 
Prices of individual food items are determined by the Nutritional Services Department 
Director and are posted daily in the Cafeteria. These prices may change depending upon cost 
fluctuations.  Medical Center personnel receive their meal for a discount price providing 
they are wearing their identification name tag.  Coffee is available in the Cafeteria for all 
personnel throughout the day to accommodate coffee breaks.  There is a charge for this 
coffee. 
 
Medical Center personnel are served by Nutritional Services personnel.  Personnel other 
than Nutritional Services are not allowed in food preparation or serving area.  Personnel are 
requested to deposit their soiled trays and bottles in the disposal window as provided.  
 
GUESTS 
 
Request for a guest tray should be ordered through the CIS system. A charge slip is 
generated to the Business Office and Nutritional Services Department by computer.  
Pediatric Parents receive complimentary trays handled through the PBX call center directly 
to the diet office. 
 
VENDING OPERATIONS 
 
All vending machines in the Medical Center are handled by an outside concern and 
monitored by Materials Management/Plant Services through contractual obligation.  
 
 
 MACHINES AND DISPENSERS 
 
The Nutritional Services Department has five ice machines.  Three  are located in the 
Cafeteria and two are located adjacent to the tray assembly area.  These ice machines are 
owned by the Medical Center. The Nutritional Services Director provides ice to other 
departments and units upon prior approval. All refrigeration is on a preventive maintenance 
and sanitation contract with Eagle Refrigeration, the Plant Services Department sanitizes the 
machines quarterly.  
The Cafeteria has four carbonated beverage machines with eight dispensers.  These two 
machines are on consignment from the Baton Rouge Coca -Cola Bottling Company. The 
Tau Center has an ice machine in the main kitchen, which provides ice for the entire 
building. 
 
The individual nursing units ice machines on the unit.  They are responsible for contacting 
plant services for maintenance. 
 
 