Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Departmental 
Subject:  Production Ordering Procedures Section:  
Date of Origination: April 1991 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: April 2015 Serial Code: NSDP13 
Date of Last Review: June 2018 
 
 PRODUCTION ORDERING PROCEDURES 
 
Production orders of the kinds and amount of food to be prepared for each meal are the 
responsibility of the Chef in conjunction with the Production Manager who works with the 
Assistant Food Services Director.  
 
The Chef  is responsible for keeping an accurate history of both patient and cafeteria 
forecasts for amounts of food to be prepared based on a continual updating of data. The 
forecast is adjusted daily for actual census.  The Chef is responsible for communicating with 
the storeroom staff and production staff for any adjustments necessary on a daily basis. The 
weekend production sheets are produced on Friday using and educated forecast of the 
patient census and made available to the production staff. 
 
Nutritional Service ambassadors are responsible for generating a production order tally of 
special request write in menu items for all patients. This is delivered to the Chef or Head 
Cook. They also track the supplements and tube feedings along with items to be placed on 
the trayline beverage cart. 
 
The Assistant Food Services Director is responsible for tracking items, which the trayline 
runs out of during assembly of trays.  This information is logged and passed on to the Chef 
and the Production Manager so changes may be made to the system affording it the greatest 
possible accuracy. 
 
The Retail Manager is responsible of tracking items through the cash register system.  The 
Retail Manager then communicates information to Chef or Production Manager to insure all 
necessary adjustments are made to production and purchasing. 
 
The Production Manager should check daily on what is being issued for the next day, pic 
sheets, and the volume of what is being prepared for the day of to ensure proper amounts are 
produced.  This should assure not running short of food or over producing. 
 
Production sheets indicate the number of servings of each food prepared for different diets - 
ex: regular biscuits, SF biscuits. A total number of servings of each food required are also 
provided. 
 
 Utilization of Left-Overs: 
 
Foods are cooked and prepared fresh on a daily basis according to production needs.  In the 
event of overproduction a cooler located in the storage area has been designated as a storage 
box for leftovers.  These food items must be labeled and dated and utilized within a 48-hour 
period as stipulated in the departmental Infection Control Policy.  
 