Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Departmental 
Subject:  Performance Improvement Section:  
Date of Origination: March 1988 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: April 2015 Serial Code: NSDP09 
Date of last Review: August, 2018 
 
NUTRITIONAL SERVICES PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT PLAN 
 
Purpose of Performance Improvement Plan 
    
The purpose of the Nutritional Services Performance Improvement Plan is to study and 
improve the processes that affect patient care outcomes with the goal of improving the 
quality of services provided.  Though the Nutritional Services Department remains 
concerned with the resolution of problems which occur, the evaluation of our important 
aspects of care is designed to aid us in identifying opportunities to improve care. In 
addition, the Performance Improvement Plan assures that appropriate actions based upon 
the findings of the evaluation process are taken and the effectiveness of these actions are 
evaluated to assure improvement in quality or resolution of problems. 
 
Important aspects of care are identified and monitored in an ongoing way using 
established daily, weekly, monthly, and periodic monitors.  Indicators may be studied on 
an ongoing basis or as part of a focus study.  Activities are organized around the flow of 
care and integrated with other departments to study processes and functions for 
improvement.  Monitoring is performed to analyze not only how a process is performed 
within this department but also how well it is coordinated with other departments. 
 
The plan involves evaluation of the effectiveness of individual actions; the overall 
Performance Improvement Plan of the Nutritional Service Department is also appraised 
and revised annually. 
 
Responsibility for Performance Improvement Plan 
 
The Food Services Director has the responsibility for assuring that the Performance 
Improvement Plan is appropriately developed, implemented, and evaluated. 
 
The Clinical Nutrition Manager, Operations Manager, Production Manager, and Assistant 
Food Services Director are directly involved in the process of selecting indicators for 
monitoring and planning quality assurance studies, collecting and compiling data, 
evaluating results and taking corrective action to correct problems identified in their 
particular areas. 
 
  
 
Methodology 
 
The process of assuring that the Nutritional Services Department provides quality 
services is a multi-step program. 
 
1. Identification of important aspects of care for the Nutritional Services 
Department. 
• Important aspects of care are those that occur frequently (ex: Diet 
Instructions), affect large numbers of patients (ex: Wholesome, Nutritious 
Meals), or place patients at risk of serious consequences if not provided 
correctly when intended (ex: Infection Control). 
 
2. Identification of indicators used to monitor quality and appropriateness of 
important aspects of care. 
• Indicators selected must be objective, measurable and based on current 
knowledge in the area of food and nutrition. They may be selected for a 
focus study based on an identified problem. 
• For each indicator selected, data is collected.  The frequency and size of 
the activity monitored determine the frequency and size of sampling. Data 
collection is organized in a manner, which allows easy identification of 
areas requiring further evaluation; either single events or variances in 
trends may initiate further evaluation.  The focus of the program is to look 
across systems on how care is delivered to determine the quality of service 
provided and its effects on outcomes.  Even those areas, which appear 
problem-free, are still appropriate areas of study - to improve the process, 
improve results, or decrease costs. 
• Indicators may involve resources, procedures, techniques, processes or 
outcomes.   
• Ongoing indicators are reviewed and evaluated annually by the general 
manager in determining the following year's quality assurance plan of 
indicators.   
 
3. Evaluation of the quality of care. 
• The evaluation of services and processes focuses on trends and patterns in 
aspects of care based on outcomes.  The evaluation process identifies 
problems or opportunities for improvement in quality of care. Based upon 
this evaluation, a plan of action is developed and implemented.  The 
effectiveness of this action is assessed through continued monitoring.  All 
findings, recommendations and conclusions are documented and reported 
to the Food Services Director. 
• At least part of the departmental education programs is based upon the 
results of the evaluation of care. 
 
     Methodology 
 
  Ongoing monitoring of data from: 
 
1. Quality Control Monitors 
a. Temperature log checks (patient line and cafeteria) 
b. Annual employee evaluations 
c. Annual review of Food Service Policy and Procedure Manual 
 
2. Quality of Service Indicators 
a. Volume Indicators 
i. Number of meals served to patients (daily average) 
ii. Number of cafeteria meals served (daily average) 
iii. Number of special functions served (head count) 
iv. Number of patients visited 
v. Patient satisfaction results 
b. Quality Indicators 
i. Cafeteria Satisfaction Questionnaire results (%)  
ii. Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire results (%) 
iii. Employee Satisfaction Survey results. 
iv. Ancillary Services Survey results 
v. Documentation in patient's medical record of tube feeding within 
24-48 hours of physician's order. 
vi. Documentation of assessment will be based on the patient’s level of 
acuity.  High-risk assessed within 48 hours and moderate risk 
within 72 hours after screening. 
vii. Accuracy of patient meal preparation. 
viii. Food and Drug interaction is addressed by modifying patient's diet 
for the following medication: Isoniazid, Phenelzine, 
Tranylcypromine, Theophylline & Procarbazine. 
ix. Calorie Count is conducted on patients when ordered by a physician 
x. Tray assessments – overall (%) results for accuracy and temperature 
      
 
 QUALITY CONTROL STANDARDS 
 
Quality Control Monitors 
 
A. All temperature logs (patient line and cafeteria) must be recorded daily with the 
appropriate supervisor's initials.  All refrigerators, coolers, and freezer temps must 
have readings within the acceptable range 100% of the time or service must be 
ordered and recorded to restore to acceptable range.  This is to ensure that 
customers are receiving an acceptable product. 
 
B. Trays will be delivered within the 45 minute time frame when ordering.  As well 
as the specific time frame per each unit.    
C. Annual Employee Evaluations will be expected to reflect satisfactory 
performance 98% of the time. 
 
D. All departmental policies and procedures will be reviewed at least every three 
years and revised with the current year date. All clinical policies will be reviewed 
on an annual basis.   
 
E. The Nutritional Services diet manual (Nutrition Care Manual) will be revised by 
the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics on an annual basis.  The manual will be 
approved by the Nurse Executive Council every three years.   The current 
formulary will be approved on a yearly basis by the Pharmacy and Therapeutics 
Committee.   
 
F. The time lapse of patient meal service between supper and breakfast will be 
within the accepted time frame of 15 hours or less. 
 
Follow Up 
 
There will be follow-up on problems and opportunities for improvement after 
implementing a plan of action.  The Nutritional Service Department Continuous 
Improvement Plan will be evaluated annually.  The Nutritional Service Department 
management team meets to evaluate problems and identify opportunities for 
improvement within the Food Service department.  Progress toward resolution of 
problems and recommendations for improvement in quality are reviewed. 
 
                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 