Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Departmental 
Subject: Guidelines for Supervisors Section:  
Date of Origination: February 1988 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: June 2008 Serial Code: NSDP10 
Date of Last Review: April 2018 
GUIDELINES FOR SUPERVISORS 
 
 
Supervisors will be responsible and accountable for the following on a daily basis: 
 
1.  Refrigeration checks 
    a. Refrigeration must be checked daily and temperatures recorded. 
    b. Make certain leftovers are utilized within 48 hours.  If not, have justification for usage. 
    c. Make certain all food items are covered, labeled and dated. 
 
2.  Food Temperature checks 
    a. Food temperature check must be made daily at the beginning of each meal tray line. 
    b. Any food item below temperature standard must be returned to 
       Cooks area for proper heating. 
 
3.  Food Quality checks 
    a. Check that recipe procedures are being used and followed routinely in production units. 
    b. All foods produced must be an acceptable product for usage in Cafeteria or patient belt- 
line (appearance and taste). 
    c. Report to management any food product that does not meet an acceptable standard and    
submit corrective measures to be taken. 
 
4.  Food Quantity checks 
    a. Check each production unit and make certain that all food  
       items ordered have been prepared. 
    b. Check that correct portion size is being served. 
 
5.  Nutritional Service staffing checks 
    a. Check sign-in sheets in accordance with posted schedules. 
    b. Make necessary staffing adjustments to adequately cover designated areas. 
    c. Check employees for name tags, hairnets and appropriate dress daily. 
    d. Record appropriately reasons for absence or tardiness. 
    e. Check with employee regarding physician ill slip and approximate date of return. 
 
6.  Nutritional Service Circulation checks 
    a. Periodically circulate and check all production assembly and dishwashing areas. 
    b. Make certain production time schedules and patient tray schedules are on time.     c. Monitor and check any maintenance or repair problem and write appropriate job order. 
 
7.  Employee performance checks 
    a. Make certain employees are productive. 
    b. Make additional assignments during any "lag" time. 
    c. Make certain soiled late trays are removed from nursing unit 
       kitchens twice daily. 
    d. Address any disciplinary problem by issuing a corrective counseling slip. 
    e. Participate in the Employee annual merit evaluation process. 
 
8.  Policy and Procedure checks 
    a. Make certain that Supervisors set leadership examples and adhere to departmental 
policies and procedures. 
    b. Make certain breaks and meal period schedules are followed. 
    c. Make certain all other policies and procedures are followed without violation. 
 
9.  Infection Control/Sanitation 
    a. Make daily inspection of all areas. 
    b. Make certain proper cleaning methods are used. 
    c. See that cleaning is done on a continuous basis. 
    d. Randomly monitor employees from each shift for skin lesions. Take appropriate action 
based upon findings. 
    e. Take random samples of sanitizing solutions to insure they are of correct dilution. 
    f.  Make sure each work station has sanitizing solution and clean soapy water. 
    g. Proper temperatures on Dish Machine and Pot Washer. 
    h. Proper set up of individual sanitation carts in work units. 
 
 
 
 