Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Departmental 
Subject:  Responsibility and Authority of the FSD Section:  
Date of Origination: July 1985 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: April 2015 
Date of Last Review:  August 2018 Serial Code: NSDP04 
Responsibility and Authority of the Food Services Director 
 
The Food Services Director (FSD) of Nutritional Services will be responsible for 
the entire nutritional services department operation in accordance with recognized 
professional standards and administrative policies: Devising, developing, adapting, and 
installing policies and procedures to provide maximum efficiency in the operation of the 
Nutritional Services Department.  The primary function is to provide leadership including 
defining a departmental mission and vision and creating the strategic plans and policies to 
achieve them. This mission and plan must be communicated to the employees of the 
department. 
 
 The FSD provides for the appropriate nutritional care of patients according to 
guidelines established by the Medical Staff. This care is based on identified patient needs 
and is consistent with the hospital mission. The FSD provides for uniform performance 
within the department as it affects patient care.  The FSD provides this care in accordance 
to the nutritional services written goals and scope of service.  The FSD works in an 
interdisciplinary manner to collaborate in decision making regarding the nutritional care 
of the patient and integrates the department's services with the hospitals primary function. 
 
 Services are designed to the patient and family needs and expectations. The FSD 
identifies how the department adjusts to the results of patient satisfaction surveys. The 
FSD is responsible for gathering, assessing and acting upon information regarding patient 
and family satisfaction.  This is done in a timely manner and if needed develops a plan 
based on the performance-improvement process to attain the desired outcome. The FSD 
adopts a leadership approach to performance improvement and participates in 
interdisciplinary, interdepartmental performance improvement activities.  The FSD 
allocates adequate resources for measuring, assessing, and improving the hospitals 
performance.  The FSD assigns personnel needed to participate in performance 
improvement activities and provides adequate time for participation in them. The FSD 
provides staff training in the basic approaches to performance improvement and measures 
and assesses the effectiveness of their contributions to improving performance. The FSD 
continually assesses and improves the department's performance. 
 
 The FSD develops an annual operating budget and long term capital expenditure 
plan designed to meet the scope of care the department provides. The FSD carefully 
monitors the actual progress of attaining budgetary objectives. 
  The FSD works in conjunction with the Human Resources department to promote 
recruitment, retention, development, and continuing education of the departments’ staff 
members.  The FSD also implements programs to promote staff members job related 
advancement. The department's internal services must be integrated to efficiently perform 
quality nutritional care.  The FSD insures that the provision of services is supported 
through development of policy and procedure. The FSD provides for department specific 
orientation, in-services, space needs, and outside consultation as deemed needed.  The 
FSD insures that a qualified management staff including a staff of clinical dietitians, 
registered and licensed, as well as a: clinical nutrition manager to manage the information 
system and nutrition service center of diet office, an operation manager for patient food 
and purchasing, a patient service manager for managing hostess staff as well as the 
quality, accuracy and timeliness of patient food delivery, and a retail manager to operate 
the cafeteria for employee and visitor meals. The management staff competencies will be 
reviewed annually with their performance evaluation.  
 
The FSD fosters communication and coordination both inside and outside the 
department and works in collaboration with other departments regarding policies and 
procedures that interrelate.  
 
The Nutritional Services Director’s qualification requires professional 
certification. 
 
 
 
 
 
 