Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Human Resources 
Subject:  Orientation and Training Section:  
Date of Origination: Originated January 1988 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: April 2012 Serial Code: NSHR09 
Date of last Review: April 2015 
 
 
 
 ORIENTATION AND TRAINING PROGRAM 
 
  ORIENTATION 
 
All employees will receive orientation to the hospital, department, and job duties and 
expectations during the initial two weeks of employment by the nutritional services 
department.  Orientation is a planned program to achieve an efficient and effective 
performance by the nutritional services employee. 
 
Orientation sets the broad framework within which a high level of employee performance 
is expected.  The quality of this program is reflected in the general manner in which the 
employee conducts himself, personal neatness, and the degree of courtesy shown to 
patients, visitors and fellow employees. 
 
The goals of our orientation program are: 
 
1. To transition into a smooth functioning food service operation. 
2. To give the employee a sense of identification by impressing the importance of 
the job they are to perform and by making him/her proud to work for the 
organization. 
3. To give a clear picture of tasks to acknowledge the job functions and 
responsibilities.   
4. To assure the employee is adequately prepared to carry out job duties and 
demonstrates competency in performing the tasks. 
 
The first day of employment for Nutritional Services employees will complete the 
Nutritional Service new employee checklist.  The following information will be presented 
and discussed: 
 
1. The manager or supervisor will review all of the materials included in the 
nutritional services employee checklist.   
2. The job description and performance expectations will be discussed and 
explained.  A copy will be provided to the employee either by human resources or 
by the nutritional services department. 3. A walking tour of general kitchen facility, as well as hospital units and elevators, 
with explanation of major areas.    Location of policy and procedure manual, diet 
manual, emergency preparedness manual, infection control manual and hazardous 
control plans are designated. 
4. The communications system (Telephone, Executone, Pamex and Computer) is 
explained. 
5. Location and use of smoke detector, fire alarm pulls, fire extinguisher and circuit 
breaker boxes is discussed. 
 
The second day of employment, the Nutritional Services employee will be placed in the 
appropriate working area under the direction of Team Leaders.  Employees are scheduled 
to complete job specific orientation and training in all job duties during a two-week 
period.  Employees are scheduled to work with a department trainer during the training 
period.  A review of the “trainees” activities and performance is conducted on a frequent 
basis by management by meeting with both the department trainer and trainee.  A trainee 
may request a new department trainer if they feel the trainer is inadequately preparing 
them to assume the regular duties.  An employee is officially removed from training 
when the employee, department trainer and supervisor indicate the employee has 
demonstrated the ability to conduct all job duties on the job-training checklist. An 
informal evaluation of the new employee's performance is conducted and documented by 
a department manager at the one month anniversary date (additionally as needed).  This 
evaluation is based upon observation by and discussion with the nutritional services 
supervisors. 
 
Employees must demonstrate competence in the safe and effective use of all equipment 
involved in completing their job duties before they operate the equipment and a skills 
competency will also be completed before the employee is allowed to work without a 
mentor. The CBL food service survival must be completed within the first month of 
employment. 
 
Orientation Program - Clinical Offices 
 
In addition to the overall departmental orientation program, the employees in the clinical 
offices will complete an orientation to the office and nutritional care procedures. 
 
The following areas will be reviewed: 
1. Orientation and training in the use of the Cerner system based upon job class.   
a. Limiting the type of records each employee of nutritional services may 
access with their personal sign-on code enforces patient confidentiality 
and security of patient records.  
b. Each personal access code is accompanied with the OLOLRMC 
Information Systems Statement of Conformation document that must be 
signed by the employee and IS Department. 
2. The ordering and identification system for patient nourishment and enteral 
feedings is demonstrated. 
3. Education on specific diets (i.e. knowledge of appropriate food items allowed on each diet). 
4. Location of policies and procedures (on Lake Link as well as policy binder) for 
nutritional screening, nutritional assessment, and nutritional counseling is shown 
along with the location of educational materials and forms. 
5. Appropriate charting procedures in Cerner (electronic medical record), location of 
nutrition progress notes in the medical record, and proper use of standardized 
terminology, definitions, abbreviations, and symbols. 
6. Departmental charge system for nutritional care procedures and enteral feedings is 
demonstrated. 
 
 
 
IN-SERVICE TRAINING PLAN  
 
In-service Education for the nutritional services department is planned for all food and 
nutrition staff and is conducted at least monthly.  In order to have the best communication 
possible copies of the in-service are conducted during the huddles as well as in the 
monthly department meeting.  The log of attendance and completion will be kept on file.   
 
The subject materials for In-service sessions are related to job responsibility (professional 
development) along with Customer Service and Work/life/family balance.  Unrelated 
topics to the job may be presented for interest or an educational experience for the 
employee.  In-service Education will include the following conducted on a yearly basis: 
Safety Education, Infection Control, Fire Drill Procedures, Departmental Disaster Plans, 
Hazardous Control and Employee Right to Know Law, Patient Rights & Ethical Behavior 
and Quality Improvement.  Results of Departmental Evaluations, employee performance 
evaluations, sanitation and safety inspections and information from quality improvement 
activities will be used in selecting other appropriate in-service training topics.  In-services 
will be conducted on appropriate use of all new equipment, machinery and chemicals in 
the department.  Seminars and workshops are planned for supervisory personnel and 
other employees when available and scheduling is possible. 
 
The Production Manager plans and coordinates the in-service education for the 
department with the approval of the Director. 
 
In-service training will be conducted using appropriate teaching methods for both 
knowledge-based and skill-based activities.  Learning objectives will be identified for 
each in-service activity. Employees may be required to demonstrate competency 
following training activities or by taking a short test.  This will be necessary for all new 
equipment, machinery and chemicals. 