NSM012 
Page 1 of 3 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Medication 
Title: Thrombolytic IV Administration, Stroke 
Policy 
Reference #: NSM-012 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: June, 2000 Review Date:   July 8, 2024  
Revision Date: July 8, 2024  
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for the administration of thrombolytic medications otherwise known as 
alteplase (Activase) and tenecteplase (TNKase) in ischemic stroke patients. 
 
  
 
POLICY: 
Critical Care Areas and Emergency Department RNs should be familiar with dosing, 
administration and complications of thrombolytics.  The administration of thrombolytics shall be 
done in accordance with the American Stroke Association/American Heart Association 
(ASA/AHA) Guidelines for the Early Management of Adults with Acute Ischemic Stroke. 
 
 
 
INDICATIONS: 
Alteplase and tenecteplase are thrombolytics indicated for the management of acute ischemic 
stroke in adults for improving neurologic recovery and reducing the incidence of disability.  IV 
thrombolytics are recommended for selected patients who may be treated up to 4.5 hours from 
onset of ischemic stroke symptoms.  Physicians should review the ASA recommended 
indications and contraindications to determine eligibility.  
 
 
  
PROCEDURES: 
 
Physician Order: 
Thrombolytics can be given to acute ischemic stroke patients up to 4.5 hours after symptom 
onset.   
A. The alteplase dosing protocol for ischemic strokes will be utilized (0.9 mg/kg – max dose 
of 90 mg) 
B. The tenecteplase dosing protocol for ischemic strokes will be utilized (0.25 mg/kg – max 
dose 25 mg) 
      
 
 NSM012 
Page 2 of 3 
 
Nursing Procedure: 
A. Provide continuous cardiac monitoring 
B. Establish separate IV access with at least two (2) saline locks; three (3) locks are 
preferred. 
C. Administer tenecteplase per Stroke Protocol. 
    
     Tenecteplase  
1. Recommended dose is 0.25 mg/kg (maximum dose is 25mg) 
2. Flush IV access with 0.9% sodium chloride (Normal Saline) prior 
to administration 
3. Medication is a one-time bolus. Administer dose over 5 seconds 
4. Follow administration with 0.9% sodium chloride (Normal Saline) 
flush to ensure full delivery of medication 
D. Recommend Venipuncture:  use small gauge needles (23 or 25 
gauge) for blood venipuncture.  Apply direct pressure for 20 to 30 
minutes to venipuncture site. 
E. Upon initiation of tenecteplase, the nurse must be in room observing 
patient, obtaining vital signs, and performing neurological assessments.  
This should be completed: 
1.  every 15 minutes x 8 (2 hours), 
2.  then every 30 minutes x 6 hours 
3.  then hourly x 16.  
4. Vital signs changed to routine frequency after 24 hours from IV 
alteplase treatment start.  
 
F. Perform a baseline neurological assessment prior to administration, and 60 
minutes after tenecteplase bolus utilizing the National Institute Health 
Stroke Scale (NIHSS); other assessment time intervals use the modified 
NIHSS along with a reassessment of presenting symptoms with each vital 
sign. The modified NIHSS includes items 1b, 1c (LOC), 2 (Gaze), 3 
(Visual), 5 (Motor Arm), and 6 (Motor Leg), 8 (Sensory), 9 (Language), 
11 (Extinction and Inattenion) from the full NIHSS. 
G. Nursing documentation 
1. Document patient assessment. 
a. Blood pressure/vital signs per previously indicated 
frequency (letter G) 
b.  2 full NIHSS (before initiation and 60 minutes after bolus 
dose), and 
c.  modified NIHSS and reassessment of presenting 
symptoms with each neurological check per previously 
indicated frequency (letter F) 
 
2. Document any bleeding and report to physician  
            immediately. 
      
   
 NSM012 
Page 3 of 3 
 
Indications/Contraindications Criteria:  
As per referenced AHA/ASA Guidelines for the Early Management of Adults with Acute  
Ischemic Stroke  
 
 Important Points to Remember: 
1. Assess frequently for presence of headache, changes in mental status, and 
alterations in neurological status or other vital signs as these may be early 
indicators of increased intracranial pressure or altered cerebral tissue 
perfusion. 
2. If concern for bleeding or acute change in mental status arises, infusion should 
be paused, and physician should be contacted immediately. May restart 
infusion per provider discretion. 
3. Superficial bleeding can be successfully managed by direct pressure. 
4. Surface or internal bleeding that results in fluid volume deficit or 
hemodynamic compromise requires immediate and definitive emergency 
action and medical intervention.   Discontinuation of the infusion with/without 
blood product supplementation or reversal may be indicated (per discretion of 
the provider) 
     
 
References:  
 
Powers et al. (2019). Guidelines for the early management of patients with ischemic 
stroke: 2019 update to the 2018 guidelines for the early management of acute stroke. A 
Guideline for healthcare professionals from the American heart association/American 
stroke association. Stroke, 50. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000211 
 
Wang, L., Hao, M., Wu, N., Wu, S., Fisher, M., & Xiong, Y. (2024). Comprehensive 
Review of Tenecteplase for thrombolysis in Acute ischemic Stroke. Journal of the 
American Heart Association. Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular 
Disease. https://doi.org/10.1161/jaha.123.031692 
 