NSO-001 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Oncology 
Title: Chemotherapy Extravasation Protocol 
Policy 
Reference #: NSO-001 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: July, 1997 Review Date: November 5, 2024 
Revision Date: December 12, 2022 
 
PURPOSE: 
To minimize the risk of extravasation and to facilitate the timely and effective management of 
extravasations. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Extravasation: the unintentional escape of fluid from its physiologic contained space into the 
surrounding tissue 
 
Vesicants:  agents known to cause blistering and necrosis when extravasated. 
 
PROCEUDRES: 
1. The extravasation protocol should be initiated as soon as an extravasation of a vesicant/irritant is 
suspected.  
2. An infiltration scoring system and a phlebitis scoring system is available in the nursing 
documentation portion of the electronic medical record (See Appendix).   The use of these scoring 
systems must be charted if extravasation is suspected or confirmed.  
3. Initiate the following steps in the event of any extravasation of a chemotherapeutic agent. 
1. Notify the physician at the time of the occurrence and obtain orders. 
2. Don Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to minimize personal exposure to any 
chemotherapeutic agent or blood. 
3. Terminate the chemotherapy infusion at first sign of a problem with flow, pain, or 
color change at the site of injection. 
4. Disconnect IV tubing and attach syringe directly to the extension tube. Do not remove 
the IV device or port needle.  
5. Withdraw as much blood or extravasated fluid as possible from the site using slight 
negative pressure through the syringe.   
6. Refer to facility designated drug reference system located within the medication 
administration record (MAR) for actions on specific drugs. 
7. Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference for specific actions on specific 
drugs.  
8. Observe the site for pain, erythema, induration, and /or necrosis. 
9. Document the following: 
a. Date 
b. Time 
c. Type of access 
d. Location of access NSO-001 
Page 2 of 3 
e. Drug sequence of treatment plan 
f. Drug administration technique and/or route 
g. Approximate amount of drug extravasated 
h. Patient response 
i. Appearance of the site 
j. Physician notification 
k. Follow up measures 
l. Document the incident according to institutional policy 
10. A safety event must be completed through the electronic events reporting system. 
11. If the patient is an ambulatory patient and the antidote requires a multi-day treatment, 
which falls on the weekend or holiday, the patient will be admitted to the hospital for 
the subsequent treatment. 
 
  
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
Chemotherapy and Immunotherapy Guidelines. ONS, 2019, p. 251-261 
 
 
Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference 
Refer to facility designated drug reference system  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NSO-001 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
 
Appendix: 
 
Infiltration Score 
(graded according to the most severe presenting indicator) 
Grade Clinical Criteria 
0 No symptoms of infiltration 
1 Skin blanched 
Edema less than 1 inch in any direction 
Cool to touch 
With or without pain 
2 Skin blanched 
Edema less than 1-6 inches in any direction 
Cool to touch 
With or without pain 
3 Skin blanched or translucent 
Gross edema greater than 6 inches in any direction 
Cool to touch 
Mild to moderate pain 
Possible numbness 
4 Skin blanched or translucent 
Skin tight, leaking 
Skin discolored, bruised, swollen 
Gross edema greater than 6 inches in any direction 
Deep pitting tissue edema 
Circulatory Impairment 
Moderate to severe pain 
Infiltration with any amount of blood, irritant, vesicant 
 
 
Phlebitis Score 
(graded according to the most severe presenting indicator) 
Grade Clinical Criteria 
0 No symptoms of phlebitis 
1 Erythema at site with or without pain 
2 Pain at site with erythema and/or edema 
3 Pain at site with erythema and/or edema 
Streak formation 
Palpable cord less than 1 inch 
4 Pain at site with erythema and/or edema 
Streak formation 
Palpable cord greater than 1 inch 
Purulent drainage 
 
 