NSO-002 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Oncology 
Title: Hazardous Drug Spill Procedure 
Policy 
Reference #: NSO-002 
Supersedes #: 1997 
Date of Origination: November, 1996 Review Date: October 23, 2023 
Revision Date:   November 5, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to define the activities necessary to properly decontaminate areas where 
high risk hazardous drug (HD) administration occurs as well as provide instructions on proper spill 
management and disposal of HDs.  High risk HDs are considered antineoplastics, more commonly 
referred to as chemotherapy drugs.   
 
This policy will review high risk hazardous drug related spills in outpatient infusion and/or clinic setting 
(or non-acute locations), inpatient setting (or acute locations), as well as review home infusion spill kits.   
 
 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
• USP800: United States Pharmacopeia (USP) General Chapter <800> Hazardous Drugs – 
Handling in the Healthcare Setting is a guidance document comprised of best practices handling 
hazardous drugs in healthcare settings.   
• Hazardous Drug (HD): NIOSH defines any drug having any of the following six characteristics 
in humans or animals:  
o Carcinogenicity 
o Teratogenicity or other developmental toxicity 
o Reproductive toxicity 
o Organ toxicity at low doses 
o Genotoxicity 
o Structure and toxicity profiles of new drugs that mimic existing drugs determined 
hazardous by any of the above criteria  
• High Risk HD: following OLOL policy of HDs, High Risk HDs are considered to be NIOSH 
Group 1 drugs: Antineoplastic HDs.   
• Low Risk HD: following OLOL policy of HDs, Low Risk HDs are considered to be NIOSH 
Group 2 and 3 drugs: Non-Antineoplastic and Reproductive Risk HDs.   
• Deactivation: Deactivation renders a compound inert or inactive.   
• Decontaminate: Decontamination occurs by inactivating, neutralizing, or physically removing 
HD residue from non-disposable surfaces and transferring the HD residue to disposable materials 
for proper removal from an area.   
• Spill Response Team (SRT): The SRT will consist of the following personnel:  
o The person who created and/or found the spill 
o The unit or clinic supervisor (or designee) where the spill occurred  NSO-002 
Page 2 of 4 
o A team member from Pharmacy for spills occurring in acute locations  
o A team member from Environmental services for spills occurring in acute locations 
• Personal Protective Equipment (PPE):  
o Gloves: Per USP800 gloves used as PPE when handling HDs shall meet American 
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standard D6978 (or its successor).   
o Gown: Per USP800 gowns used as PPE when handling HDs shall meet the following 
criteria: 
▪ be disposable and nonabsorbent 
▪ shown to resist permeability by HDs 
▪ close in the back and have no openings to the front 
▪ be long sleeved with closed, elastic or nit, cuffs 
▪ must not have any seams or closures HDs could pass through 
o Respirator: a full-face piece, chemical cartridge-type respirator or powered air-purifying 
type mask.  This type of mask should only be worn when attending to HD spills larger 
than what can be contained with a spill kit.   
• HD Spill:  An HD spill is the unintentional leakage or spill of a hazardous drug from an 
otherwise closed container.  For purposes of this policy, HD Spills and spill management will be 
referred to for High Risk HDs.   
• Large High Risk HD Spill: A large HD spill is any high risk HD spill that cannot be contained by 
one chemo spill kit, requiring the use of multiple spill kits.   
• Small High Risk HD Spill: A small HD spill is any high risk HD spill that can be contained by a 
single chemo spill kit or decontaminant wipes.   
• Hazardous Bodily Fluid Spill:  Hazardous bodily fluid spill refers to any patient currently 
receiving or has received a High Risk HD during this current hospital admission, where any 
bodily fluids have spilled or soiled any locations or surfaces in the patient care area.   
  
 
POLICY: 
High Risk Hazardous Drug (HD) Spill (Group 1 drugs)Only High Risk HDs, also known as 
antineoplastic drugs, will follow the outline in this policy.   
A. Wherever chemotherapy, or a high risk HD, is being administered, a spill kit must be readily 
available in supply room of unit.  If a chemo spill kit is not readily available, obtain one from 
pharmacy or central supply.  The following items should be available to manage a high risk HD 
spill:  
• Goggles 
• Two pairs of ASTM D6978 rated chemo gloves 
• One N95 mask (not surgical mask) 
• Gown shown to resist hazardous drug permeation with back closure 
• Shoe covers 
• Sheets of absorbent material 
• Spill control pillows 
• A sharps container 
• A small scoop to collect glass fragments 
• HD waste-disposal bag 
B. Personal Contamination: Should personnel splash a high risk HD on their clothes or PPE, the 
following steps should be taken:  NSO-002 
Page 3 of 4 
1. Immediately remove gown, gloves and personal clothing.   
2. Dispose of all in a chemotherapy disposal bag.   
3. Wash affected skin immediately with soap (not germicidal cleaner) and water.  For eye 
exposure, immediately flood the affected eye with water or isotonic eyewash for at least 15 
minutes. 
4. Obtain medical attention.  Contact your supervisor and report to ECU.  Employee Health 
should be contacted during office hours. 
5. A safety event should be completed through the electronic events reporting system.  
C. Containment and identification of high risk HD spill area: 
1. It is the responsibility of the person creating or finding the high risk HD spill to initiate the 
containment of the spill.  If the spill is not able to be managed by a single spill kit, the SRT 
should be activated for help cleaning the high risk HD spill.  
2. Identify the spill area to prevent others from entering the area and spreading the spill or 
becoming contaminated. 
3. Isolate the area of the spill to reduce the risk of exposure to additional personnel if not 
already done by persons calling the HD SRT. 
4. Prior to entering the spill area, don a coated chemotherapy, back closing gown, double shoe 
covers, thick gloves (over double chemo gloves if broken glass) or double chemo gloves 
tested to ASTM standard D6978, and personal full face dual chamber respirator (or half 
respirator and goggles) where warranted.  
5. Gather spill kit supplies and enter area of spill. 
6. If the spill is liquid, place absorbent towels on top of spill gently to prevent splashing of HD 
if not already in place 
7. If the spill is a solid, place absorbent towels wetted with water on top of the spill. 
8. Use the absorbent towels to contain the spill and carefully place the contaminated towels in 
the HD waste bag provided in the spill kit. 
9. Clean up any broken glass fragments using utility gloves (thick rubber gloves) placed over 
double chemotherapy gloves and place into pierce proof container along with any 
contaminated sharps. Place in yellow waste container along with any soft supplies that are 
heavily contaminated with HD. If a yellow waste container is not immediately available, 
place in RCRA Black Bin.   
10. Once the visible spill has been removed, use absorbent towels wetted with the designated 
decontamination agent to decontaminate the area. These wipes will be placed in yellow waste 
container or RCRA waste (Black Bin) regardless of the drug spilled. 
11. Allow the agent to dry.  
12. Clean the area with the designated germicidal detergent/sporicidal solution. Solution will be 
brought from pharmacy when the HD SRT is called. Bleach wipes may be used otherwise.   
13. Place all wipes used in the cleaning process into the trace yellow waste. 
14. Once the spill has been cleaned, remove PPE and discard in trace yellow waste. Wash hands.  
 
 NSO-002 
Page 4 of 4 
D. Documentation of Spills 
1. Spills and spill cleanup must be documented in the electronic event reporting system by the 
person who had the spill or those who notified the HD SRT.  Further investigation should 
occur by the unit manager or supervisor to avoid similar high risk HD spills in the future.   
E. Linen 
1. Laundry Personnel: Potentially contaminated clothing must not be taken home under any 
circumstances.  
2. Contaminated linen will be double bagged in a specially marked laundry bag and placed in the 
soiled utility chute.  
 
F. Home Chemotherapy Spill Kit 
1. Patients who are sent home with continuous IV chemotherapy will be given a chemotherapy 
spill kit. In the event of a spillage at home, the instructions contained within the patient home 
chemotherapy spill kit should be followed.   
G. Hazardous Bodily Fluid Spill:   
1. Obtain a spill kit 
2. Wear double chemo gloves and gown 
3. Wear a face shield if splashing is possible, if available  
4. Discard linen in a hazardous drug labeled linen bag 
5. Discard trash and disposable items in a chemotherapy labeled bag and place in chemotherapy 
plastic container  
6.  For non-employees exposed to an HD spill, enter a safety event into the electronic reporting 
system and notify the physician or report to emergency room for evaluation.  
1. Training: All personnel who may be required to clean up a spill of HD must receive proper 
training in spill management and the use of PPE.  
 
 
EQUIPMENT:  
Chemotherapy Skill Kit 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
  
Olsen, M., LeFebvre, K., Brassil, K. (2019).  Chemotherapy and Immunotherapy Guidelines. Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania: Oncology Nursing Society  
 
USP General Chapter <800> Hazardous Drugs – Handling in Healthcare Settings USP42-NF37 
Published on June 1st, 2019  
 
Olsen, M., LeFebvre, K., & Brassil, K. Chemotherapy and Immunotherapy Guidelines. 2019. Oncology   
                       Nursing Society.  
 
Refer to Facility Online Clinical Reference 
 