NSO-007 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Patient Care Services/Nursing Section: Oncology 
Title: Radiation Therapy Unsealed Sources, 
Care of Patient Receiving 
Policy 
Reference #: NSO-007 
Supersedes #: April, 1999 
Date of Origination: January 8, 1987 Review Date:   June 10, 2024 
Revision Date:  11-30-2020 
 
PURPOSE: 
To inform nursing staff of approved measures when patients are receiving radiotherapy from an 
unsealed source. 
 
The following instructions should be followed when patients receive radiotherapy from an unsealed 
source. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
Radiation Therapy with unsealed sources constitutes the administration of dosages of radioactive 
materials (radio nuclides) into the body. 
 
A. Therapy Request: 
 When this type of radiation therapy is ordered by a physician, notify the Department of Nuclear 
Medicine to make necessary arrangements to prepare the patient, the room, instruct the nursing 
staff, administer the radio nuclide, and to regulate and monitor the environment on a daily or as 
needed basis. 
 
B. Radiation Notices and Orders: 
 Two forms will be utilized to support the radiation safety practices for the care of all radiation 
therapy patients. 
 
1. The Radiation Therapy Patient Inpatient Survey for the patient's chart report will 
document the radiation monitoring of the patient and the proper restrictions and 
notifications.  This will be placed in the patient's chart. 
 
2. The Radiation Safety Notice for patient's room door will be affixed by the Radiation 
Safety Personnel to the door and will identify that radiation therapy is in progress, as well 
as radiation safety restrictions for visitors and nursing staff.  When this notice is removed 
from the door by the Radiation Safety Personnel, it will be retained in the patient's 
permanent record. 
 
The written chart orders for these patients will outline the radiation safety practices that 
are in place during the inpatient radiation therapy. 
 
These forms and orders will be updated periodically by the Radiation Safety Committee. NSO-007 
Page 2 of 4 
 
C. Patient Room 
 Patients receiving radiation therapy with unsealed source will be admitted to the approved 
radiation therapy rooms.  The patient, unless otherwise indicated, should not be removed from 
the room until the Radiation Safety Officer, or his designee has established that the patient's 
radiation level has decreased to acceptable limits.  The door is to be kept closed.  The patient's 
room is not to be released for cleaning and subsequent re-occupancy until approved by the 
Radiation Safety Officer.  Emergency telephone numbers will be posted on the door of the 
patient's room. 
 
 The warning signs and notices posted on the door to any patient's room by the Radiation Safety 
Officer should remain until the patient's room has been decontaminated and patient isolation 
restrictions are released by the Radiation Safety personnel. 
 
 Any body fluids from a radioactive patient receiving unsealed sources, is to be considered 
radioactive and will necessitate decontamination by the Radiation Safety Personnel (i.e., 
vomitus, urine, sputum, etc). Cover material with towel and call Nuclear Medicine immediately.  
(Refer to sign on patient's door). 
 
D. Nursing Care 
 The nursing staff will follow the direction of the Radiation Safety Personnel/Nuclear Medicine 
Department and address questions or problems to the Nuclear Medicine Department on a 24-
hour basis.  Routine physician's orders should be conducted before administration of the 
radiation therapy.  Universal precautions and radiation isolation room setup should be ordered 
and followed.  Hamper stands and appropriate bags should be used to contain linen and trash in 
the room.  Appropriate isolation attire should be worn by all staff members entering the room.  
Gloves should be worn when handling secretions or excretions.  No linen, trash, or other 
objects/articles are to be removed from the room until inspected and released by the Radiation 
Safety Personnel. 
 
 Disposable food trays should be requested and utilized.  The patient should be provided with 
hospital attire, disposable gloves and booties.  The patient should remain in the room and not 
allowed to ambulate in the hallways. 
 
 Patients should be encouraged to care for themselves and to be as self-sufficient as possible, thus 
reducing the need for close contact with hospital personnel. 
 
 All nursing care should be pre-planned to provide maximum care for the patient in a minimum 
amount of time.  If no specific time and distance recommendations are given in the chart, nursing 
personnel should maintain a distance of six (6) feet from the patient unless giving direct nursing 
care. 
 
 Gloves and booties should be worn prior to entering the room and removed upon leaving. Gowns 
and gloves should be worn when handling the patient's bedpans, soiled bed linen, or any 
container of radioactive material (i.e., urine, vomitus, or excreta from incontinent patients) from 
the patient.   NSO-007 
Page 3 of 4 
 
E. Nursing Personnel 
1. All nursing personnel assigned to care for patients who have received therapeutic 
quantities of radioactive materials shall be considered as individuals who are 
occupationally exposed to ionizing radiation. 
  
2. Nursing personnel should identify and check for appropriate warning signs on the 
patient’s door and ensure that posting is maintained as required by the Radiation Safety 
Officer. 
 
3. Appropriate training of nursing personnel under the direction of the Radiation Safety Officer 
should include specific protocols of patients receiving radiotherapy from unsealed sources.  
 
4. The nurse manager is responsible for the annual assessment and ongoing radiation 
therapy education within the specific nursing departments. 
  
Nursing personnel should document all patient care and maintenance of radiation 
isolation measures in the patient’s medical record. 
 
5. Nursing personnel may enter the patient’s room at any time, wearing proper protective 
gloves, shoe covers, etc., to perform any and all normal duties; however, they should not 
spend excessive time visiting with patients nor perform non-vital personal services, such 
as shaving or hairdressing.  If extended nursing care beyond the posted time limits must 
be performed, contact the Nuclear Medicine Department for recommendations (Refer to 
the sign on patient’s door for contact person). 
 
6. Pregnant, or breast feeding personnel should not care for patients receiving this form of 
radiation therapy.  No one under the age of 18 is permitted to enter the room.  Nursing 
personnel should be rotated in the care of the patient according to the time limits allowed.  
Assigned nursing personnel must be educated in radiation isolation protocols and care of 
the patient receiving radiation therapy.  Float staff should not be assigned to patients 
receiving radiotherapy.  Radiation Safety Officer should be contacted with any questions 
regarding the individual care of these patients in regard to radiation safety. 
 
F. Laboratory/Radiology 
 Laboratory work (i.e., involving blood or urine samples) and x-rays should be done prior to the 
radiation therapy.  Those which become necessary during the radioactive treatment should be 
delayed 48 hours following the time the patient received the dose, if possible. 
 
G. Emergency Care/Resuscitation 
 In an emergency, such as a MET Team/Code Blue, the patient should be treated as would any 
patient not receiving radiotherapy under the same crisis circumstances.  The physician in charge 
and the Radiation Safety Personnel should be notified immediately, though care for the patient 
should not be withheld until these individuals arrive. 
 NSO-007 
Page 4 of 4 
 Should the patient expire, the physician in charge and the Radiation Safety Officer should be 
notified immediately.  Nothing is to be removed from the room until released by the Radiation 
Safety Officer. 
 
H. Release of a Patient Containing Radioactive Material: 
 A patient should not be released from the hospital until it has been determined that the exposure 
level from the patient is at or below 7 mr/hr at 1 meter, at the highest reading from the patient. At 
that point, the radiation safety officer will clear the patient for discharge.  Only at that time may 
the patient be released.  This procedure is to be followed in any instance where the patient is to 
be discharged with a radioactive source in his/her body (i.e.: I-131; Gold 198 Seeds; P-32 
intercavitary implant; Palladium Implants). 
 
I. Release of Room for Reuse: 
 The room should be monitored and released by the Radiation Safety Personnel.  Upon the 
determination by the Radiation Safety Officer that the room is not contaminated and can be 
reoccupied, the Radiation Safety personnel will issue a clearance form that will be signed by the 
Radiation Safety Officer, the Nuclear Medicine Radiation Safety Personnel, the Patient Care 
Staff, and the Housekeeping Personnel.  This form is to indicate that the room has been released 
and is ready for cleaning and re-occupation.  A copy of this form will be delivered to the nursing 
unit, Housekeeping, and to the Nuclear Medicine Department. A copy of this form will be 
maintained in the patient's medical record. 
 
 
References: 
Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference 
 