Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Patient Services 
Subject:  Patient Menus Section:  
Date of Origination: June, 2008 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: July 2013  Serial Code: NSPS04 
Date of Last Review: July 2018  
 
PATIENT MENUS 
 
Format: 
 
The Nutritional Services Department is currently using a room service menu. All patients on 
TCU and Rehab receive a visit by ambassadors to place an order.  The role of the 
ambassador is to discuss the menu in accordance with their diet order, which enables them 
an opportunity to select their choices of foods and have them recorded, by the ambassador. 
The menus are not discussed with the patients in the psychiatric unit as they receive a buffet 
cart to choose from.  Patient menus are planned and approved by the Food and Nutritional 
Services Director, Clinical Nutrition Manager, and the Patient Services Manager. 
 
Menu nutritional adequacy: 
 
The department menu follows the My Pyramid Guidelines  and the Dietary Reference 
Intakes (DRIs) to provide patient a variety, balanced diet. The patient menu includes at least 
the minimum servings of milk, meat, vegetable, fruit, bread/cereals, and other food groups 
to meet the recommended allowance guideline s of My Pyramid. Patients experiencing 
difficulties with poor appetite or weight loss may require oral nutrition supplementation. 
The department has a variety of oral supplements to offer to the patients (e.g. Ensure, Ensure 
Plus, Ensure Pudding, etc).  
 
Patient Contact for Menu Selections: 
 
Room Service is a system which allows patients to choose food items within their diet 
restriction.  Nursing will assess the patient and determine if the patient is appropriate to 
participate in room service ordering. Patients that are room service appropriate may call in 
their meal orders between 6:30 am and 7 pm.  
 
Patients that are determined to need assistance ordering room service are considered room 
service assist and will be visited by ambassadors or called by operators to take their menu 
selections. Patients who are room service not appropriate will receive a non-select diet.   
 
Operators will perform call backs to determine if any patient has not received a meal . 
Operators will print out the call back rep ort and if any patient who is not appropriate will 
receive a house diet; appropriate and assists will receive a phone call to get menu selection. The same process will be used for diet changes and NPO releases.  During this contact time 
the am bassadors and/or hosts/hostess works closely with the Patient Service’s Manager 
informing them on any requests for diet information, diet preferences , supplement 
consumption or any other situation indicating clinical expertise is necessary.  
 
 
Patient Menu Substitutions: 
 
Patient menus have been planned to provide variety in the selection of foods.  Substitutions 
in foods are rarely made; however, occasionally a situation arises beyond the control of the 
Nutritional Service General Manager and a substitution must be made on the patient menu.  
This situation would be non -availability of the food item on the Baton Rouge market.  
Should this occur, the Executive Chef or the Clinical Nutrition Manager will be responsible 
for making an appropri ate substitution in the menu. In the a bsence of management a 
dietitian will be responsible to assure the substitution is appropriate for the diet. 
 
 
Patient Birthday Cakes: 
 
The charge nurse may order a birthday cake for patients on regular diets by calling the 
Patient Service’s Manager.  Most patients on modified diets may receive a birthday cake; a 
diet tech or dietitian will determine the availability of cakes to patients on therapeutic diets. 
The Food Service Department must receive a request for a birthday cake by 10:00 a.m. on 
the specified day.  The choice on the kind of cake will be left to the discretion of the 
Nutritional Services Department. 
 
 