Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Retail 
Subject:  Retail Patronage Section:  
Date of Origination: February 1988 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: February 2010 Serial Code: NSRT03 
Date of Last Review:  April 2015 
 
RETAIL PATRONAGE 
 
Cafeteria: 
 
The Cafeteria operates from 6:30 AM-10:00 AM and 11:00 AM-8PM daily. The Cafeteria 
is a Retail Dining facility primarily for visitor, employee and physician patronage.  A 20% 
discount is given to employees wearing their picture identification nametag and 10% to 
members of OLOL’s Healthy Connections program. 
 
Patient patronage is restricted to the following. 
     
1.  Patient Meal Service is only provided through Nutritional Services’ patient 
trayline service.  This is to ensure that foods served are in compliance with 
Physician’s Diet Orders.  Food options do not include Retail Menu Options.  If a 
Patient is admitted for more than 21 consecutive days and is on a Regular Diet, 
limited Retail Menu Options will be offered. 
 
2. Patients on Regular Diets may choose to purchase Retail Menu Options, at the 
patient’s own expense,  if the request is approved by Nursing. Written 
notification will be given to the Patient by Nursing to communicate to 
Nutritional Services that the Patient is not restricted to their room or in their diet.  
This is to ensure that there are no precautions in place such as isolation.  
a. If the Patient does not obtain the written notification from Nursing to 
communicate that the Patient is not restricted to their room, Nutritional 
Services Managers/Supervisors will request In -Patients to sign their 
name and room number when making purchases in the Café.  This is to 
ensure that Nursing knows that food is being consumed other than from 
Patient Service.  Nutritional Services will contact the unit and let them 
know the Patient is consuming food from Retail Services. 
b. Service will be refused if Patients are not properly dressed in accordance 
with State Food Service Regulations.  Patients are expected to wear 
shoes and a robe or second gown over their primary gown to reduce the 
potential of contamination. 
    
             If the Patient refuses to leave the Café, Nutritional Services Supervisor  
            or Manager will immediately contact the House Manager for assistance  
How will this be 
communicated to 
the unit?              with the Patient returning to their room. 
 
 
Tau Center: 
 
The management of Nutritional Services Departm ent operates the Tau Center. The Café 
operates 7:00 AM- 6:00 PM Monday - Sunday. The Tau Café provides meal service for 
Employees, Visitors, Physicians and Patients.  Employees patronizing the Tau Cafeteria 
receive a 20% discount.  To receive this discount employee  must be wearing their 
identification nametag.  
 
Service will be refused if Patients are not properly dressed in accordance with State Food 
Service Regulations.  Patients are expected to wear shoes and a robe or second gown over 
their primary gown to reduce the potential of contamination. 
 
February 1988   
Reviewed Dec. 1989 
Reviewed Nov. 1990  
Reviewed April 1991 
Reviewed April 1992   
Revised April 1993 
Revised April 1994   
Revised May 1999 
Revised February 2000 
Revised June 2001 
Revised July 2002 
Revised August 2009 
 