Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Safety 
Subject:  Safety Rules Section: Departmental Safety 
Guidelines 
Date of Origination May 1987 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: April 2012 Serial Code: NSSF01 
Date of Last Review: March, 2010 
 
DEPARTMENTAL SAFETY RULES 
 
PURPOSE:  The purpose of this policy is to provide a written policy on the subject of 
safety, so there is no doubt as to the importance of safety to all.  These policies are in 
addition to the hospitals’ policies. 
 
POLICY:  It is the policy of OLOLRMC and the Nutritional Services Depart ment to 
conduct all operations safely and to provide a healthy environment for employees, patients, 
staff, and the general public.  This facility is committed to the safety practices and 
procedures established by the Occupational Safety Act of 1970, and as amended, and to the 
various State and Health Statutes.  It is the responsi bility of all Nutritional Service 
employees to conduct their work safely and in accordance with OLOLRMC and the Food 
Service Policies. 
 
GENERAL SAFETY RULES: 
 
1. All injuries and accidents will be reported to the supervisor on duty.  
2. Defective or broken items (equipment, chairs, electrical plugs etc.) should be 
reported immediately to your supervisor. 
3.  Report to your supervisor immediately, any unsafe conditions. 
4.  Know your work procedures and safe practices to be followed.  Do not take 
chances.   
5.  Know how to properly operate all equipment or machines before using.  All 
employees are to be trained and approved for use of hazardous equipment before 
operating quipment without supervision. 
6.  Personal protective equipment must be worn when necessary (i.e. rubber gloves, 
aprons, etc.) 
7. Caution must be taken when walking and cleaning the floors in the kitchen.  
     a)  Keep floors clean and dry. Spills must be cleaned up immediately.  
b)  When cleaning always put up a wet floor sign , then mop with clean hot soapy 
water and then "dry mop" or let dry before walking on wet areas.  Mop small 
portions of the floor at a time to allow traffic to pass safely.     
     c)  Tile floors may be slippery when weather is humid and muggy, so you should be         
especially careful at such times to avoid slips and falls.  
     d)  Walk - don't run or slide across the floor.  Look where you are going.  Don't be a fall guy. 
     e). All employees or those entering the kitchen are required to wear slip resistant 
shoes. 
8. Comply with both OLOLRMC and the Nutritional Service Department's dress code 
to ensure safety. 
9. The Nutritional Service worker must lift and carry loads correctly. 
10. Bulky items should be carried in such a way that the view is not blocked. 
11. Passageways will not be blocked with equipment, chairs, etc. 
12. Doors will be approached with care, caution must be taken near swinging doors, 
corners and congested areas. 
13. Do not overload food carts when traveling in hallways. 
14. Stack or balance dishes or objects carefully on carts. 
15. Pull carts on floors (do not push). 
16. Wheel carts with care, keep to the right and never run with the cart. 
17. When pulling carts, use caution at corners and watch for cross-traffic. 
18.  Park carts close to the wall so as not to block traffic. 
19. Use caution in elevators. 
20. Do not read while walking in hospital corridors. 
21. Use handrails when traveling on stairways. 
22. Horseplay is prohibited in food preparation areas and hospital corridors. 
23. Use proper lifting procedures 
             a) Face directly to the load to be lifted. 
             b) Move as close as possible to the load. 
             c) Set feet securely about one foot apart. 
             d) Bend at the knees to lower yourself. 
             e) Grasp underneath the load. 
             f) Keep back as straight and upright as possible. 
             g) Keep heels flat and arms straight. 
             h) Lift slowly, straightening legs only do not twist or turn body. 
             i) If there is any question of your ability to lift a heavy load, get help. 
             j) Bending back, reaching too far, lifting to one side, twisting with a load, off -
balance      shifting and attempting too much weight should be avoided because 
they can cause injuries. 
24. Materials in storage areas will not be piled too high or improperly stacked since they 
may fall causing injuries.  
25. Detergents and other similar items will not be stored with food items and will be 
kept away from food preparation areas. 
26. Heavy equipment and utensils will be stored on low shelves. 
 
 
TRAFFIC CONTROL POLICY 
 
     The Nutritional Services Department prohibits traffic of unauthorized personnel in the 
General Food Assembly, Food Preparation, Food Storage and Utensil Washing Area in 
accordance with the Sanitary Code of the State of Louisiana.  
 1. Visitors, salespeople, etc. will enter the production area with the permission of the 
Nutritional Services Director and will be escorted by same or designee. 
 
2. Plant Management personnel performing inspection or working on job order 
assignments will be permitted in the area. 
 
3. Other hospital personnel, visitors, patients, etc. will enter the Nutritional Services 
Department general office area to transact any communication or business. 
 
 
FOOD PREPARATION OPERATIONS: 
 
1. Use only mitts or pot holders when handling hot utensils. 
2. Cook in minimum amounts of water to avoid boiling over.  This also reduces the 
handling problem when pouring off hot liquids. 
3. When removing lids from pots carefully slide lid towards you or open lid slowly so 
that steam may escape without scalding hands or face. 
4. Keep the stove top and hood free of grease. 
5. Handles of cooking utensils should be turned away from the edge of the stove so that 
the utensils will not be brushed off; but, take care that the handle is not too near an 
open flame.  
6. In removing heavy containers, have adequate assistance and know    where the 
container may be safely placed.  Be sure that the work area is clear of fellow 
employees before moving hot containers, etc.. 
7. When drawing hot water or coffee from an urn, turn the faucet slowly so as to avoid 
splashing.  Check carefully that all valves and faucets are in proper position before 
filling urn. 
8. Keep oven doors closed when not in use.  Ventilate the oven for several minutes 
before lighting it. When striking a match to light an appliance, strike it in a direction 
away from your clothes or other flammable material – then place the match or wick 
at the gas jet before turning on the gas.  Turn the gas gradually so as to avoid 
"blowing out" the match or wick. 
9. Do not clean the oven or stove until it has cooled. 
10. Never leave utensils on the floor. 
 
KNIVES AND FOOD PREPARATION 
 
1. When using knives, pay attention to what you are doing!  Don't day dream! 
2. Cut away from your body and away from fellow employees. 
3. When drying a knife, keep the sharp edge away from you. 
4. Use a cutting board, knife cutting glove (with latex covering). 
5. Keep all knives in their proper storage place when not in use. 
6. Do not leave them in the sink, or where they cannot be easily seen. 
7. A sharp knife is safer than a dull knife since it cuts easier and will not require as 
much pressure with the danger of slipping.  Your immediate supervisor should 
decide the proper method of sharpening knives. 8. Remove steel particles from the knives after they are sharpened. 
9. If a knife falls, don't grab it - get out of the way.  The floor can take it better than 
your hand or foot. 
10. Use the knife for the operation for which it is intended. 
11. One last word on knives - they are not can openers and should not be used as such. 
12.        Each employee who uses a knife as part of their job duty must be properly trained 
and this is to be documented in their personnel file. 
 
CHINA AND GLASSWARE IN FOOD PREPARATION 
 
1. Use care in handling glasses and dishes. 
2. Use pan and brush and broom to sweep up pieces of broken glass or china.  Use a 
dampened paper towel for cleaning up slivers of glass or china. 
3. Drinking glasses or other china and glassware that are chipped or cracked should be 
discarded immediately by placing in the specially designated red garbage cans with 
secure lids. 
4. Glass and metal pots don't mix, so keep glass and china articles out of the pot sink. 
5. Pins or tacks should not be kept in glasses or dishes.  When storing clean sherbet 
glasses custard cups and cups, place them upside down. 
6. If you know or suspect that there is broken glass or dishware in soapy water, drain 
water first.  Then remove the broken pieces carefully. 
7. The dishwashing machine should be inspected regularly for broken glass. 
 
 
 
NUTRITIONAL SERVICES OPERATIONS 
 
1. Avoid overloading of trays.  Carefully place the dishes and containers of food on the 
trays so that they will not slip or spill when trays are carried or moved. 
2. Be sure that you check all glassware, dishes, silver, etc., for possible defects, before 
placing these items in service. Remove defective items immediately. 
3. Don't hand cups, bowls, or plates containing hot liquids or food to guests.  Place 
them at their places or on the serving counter for them to pick up.  This will avoid 
spillage, burns, and other hazards to both the guest and you.  Warn the guest that the 
plates are hot! 
4. Cups and bowls should be centered on saucers or liners before placing them on the 
tray counter or table. 
5. Avoid over-filling containers with liquids or hot foods.  Make sure that the edges of 
the plate, bowls, or cups are free of food.  Warn guests of hot dishes. 
6.   Be careful when reaching for and handling knives, forks, and other sharp objects. 
7. Protect food from foreign substances.  If you break an article near open containers, 
immediately report this to the supervisor so that food can be removed from service. 
 
DISH CLEARING AND CLEANING 
 
1. Do not overload carts with dishes or trays.  Make sure that you can see where you are going.  Be careful going through doorways or around corners.  Always guard 
against bumping into a person or object. Push, do not pull. 
2. Carts in poor repair should be reported immediately to your supervisor. 
3. Any sharp or jagged edge on dish or silver containers are hazards. 
4.   Use care in stacking dirty dishes on your tray when removing them from tables.  
Avoid spilling on floor, chairs or guests. 
5. Separate china, glassware and silver.  Place them in the proper containers for 
cleaning (whether by machine or by hand). 
6. Use special caution when preparing dishwashing solutions. Carefully follow 
instructions as to quantities, temperatures, etc.. 
7. In the event of breakage in sinks, remove larger pieces by hand (with extreme care) 
and let the remaining pieces collect in the drain cup-then remove, empty and replace 
the drain cup. 
8. After dish racks have been emptied, store them carefully so that they will not topple, 
nor trip employees. 
 
 
 
REFUSE DISPOSAL 
 
1. Place scraps of food and refuse in proper containers, as marked. 
2. Do not fill the containers to overflowing, and keep the floor clean. 
3. Empty refuse containers should not be stacked more than two high. 
4. Promptly report any containers that are broken or otherwise defective. 
 
 
EQUIPMENT USED IN FOOD PREPARATION 
 
1. Equipment will be in proper working condition.  Faulty equipment or defects must 
be reported to a manager.  Proper work order should be initiated to plant services to 
fix equipment.  Any unsafe or equipment which is not functioning should be taken 
out of service, lock-out/tag out, and dated. 
2. Equipment will be kept clean so that grease will not accumulate and become a fire 
hazard. 
3. Equipment that is out of order will not be tampered with and not utilized until fixed 
by plant management. 
4. Electrical equipment will be handled only when hands are dry. 
5. Any frayed, worn, or cracked cords  or plugs with loose items  will be replaced  
immediately. This is a high priority and should be sent to plant services immediately 
to prevent any electrical accidents. 
6. Cords will not be dangling on floor and exposed to traffic. 
7. Damaged or worn out equipment will be discarded such as splintered mop handles. 
8. All walk-in refrigerators and freezers can be opened from inside. 
9. Rubber gloves will be used to guard against skin irritations when using cleaning 
solutions. 
10. Steel wool will not be used for cleaning since particles may work loose and end up in patient’s food. 
11. All electrical appliances should be in the "OFF" position before being plugged into 
the outlet. 
 
 
EQUIPMENT TRAINING 
 All Nutritional Services employees who operate equipment will be trained and able to 
demonstrate proper procedures for operating and cleaning equipment effectively and safely. 
 
1. Supervisors and Nutritional Service managers will be responsible for reviewing 
operations and cleaning equipment procedures with employees.  A copy of the 
procedures is available in the main kitchen by the MSDS information. 
 
2. Each employee will be able to demonstrate correct procedures for operating and 
cleaning all equipment they utilize. 
 
3. Employees and managers must sign the equipment skill assessment sheet. The skill 
listed will be specific for the areas the employees work in or units they have cross -
trained in. The equipment skill assessment sheet will be placed in each employee file.   
 
 
FIRE DRILL POLICY 
 
All new Nutritional Service employees attend the Medical Center Orienta tion program 
which includes an in-service in Fire Safety.  The Emergency Preparedness Handbook is 
located in the Assistant Director's Office and all Nutritional Service employees are expected 
to be aware of this and review its contents.  All employees should know the immediate 
response in case of fire, location of fire alarms, location of shut-off valves, location of fire 
extinguisher, and location of exits. 
 
 
FIRE DRILLS 
 
The purpose of a "FIRE DRILL" is to make certain that all employees know what to do and 
how to react in the event of a real fire. 
 
The Medical Center Fire Committee conducts fire drills each month. These fire drills are 
conducted un-announced and are rotated through all departments and all shifts. In addition, 
the Nutritional Services Department conducts monthly fire drill.  The Fire Committee 
Members will decide on the date, time and location of the drill each month.    
 
 FIRE DRILL PROCEDURE 
 
1. Pretend to remove patients, visitors, or co -workers from immediate fire area.             
Pull the nearest fire alarm only.  (This is done at the location of the mock fire only 
under the direction of the fire committee member present.) 3. Call the PBX operator (extension 3333) and report Fire Drill stating the location. 
4. Close all doors and clear corridors. 
5. Pretend to shut off oxygen, vacuum, air and gas valves. 
6. Bring fire extinguisher to "fire scene".  DO NOT ACTIVATE. 
 
Employees should be prepared to answer questions about location and use of fire alarms, 
shut off valves, and evacuation routes. 
 
When Dr. Red is not in your area, you should consult your Disaster Manual for your 
department duties and prepare yourself to carry them out. 
 
FIRE SAFETY IS IMPORTANT 
 
Although this is not a fire manual, there are several things that should be remembered about 
fire safety for your organization. 
 
1. Immediately report any smoke or fire so that the fire department may be called. 
2. Know where the fire extinguisher is located and how they should be used.  If an 
extinguisher is partially used, or the seal broken, report this immediately to your 
supervisor. 
3. Know the fire exits and use them and show them to guests should the need arise. 
4. Keep fire doors, fire exits and fire stairs clear of materials and equipment.  Utilize in 
the event of emergency only. 
 
Fire Evacuation Route For Nutritional Services Employees 
 
Dining Service employees have two general exits in case of fire evacuation. 
 
1.     (A) Exit through door and turn right to main corridor, turn right on main corridor 
passing by vending area.  Continue on to the Medical Plaza and exit through 
the first right turn to the outside. 
 
       (B) Exit through door and turn left, follow corridor for another left, and follow 
corridor passing by the laundry and exit to outside. 
 
2.     Exit through main entrance door to dining area.  Turn right and follow corridor and exit 
to outside, according to plan 
        
Office employees have one general exit in case of fire evacuation. 
 
1.     (A) Exit through door to General Office.  Turn left, follow corridor for the 
second left, and turn passing by the laundry and exit to outside. 
 
       (B) Exit through door to General Office.  Turn left, follow corridor by Plant 
Management and exit to outside. 
 The General Kitchen Area has three general exits in case of fire evacuation.  These are 
posted by the Team Leaders desk in the main kitchen area. 
 
1. Exit through door by General office, then follow plan 1(A) or 1(B) for office 
employees. 
 
2. Exit through dishroom door, then follow plan 1(A), 1(B), or (2) for Dining Service 
employees. 
 
3. Exit fire exit door, then follow plan 1(A), 1(B), or (2) for Dining Service employees. 
 
 
          
          
 OLOL NUTRITIONAL SERVICES        
 FIRE DRILL PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT      
          
DATE:          
          
UNIT TESTED PLEASE CHECK COMPETENCY DEMONSTRATED     
please circle          
 RACE ALARM CALL 3333 EXTINGUISH      
          
          
OFFICE          
PRODUCTION          
TRAYLINE          
CAFETERIA          
PLAZA          
STOREROOM          
          
          
EMPLOYEE SIGNATURE:          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
COMMENTS:          
          
          
   
 
 
PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE: 
 
The preventive maintenance program will be a systemized approach to equipment operation 
from a maintenance standpoint.  It will be scheduled attention that each and every item of 
equipment should receive to ensure optimum operational efficiency and reduced down time 
for emergency repairs or service. 
 
The purpose of the preventive maintenance program is to ensure that the kitchens’ 
equipment is functioning properly and efficiently, and that it is ready to perform upon 
demand.  Top priority will be given to the constant deterioration and decline in the 
efficiency of the equipment resulting from normal wear and tear, age and accumulation of 
dirt and debris that contributes to a continuing decline in efficiency over a period of time.  
This will benefit the Medical Center by equipment lasting longer, using less energy while 
diminishing down time all allowing the department to better serve the patient. 
 
The preventive maintenance program will reflect a catalog of manufacturer 
recommendations regarding maintenance of all equipment and systems.  Plant Management 
has identified all equipment, which requires periodic maintenance.  They have established a 
schedule for conducting routine inspections according to manufacturer specifications 
concerning proper maintenance. 
 
Routine inspections are scheduled even if specific maintenance duties do not need to be 
done, since the inspection may uncover problem areas, which need to be addressed.  This 
will be considered an integral part of the preventive maintenance program.  Food Service 
employees are to report any problems they detect to the Management staff. 
 
 
 
Work orders will be used as a control mechanism and retained on file in the Nutritional 
Services Department records.  These work orders will be reviewed quarterly to see if 
problem patterns can be identified.  A file containing information for each piece of 
equipment is kept in Plant Management for referral in emergencies. The program will be 
under the supervision of the Director of Plant Management.              
 
 
HAZARDOUS CONTROL: 
 
The Nutritional Services Department has a "Right to Know Center" attached to the wall next 
to the Cafeteria entrance in the Main Kitchen for easy access for all departmental 
employees.  This center contains the OLOL Hazard Control Plans and the Material Safety 
Data Sheets (MSDS) for hazardous chemicals used in the department along with the 
information in the case of a hazardous chemical spill. 