 1 
 
 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Safety 
Subject:  Infection Control Section:  
Date of Origination: March 1988 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: November 2015 Serial Code: NSSF04 
Date of Last Review: July 2014 
 
INFECTION CONTROL 
 
 
The Nutritional Services Department for the control of infection has established the 
following policy: Proper sanitation procedures will be employed in regards to the storing, 
handling, preparation and serving of foods.  In addition to routine, daily monitoring of 
infection control/sanitation procedures by supervisors and managers, a weekly sanitation 
checklist is completed in all areas to assure compliance with departmental infection control 
policies and procedures to maintain cleanliness of the premises, equipment, and disposal of 
waste. 
 
 NUTRITIONAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT PROCEDURES  
 
1. STORING AND PREPARATION OF FOODS 
A. All meats, meat products, poultry, poultry products and fish are government 
inspected and purchased from reputable vendors. 
B. All perishable items are stored in either refrigerators or freezers at a temperature of 
40oF degrees or below or 0oF degrees or below respectively. 
C. Nutritional Services refrigeration and freezer space has been designated for the 
storage of food items only. No food items will be stored for individuals, other 
departments, or organizations.  
D. A refrigerator has been designated for food service employee lunches.  No food 
items may be stored elsewhere in the department.  No non-food items belonging to 
nutritional service employees may be stored in the production or service areas.  
Employee meals may be reheated in the microwaves only.  No preparation of 
personal food will be allowed in production areas. 
E. All foods recalled by the manufacturer will be removed from the storage and 
ingredient room areas.  The store room supervisor and operations manager will be 
responsible for checking existing stock for recall numbers upon being notified by the 
distributor.  If the product recall number is found, all stock is removed from the 
shelves and labeled for pickup by the distributor. 
F. Refrigerator and freezer temperatures are checked and recorded daily by a 
production manager. This information is filed in the Main Nutrition office. 
G. Canned goods, dried foods and other staple items are stored on platforms or shelving 
in the Nutritional Service Department Storage Rooms.  Food coming from broken  2 
 
 
 
packages or swollen cans, or food with an abnormal appearance or odor will not be 
served. 
H. Only clean equipment is used in the preparation of foods. 
I. Foods are prepared as quickly as possible keeping to a minimum the length of time 
they are held at room temperature. 
J. Prepared food mixtures are delivered to the patient's tray assembly line or cafeteria 
counter in small batches so as to shorten length of time held on the serving line. 
K. Foods are prepared for the expected number of patients and personnel in order to 
keep at a minimum the amount of leftovers. 
L. Leftover foods are kept refrigerated in shallow covered containers and are used 
within a 48 hour period.  All items are labeled and dated.  Leftovers are kept to a 
minimum both as a waste-control measure and to reduce the incidence of bacterial 
contamination of the product. Raw, unprocessed fruits and vegetables are thoroughly 
washed under running water before use. 
M. Single-service articles should be discarded after one use. 
N. Any item of food that is dropped on the floor must be discarded if it cannot be 
properly sanitized.  If you drop a pot holder on the floor, it must go to the laundry. 
O. The tops of all canned foods are washed before opening. Can openers are washed 
and sanitized daily. Separate cutting boards for raw and uncooked food and for raw 
fruits and vegetables are necessary.  All cutting boards are of a hard, nonabsorbent 
material, which is dishwasher safe.  No wooden cutting boards are to be used. 
Cutting boards are to be cleaned and sanitized between uses. Prepared foods are not 
to be cut on the same boards as raw food. 
P. In room refrigerators are for family use only.  All patient food from internal or  
external sources are to be stored in the nursing unit’s nourishment refrigerator with 
patient ID and expiration date label. Please refer to policy NSPS06. 
 
2.  HANDLING AND SERVING OF FOODS 
 
A. Clean utensils such as forks, ladles, tongs, etc. are used to dip up or place food items 
on trays to avoid manual contact with food.  Utensils, cups, glasses, and dishes are 
handled using gloves or in a manner to avoid touching surfaces with which food or 
drink will come in contact. 
B. Food must be tasted by the employees preparing the foods and by the 
Chef/Operations Manager during preparation for a final check before serving  and 
recorded on the taste panel of the temperature log.  The disposable tasting spoon that 
was used will be thrown away.  Fingers are to be kept out of food at all times.  Foods 
are removed from pans with a serving spoon. 
C. Employees who must handle food wear disposable gloves while serving. 
D. Patients’ trays are served, checked by the checker and/or tray line supervisor and 
covered as quickly as possible to avoid any possible contamination. 
E. When a patient is placed in isolation precautions, the nutritional service worker only 
enters those rooms that are not droplet or airborne.   
a. When a tray must be delivered to a patient in isolation precautions, the 
ambassador/nutritional services assistant will bring the tray to the nursing  3 
 
 
 
station. 
b. The nursing personnel will then deliver the droplet or airborne isolation trays 
to the patient's bedside. 
c. Once the patient is finished eating, the tray will then be placed on the soiled 
tray cart (by nursing) to be returned to Nutritional Services for cleaning. 
F. When a patient is placed in Contact Precautions, the Hostess may enter the room to 
obtain menu selections and preferences. 
a. When entering the room, at no time should the hostess come in direct contact 
with the patient or any object or furnishing that would have touched the 
patient. 
b. The Ambassador/Nutritional Assistant will sanitize their hands upon leaving 
all Contact Precaution rooms. 
c. The Ambassador/Nutritional Assistant will not enter airborne or droplet 
precaution rooms. 
G. Trays will not be transferred from room to room.  If the wrong tray is delivered to a 
patient, a new tray will be issued from nutritional services to correct the error and 
avoid possible contamination. 
H. Once individual portions of food are served, they are not used again. 
I. Prepared foods are transported to other areas in closed food carts or in covered 
containers. 
J. Unwrapped foods are protected from contamination by sneeze-guards. 
K. Foods that have stood for more than 2 hours at room temperature and have an 
internal temperature of greater than 41oF  degrees are considered unsafe and must be 
refrigerated immediately and brought to an internal temperature of 40oF  degrees.  If 
this is not possible the food will be discarded. 
 
 
3.  CLEANING OF EQUIPMENT AND WASTE DISPOSAL 
 
A. Environmental services removes trash and dispose was from all production units, bulk 
trash from the production and cafeteria dining area. 
B. The nutritional services department maintains the cleanliness of all equipment, shelving, 
refrigerator boxes, storage areas, patient food carts, garbage cans and garbage carts. 
C. See detailed instructions for the process for cleaning specific equipment within the 
department in the departments Equipment Cleaning Manual. 
D. Cleaning assignments are made on a daily basis to eliminate germ -breeding areas and 
avoid the risk of spreading disease. 
E. All kitchen equipment, meat choppers, slicers, mechanical mixers and work areas are 
thoroughly cleaned, sanitized, dried, and reassembled after each use so as to ensure the 
best possible sanitation standards.    
F. The housekeeping department is responsible for cleaning of the carpets in the dining 
service eating area and Private Dining Rooms. 
G. The garbage from the production unit and food waste from trays is placed in plastic 
garbage containers and is removed as quickly as possible from the nutritional services 
department by Housekeeping.   4 
 
 
 
H. Patients and cafeteria trays, chinaware, are sanitized in a dishwasher.  All chipped and 
cracked china and glassware or china wares without glaze are discarded.  Refer to the 
dish machine and pot washing machine policy (# NSSF05).    
a. The temperature of the dish and pot washing machines will be checked and 
recorded by the kitchen supervisor daily.  
I. Disposable containers used for disaster or emergency situations are stored in their 
original pack and are discarded after one-time usage.  Only dishwasher safe containers 
may be reused. 
 
4.  STORAGE OF UTENSILS AND DISHES 
 
A. Patient tray components/dishes are removed from dish machine conveyor belt after 
being sanitized and placed in lowerators to be heated for usage at the next meal. 
B. Cafeteria dishes are removed from dish machine conveyor belt after being sanitized and 
placed on storage shelves in the pot room drying area ready for service. 
C. Dishes used for special functions are removed from dish machine conveyor belt after 
being sanitized and arranged in an orderly fashion on shelving in the special function 
storage room. 
D. Silverware is sanitized and stored in appropriate receptacles for.  Gloves are worn when 
handling clean dishware.  
E. All cooking utensils are sanitized in the pot and pan area and placed in proper storage 
areas in production units.  
 
5.  ICE: MAKING, STORING, DISPENSING 
 
A. The cafeteria has three self-dispensing icemakers for usage by patrons.  Ice is made 
continuously and kept in icemaker storage bins. Eagle refrigeration Co. has a 
maintenance agreement to sanitize the ice machines monthly. Ice is dispensed 
automatically into glass, cup or other container. 
 
B. The patient tray-line assembly unit is equipped with one self-dispensing Ice Maker for 
use for patients, special functions and occasional use by other departments.  This ice 
maker is sanitized weekly to avoid build-up of mold and dust particles.  The machine is 
defrosted and completely sanitized monthly.  Ice is dispensed by removing it by 
scoopfuls with scoops used for ice only.  The scoops are sanitized weekly by running 
them through the dish machine. The machine is placed on a monthly sanitation schedule 
by a contract company to disinfect the entire machine monthly, Eagle refrigeration log. 
 
6.  EMPLOYMENT REGULATIONS AND PERSONAL HYGIENE 
 
A. All persons are required to pass a physical examination by the appointed staff physician 
before being accepted for employment. Also part of this process is having a PPD skin 
test completed upon being hired. 
B. The nutritional service workers will practice good personal hygiene in regards to body 
cleanliness, hair, hands, fingernails, etc. No artificial fingernails are allowed.  5 
 
 
 
C. Hairnets or caps are worn by the food service to guard against loose hair falling into 
food. 
D. D. The nutritional service worker will cover the mouth and nose while coughing or 
sneezing.  Hands should be washed immediately so that the food is not contaminated. 
E. Employees with infectious diseases such as hepatitis A, colds, sore throats, boils, skin 
eruptions, diarrhea, vomiting, fever, and respiratory infections will not handle food until 
recovered and cleared by their physician and employee health to return to work. 
F. Employees will report to a supervisor or management any carelessness in handling of 
food or incorrect sanitation that is not acceptable as correct standards established by the 
infection control policy. 
G. All hand-washing facilities are properly stocked with soap and disposable towels at all 
times. 
H. Any employee infected with a communicable disease must be released by both their 
physician and employee health prior to returning to work. 
I. Any employee with lesion on their hand must report this to the supervisor. The 
supervisor will determine if the employee should be sent to the employee health. The 
employee must wear a protective glove unless sent home by the employee health.  
 
7.  HOUSEKEEPING - TRASH, GARBAGE, AND GREASE REMOVAL 
 
A. The nutritional services department maintains all general housekeeping functions related 
to cleaning in the kitchen, dishwashing, and storage areas. Housekeeping is responsible 
for garbage removal to the proper dumpster outside. 
 
B. Cleaning in the department is performed on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis as 
determined by the departmental cleaning schedule. Major special project cleaning is 
done routinely on at least a monthly basis.  Employee assignments are made on a 
rotation basis. 
 
C. Rodent and pest control is provided by a professional outside contracted basis on a fixed 
schedule and/or as needed.  Plant management coordinates this service. If any type of 
spraying is needed the area sprayed must be covered with protective material so no 
pesticide residue will be left on any food preparation or serving materials.    Equipment 
should be kept clean to avoid the need for spraying and this is used only as a last resort.  
Traps and baiting should be a first step if insects are detected. 
 
D. The rest rooms are maintained by the Housekeeping Department and are cleaned daily. 
 
E. The nutritional services department is responsible for moving trash and garbage to back 
hall area for removal by housekeeping department. The refuse from the dishroom will be 
placed in the approved waste containers located near the storage room by the nutritional 
service employee. Garbage and non -food garbage is removed from the nutritional 
services department at regular intervals by the housekeeping department. Waste is sealed 
in plastic garbage bags and removed from the department via trash carts to the Medical 
Center Compactor.  The nutritional services department is responsible for the removal of  6 
 
 
 
all waste from the dishroom and pot wash room and properly depositing in the 
compactor. 
 
F. Cardboard is recycled by the Medical Center.  Clean boxes are to be broken down and 
separated from garbage in the nutritional services department.  The boxes are then 
disposed of by placing them in the appropriate containers provided for baling. 
 
G. Grease is removed from the Department in oil retrieval bin and deposited by the 
compactor in the designated vat.  A rendering company then carries the grease away. 
This is managed by the nutrition department. 
 
8. CLEANING SCHEDULE 
 
To Be Cleaned Daily: 
 
a. Men and Women's bathroom thoroughly cleaned and straightened. Sweep, mop, 
sanitize, replace toilet paper and hand towels, etc. 
 
b. Store room swept and mopped.  Also walk-in coolers mopped daily. 
 
c. Straighten and clean all stainless steel tables in all units of kitchen. 
 
d. Beltline cleaned thoroughly after each meal. 
 
e. Patient's food carts wiped down after each meal. 
 
f. Grease tray under grill emptied. 
 
g. All sinks in all units cleaned. 
 
h. Floors in department swept and mopped three times a day. 
 
i. Clean and straighten all drawers in kitchen. 
 
j. Walk-in refrigerators straightened, food dated and any spoiled food disposed of. 
 
k. Grill cleaned thoroughly with appropriate grill cleaner. 
 
To Be Cleaned Once a Week 
 
l. Clean tile wall and pipes behind steam kettles. 
 
m. Cooks clean, sanitize and straighten victory box in their unit. Salad and dessert 
aides clean sanitize and straighten victory box in their units. 
  7 
 
 
 
n. Wipe out and sanitize cold victory box used to store cold food at beltline. 
 
o. Wipe out and sanitize hot victory box used to hold prepared foods for cafeteria 
and beltline. 
 
p. Deep fat fryer emptied, cleaned with appropriate cleaner and refilled. 
 
q. Window and sills cleaned. 
 
r. Thoroughly clean inside of dish machine including curtains outside of the daily 
cleaning. 
 
s. All carts, trucks and racks steam cleaned. 
 
To Be Cleaned bimonthly 
 
t. Patient food carts steam cleaned on a rotating basis. 
 
u. Scrub walls on portable food carts. 
 
v. Special cleaning projects in department at night. 
 
 
 
9.  TUBE FEEDING PREPARATION 
 
B. Tube feeding orders are received from when ordered via the electronic medical record 
and processed by the operators and/or clinical dietitians. Operators will print out patient 
tickets with appropriate tube feeding formula. These tickets are given to the storeroom 
staff for delivery to nursing units. The hospital uses the Enteral Nutrition Closed System.  
 
C. A 24-hour supply of tube feeding is delivered to nursing unit each morning.  New orders 
and changed orders are delivered throughout the day by the storeroom staff and/or host.  
Each Enteral Nutrition Closed System is labeled with the patient name, room number, 
formula name, and date. 
 
 
10. NEUTROPENIC PRECAUTIONS 
 
A. GOAL:  To minimize bacterial and viral contamination of patient's food and tray. 
 
B. Neutropenic diet precautions consist of no fresh fruits and vegetables. All neutropenic 
food items are covered after tray preparation. All neutropenic trays are placed on the 
regular food cart and delivered to the unit. 
  8 
 
 
 
C. Neutropenic diets will have NO GARNISH on plates and this will be designated on tray 
ticket.  
 
 
11. PROCEDURE FOR HANDLI NG A PATIENT TRAY WITH NEEDLES, 
SYRINGES AND/OR MEDICINE: 
 
A. Upon discovery of a needle, syringe or medicine on a tray, immediately call your 
supervisor or manager.  DO NOT REMOVE FROM TRAY.  We are currently 
disposing the needles that are left on meal trays in a sharps box from stericycle.  
 
B. The supervisor or manager must immediately call the appropriate unit to inform the 
nurse manager and/or charge nurse of the item(s) identified on the patient tray.  The 
supervisor or manager will keep any identifying items, such as tray ticket. They will 
then dispose of the needle into the needle box placed in the dish room for this purpose.  
They should use the hemostat attached to the box for the purpose of safely depositing  
the needle. Please advise? 
 
12. PROCEDURE FOR PROPERLY REPORTING INJURIES INCURRED BY A 
PATIENT NEEDLE: 
 
A. In the event a Nutritional Services employee incurs an injury secondary to a patient 
needle, the employee must immediately report the accident to their immediate 
supervisor or manager. They should keep any identifying items such as tray tickets to 
assist in identifying where the needle came from. The needle should be placed in the 
needle box located in the dishwashing area.   The supervisor or manager should also 
contact the nurse manager of the unit from where the needle came from. 
 
B. The supervisor, manager, and/or employee must complete a safety event report 
describing the appearance of the needle (i.e. clean, dirty, blood, etc.).  The supervisor or 
manager must accompany the employee to Employee Health Monday through Friday, 
7:00 AM-4:00 PM.  NOTE: In the event that an employee is injured with a needle after- 
hours or on weekends, the employee must be sent to the EMERGENCY ROOM for 
treatment.  The House Manager must be notified of the incident so that the needle and 
syringe may be properly disposed. 
 
D. The supervisor must inform their direct Nutritional Services Manager (or any other 
available manager) of the accident as soon as possible.  In turn, the manager must call 
the appropriate unit to inform the nurse manager/charge nurse of the incident.  The 
Nutritional Services Director must also be made aware of the incident in a timely 
manner. 
 
E. The employee must return information concerning the treatment received and 
precautions to be taken to their immediate supervisor or manager as soon as they are 
released from treatment.  The employee must also keep their immediate supervisor or  9 
 
 
 
manager abreast of all information concerning their condition as it becomes available. 
 
 