Policies and Procedures Manual                        Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   Chapter: Safety 
Subject:  Monitoring the Dishwashing and Pot washing Machine  Section:  
Date of Origination:  September 8, 2011   Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: September 8, 2011   Serial Code: NSSF05 
Date of last review: January 31, 2019 
 
Policy: 
To ensure clean and sanitized dishware and utensils, the dishwashing machine and pot washing machine will be 
monitored and maintained to ensure it is operating properly. If a machine is not operating properly, it will be 
removed from service and action taken to resolve the problem.  
 
Procedure: 
1. Verify the dish machine is supplied with the approved chemicals, working properly, and at the correct 
temperatures (i.e. per the machines temperature gauges) before running dishware and utensils. 
 
2. Record the pre-wash, wash, rinse and final rinse readings on the temperature log each meal period (i.e. 
Dishwashing/Ware washing Temperature Log).  
 
Acceptable minimum temperatures for the Hobart dish machine are as follows:               
a. Pre-wash:  120 degrees F 
b. Wash: 150 degrees F 
c. Rinse: 160 degrees F 
d. Final Rinse: 180 degrees F 
 
Acceptable minimum temperatures for the Alvi pot wash machine are as follows: 
a. Wash: 150 degrees F 
b. Rinse: 180 degrees F 
 
3. If minimum temperatures are not reached, the Production Manager and/or supervisor should be notified 
immediately.   
a. For the dishwashing machine, if the problem cannot be resolved immediately, a decision will be 
made to move to paper (disposable) ware instead of china for meal services until equipment is 
returned to proper working order. 
 
b. For the pot washing machine, if the problem cannot be resolved immediately, a decision will be 
made to move to manual dish washing procedure until equipment is returned to proper working 
order.  
 
c. Manual Dishwashing Procedure is as follows 
i. Prepare: Clean and sanitize all sinks and the drain board. Have trash can, brush, scrub pads 
and rubber gloves available. 
ii. Pre-Rinse, scrape and soak all items before washing. 
iii. Wash in detergent solution using scrub brush or nylon scrub pad to remove remaining soil. 
Replace detergent solution when it becomes dirty. 
iv. Rinse: Immerse or spray-rinse in rinse water to remove all traces of food and detergent. 
Change rinse water when it becomes cloudy or dirty. v. Sanitize in third sink (immerse for one minute in sanitizing solution or for 30 seconds when 
hot water sanitizing is used.) 
1. Prepare the Sanitizing Solution as follows. 
a. Cold Water Sanitizer:  
Mikroklene: 12.5 to 25 parts per million (ppm), Oasis 146: 150 to 400 ppm. 
b. Fill sinks to reserve line with cold water and add 1 quart of sanitizer solution. 
c. Test with test strips to verify correct concentration. Dip test strip in solution 
for 10 seconds, then compare to scale on dispenser.  
d. Do not fan strip to dry.  
 
d. Air-dry all items; do not use towels or aprons for drying. Stand cutting boards and sheet pan upright 
and apart for quick drying.  
 
4. The Supervisor or Manager of the Day will monitor equipment function daily to ensure ongoing 
compliance.  
 
5. A work order will be entered and a call to the service provider for equipment repair will be made. 
 