Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Nutritional Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Tau 
Subject:  Tau Services Section:  
Date of Origination: September 2000 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: September 2020 Serial Code: NSTU01 
Date of Last Review: September 2020 
 
Tau Program Meal Service 
 
The Tau Program located at 8080 Margaret Ann Drive; Baton Rouge shall be considered 
a department of OLOL and serviced by nutritional services.  The Tau Program consists 
of: 
• Tau program for chemical dependency 
• Tau program for adolescence, the St. Clare psychiatric unit 
• St. Anne intensive outpatient program 
• St. Anne eating disorder program. 
 
The nutritional service department will provide breakfast, lunch, and supper buffet 
service to this location that permits selection of nutritionally balanced, aesthetically 
pleasing meals by each patient. The menus will be developed by the Production Manager.     
 
The breakfast, lunch and supper service will include a choice of 1-2 entrée items, 
vegetables, and desserts so that patients may select their most preferred foods.  The 
nutritional service department will provide foods and beverages as scheduled on each 
day's menu.  The cycle will change weekly.  Quantity of food to be provided will be 
determined by the census count. 
 
The production manager will send a weekly menu to the Tau Center Team Leader by 
12pm on Friday for the next week beginning on Sunday.  The Tau Center dietary staff 
shall requisition their raw food items from the same food vendor as Our Lady of The 
Lake Regional Medical Center. Tau Center dietary staff shall prepare meals as necessary. 
The nursing units will fax floor stock orders through the Catertrax.  The Tau staff shall 
record food temperatures in accordance with all federal and local safety standards.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hours of Service 
 
The Tau adolescent programs will shall have cafeteria style meals in the dining room 
unless there is a unit restriction at which times the individual trays will be assembled at 
Tau Dietary and sent to the unit where Nursing Service shall distribute the meals. 
Meal times shall be the same as the Tau program. 
• The Tau program will have cafeteria style meals in the dining room.  
Meal times shall be: 
Breakfast  7:30-9:00 AM 
Lunch  11:00-1:00 PM 
Supper  4:30-6:00 PM 
 
 
 
The St. Clare unit shall have a portable buffet delivered to the nursing station. 
Meal times are: 
 Breakfast  7:30 AM 
 Lunch  12:00 PM 
 Supper  4:00 PM 
The St. Anne IOP shall eat lunch in the Dining room at 11:45 AM. 
 
 
Tau Program Nutrition Care 
 
Tau and St. Claire in-patients are screened by Nursing Services using the hospital wide 
nutrition screen. Patient’s that are 17 years or younger are seen by Our Lady of the Lake 
Children’s Dietitians. Patients 18 years and older will be seen by Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center Morrison Healthcare Inpatient Dietitians.  
 
 
 