OC-009 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Patient/Family/Significant Other 
Education 
Policy Reference #: OrgClin/009 
Supersedes #: AD/A/002 
Date of Origination: July 8, 1985 Last Review Date:  August 29, 2023 
Last Revision Date: June 22, 2022 
 
PURPOSE 
To identify clinical staff responsibilities in providing patient/family education and to provide guidelines 
for documenting in the Electronic Medical Record (EMR.)  
 
POLICY 
1. Patients, identified family members, legal guardian and/or significant others should be provided 
with appropriate education and training pertinent to the diagnosis, problems or needs identified 
during initial and ongoing assessment.   
2. Education provided should be respectful of the patient’s cultural and religious beliefs, emotional 
barriers, desire and motivation to learn, physical, visual, hearing, financial or cognitive 
limitations and barriers to communication.  The education should be in a manner tailored to the 
patient’s age, language and ability to understand. 
3. The patient and family should be provided specific knowledge and skills to cope with health care 
needs to promote positive patient outcomes and health behaviors.  These instructions may 
include, but are not limited to: 
a. Explanation of the plan for care, treatment, and services    
b. Expanding the patients’ knowledge and understanding of diagnoses, treatment needs, 
and financial implications of their care choices.   
c. Safe and effective use of equipment and supplies ordered for their use.    
d. Dietary requirements and potential interactions with medications.    
e. Medication use in a safe and effective manner.    
f. Accessing community resources as needed.   
g. Self-management tools and techniques.   
h. Providing information about rehabilitation potential and resources.  
i.  Providing information about effective pain management, pain assessment process and 
pain management resources.   
j.  Fall reduction strategies 
k. The appropriate use of antimicrobial medications, including antibiotics, information 
about resistance and optimal prescribing 
l.  Conditions under which time-outs are used 
m. Central line-associated bloodstream infection prevention  
n.  If undergoing a surgical procedure surgical site infection prevention and pre-
procedural education 
o.  Anticoagulation therapy – risks involved, precautions need to be taken and the need 
for regular International Normalized Ration (INR) monitoring, drug-food interactions, 
potential adverse drug reactions and interactions 
p.  Healthcare associated infection prevention strategies if infected or colonized with a 
multidrug-resistant organism 
 OC-009 
Page 2 of 2 
q. Catheter-associated Urinary Tract Infection (CAUTI) if patient has an indwelling 
catheter 
 
 
4. Patient Education should be documented in the patients’ medical record in the Education Section 
in the EMR. This documentation should include the learners, readiness, method, patient’s 
understanding and response to  the education provided. 
 
 
REFERENCE: 
The Joint Commission E-dition Hospital Accreditation Requirements dated January 9, 2017 - 
MM.09.01.01; NPSG.03.05.01; NPSG.03.06.01; NPSG.07.03.01; NPSG.07.04.01; NPSG.07.05.01; 
NPSG.07.06.01; NPSG.15.01.01; PC.01.03.03; PC.02.03.01; PC.03.01.03 
 
 
Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference 