OC-007 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Disclosure of Unanticipated Outcome, 
Medical Errors, and Sentinel Events 
Policy Reference #: OrgClin/007 
Supersedes #: AD/B/049 
Date of Origination: August, 2001 Last Review Date:  May 1, 2024 
Last Revision Date:  April 22, 2013 
 
PURPOSE 
Provides guidelines on the process for disclosing any unanticipated outcomes, medical errors, or sentinel 
events to patients and/or patient’s family.  
 
DEFINITIONS 
1. Clinically Significant: refers to an event which impacts the patient in such a way that the patient 
may require additional treatment or monitoring, prolonged hospitalization, or where the patient has 
experienced serious physical or emotional harm or death. 
 
POLICY 
A. The treating physician and Administration are responsible for informing the patient and/or family of 
a clinically significant medical error or unanticipated outcome, or of a sentinel event. 
B. The treating physician and a representative from Administration will provide ongoing 
communication with the patient and/or family regarding the investigation and actions taken to 
address the consequences of the event.  
C. If the treating physician chooses not to participate in the disclosure, the Chief Medical Officer or 
designee and a representative from Administration will disclose the known factual information of the 
medical error and provide ongoing communication with the patient and/or family regarding the 
process.  
D. When contract staff or allied health providers are involved in the event, Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center (OLOL) will make every reasonable effort to include them in the 
disclosure. 
E. If the contract staff or allied health provider chooses not to participate in the disclosure, the Chief 
Medical Officer  or designee and a representative from Administration will disclose and provide 
ongoing communication with the patient and/or family.  
 
PROCEDURES 
1. The person, who discovers a clinically significant medical error or unanticipated outcome, or a 
sentinel event, will immediately notify the Unit Manager or the House Manager. The Unit Manager 
or House Manager will immediately notify the Administrator on Call and the Risk Manager. 
2. The treating physician and the highest level clinical representative from Administration, or the 
Administrator on Call, or his/her designee will notify the patient and/or family of the event as soon 
as it is reasonably possible. When discussing the event, they will communicate the following: 
▪ OLOL regrets and apologizes that an event has occurred. OC-007 
Page 2 of 2 
▪ All factual information that describes the specific event affecting the patient. 
▪ A full investigation will be completed. 
▪ Measures will be taken in response to the event, and to prevent recurrence. 
3. If unknown to the patient/family, individual staff members involved in the event will not be 
identified by name or description when the patient and/or family are informed of the event.  
4. The treating physician and representative from Administration (as stated above in item 2) will 
document in the patient’s medical record that an event has been disclosed to the patient and/or 
family. Only factual information about the event and disclosure should be documented.  
5. In extremely rare situations, where it can be documented that disclosure of an event may not be in 
the best interest of the patient or may harm the patient, disclosure of the event may be delayed. The 
decision to delay disclosure will be made jointly by the treating physician, Chief Medical Officer  or 
designee and Administration.  
 
 
 