 
OC 012 Informed Consent 
1 
  
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: SUBJECT:  
Verification of Hospital/Informed Consent for Operations and 
Other Procedures 
PAGES: REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
October 1, 2019 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
February 29, 1985 
REVISION DATE: 
August 16, 2024 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OC 012 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt facility wide policies.  This policy shall not apply to consent for 
mental health treatment. 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for verifying that a patient, or someone authorized by Louisiana law to consent for such 
patient, has given Informed Consent for any invasive procedure, designated special procedure, surgical 
procedure, or medical treatment. 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
OC 012 Informed Consent 
2 
POLICY: 
A. There shall be a properly executed informed consent for each medical treatment, invasive procedure, designated 
special procedure, or surgical procedure. 
 
B. It is the duty of the physician/practitioner who is responsible for the medical treatment, invasive procedure, 
designated special procedure, or surgical procedure to obtain the Informed Consent of the patient or other person 
authorized to give consent.  
C. The physician/practitioner will speak with the patient, or person authorized to give consent on the patient’s behalf, 
and outline the planned procedure, explaining its risks, benefits and alternatives.   
D. A resident or fellow can obtain Informed Consent (see policy GME/RES08)  
E. All areas listed below must be addressed to have a complete Informed Consent  
1. Physician/practitioner signature 
2. Patient or designee signature 
3. Witness signatures 
4. Risks and Benefits 
5. date and time of each signature 
If any of the items listed above are incomplete the patient’s procedure should not begin. 
F. In the event the staff member has some concerns about Informed Consent they can contact the Department Manager 
or House Manager for clarification. 
G. Informed Consents for operative and other procedures are valid and continue to have force and effect for a 
reasonable period of time so long as (i) the patient’s condition has not materially changed such that either the scope 
of the procedure or risks have changed, (ii) the state of the art of the specific medical procedure has not changed, and 
(iii) it is reasonable to expect the patient to remember the details of the consent conversation.  Of course, the patient 
must also have not revoked the Informed Consent.  These consents are not transferrable from hospital visits.  
Hospital consents for blood transfusion are durable for the duration of the visit. 
 
  
OC 012 Informed Consent 
3 
DEFINITIONS: 
1) Informed Consent: The voluntary permission of a patient, through signature, marking, or affirmative action through 
electronic means pursuant to La. R.S. 40:1163.1, to any medical or surgical procedure or course of procedures 
which: (1) sets forth in general terms the nature and purpose of the procedure or procedures, together with known 
risks, if any, of death, brain damage, quadriplegia, paraplegia, the lose or loss of function of any organ or limb, of 
disfiguring scars associated with such procedure or procedures; (2) acknowledges that such disclosure of information 
has been made and that all questions asked about the procedure or procedures have been answered in a satisfactory 
manner; and (3) is evidenced by a signature, marking, or affirmative action through electronic means, by the patient 
for whom the procedure is to be performed, or if the patient for any reason lacks legal capacity to consent, by a 
person who has legal authority to consent on behalf of such patient in such circumstances.  Alternatively, the lists 
established by the Louisiana Medical Disclosure Panel in Louisiana Administrative Code Title 48, Part I, Chapter 23 
(https://www.doa.la.gov/media/15odwaqn/48v01.pdf) may be used to evidence Informed Consent. 
2) Invasive Procedure: A procedure involving puncture or incision of the skin, or insertion of an instrument or foreign 
material into the body, including, but not limited to, central line insertion, percutaneous aspirations, biopsies, cardiac 
and vascular catheterizations, endoscopies, angioplasties, and implantations, bone marrow aspirations, but excluding 
venipuncture, intramuscular, subcutaneous and intradermal injections, intravenous therapy or contrast, simple 
incision and drainage, and simple sutures .  
3) Designated Special Procedure: Non-invasive procedures requiring the administration of regional, moderate, deep, 
or general sedation/anesthesia; nonsurgical procedures performed in the Operating Room the Endoscopy Unit or 
Radiology Department;, or administration of any intravenous chemotherapy or investigational drugs. 
4) Transfusions:  Blood components are consented by patients on a separate blood transfusion form and this is 
witnessed by a member of the nursing staff. A transfusion consent is valid for each episode of care and is not 
required for each unit of blood component.  
5) Adult: A person eighteen (18) years or older. 
6) Spouse: an individual who is lawfully married to another individual including same-sex marriage  
7) Minor:  A person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
8) Emancipated Minors: A person under the age of 18 who is legally emancipated.  A minor can be emancipated by a 
written notarial act signed by his/her legal guardian. A minor who is 16 or 17 years of age is emancipated of right by 
marriage.  Once married, a minor is emancipated even if that marriage ended in divorce. A minor can also be 
judicially emancipated by order of court.  
9) Emergency: A situation wherein: (1) in the competent medical judgment, the proposed medical treatment, invasive 
procedure, designated special procedure, or surgical procedure is reasonably necessary; and (2) a person authorized 
to consent is not readily available, and (3) any delay in treatment could reasonably be expected to jeopardize the life 
or health of the person affected or could reasonably result in disfigurement or impaired faculties.  For the purposes 
of this policy, an emergency is also defined as a situation wherein: (1) a person transported to Entity from a licensed 
health care facility is not in a condition to give consent; (2) a person authorized to give consent is not readily 
available; and (3) any delay would be injurious to the health and wellbeing of such person.   Treatment should be 
limited to that required for the emergency only. 
10) Physician: For the purpose of this policy only, the term physician shall include all members of the medical staff, 
including medical doctors, osteopaths, oral surgeons and other dentists, podiatrists, psychologists and residents.  In 
addition, advanced practice professionals, such as Advance Practice Registered Nurses, Certified Registered Nurse 
Anesthetists, and Physician Assistants can obtain informed consent for those procedures they are privileged to 
perform. 
11) Licensed health care professional: a person who possesses a current license, certificate, registration, or other 
authority from a professional licensing board to provide health care services in this state 
12) Locos Parentis: A Latin term means “in place of a parent” or “instead of a parent”.  It refers to situations in which 
someone other than a biological parent takes on the role of parent to a minor child without formally adopting the 
child. 
13) Adult Friend:  an adult who has exhibited special care and concern for the patient, who is generally familiar with 
the patient’s health care views and desires, and who is willing and able to become involved in the patient’s health 
care decisions and to act in the patient’s best interest. 
 
  
OC 012 Informed Consent 
4 
14) Personal Healthcare Representative:  a person who has authority in accordance with Louisiana law to act on 
behalf of an individual who is an adult or an emancipated minor in making decisions related to health care because 
of incapacity. 
15) Learners:  any person enrolled in a medical, nursing, or allied health education program, a medical resident, intern, 
or student undergoing a course of instruction or participating in a clinical training or residency program 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Informed Consent Documentation 
1. The Informed Consent process may take place in the physician's office prior to the procedure.  The 
signed Informed Consent forms from the physician's office can be submitted by the patient at the time 
of procedure or the physician's office may send the signed forms to the procedure location prior to the 
procedure.  Otherwise, the physician/practitioner can use the hospital provided Informed Consent 
document. 
2. All consent forms must be properly witnessed, by a team member who can attest that the patient or a 
person authorized to give consent has been given the opportunity to read the form, does not have any 
questions, and has freely signed the Informed Consent document.  The Informed Consent must be in 
terms and language that a layman would be expected to understand. 
3.  Abbreviations are not acceptable.  
4. Should an amendment need to be made to the consent form after it has been signed the 
physician/practitioner making the amendment as well as the patient or patient representative must 
initial, date and time at the place of the amendment(s). 
5. If the patient is unable to read and/or write, the person responsible for obtaining the consent should 
read the consent form to the patient and the patient should verbalize back that he/she understands what 
is read.  The patient is to place an “X” on the line for patient signature on the consent form.  There 
should be two witnesses to the “X” made by the patient. 
B. Who Can Give Consent – Adults and Emancipated Minors 
1. The consent form should be signed by the patient if the patient is an adult or an emancipated minor and 
if the patient is capable of understanding and giving consent.  
2. If the patient, adult or emancipated minor lacks capacity to give consent then the following procedure 
becomes effective. Any one of the persons listed below in the following order of priority, if there is no 
person in a prior class who is reasonably available, willing and competent to act, is authorized and 
empowered to sign the consent form for any medical treatment, invasive procedure, designated special 
procedure, or surgical procedure or autopsy which has been suggested, recommended, prescribed or 
directed by a duly licensed physician/practitioner:  
a. The judicially appointed tutor or curator of the patient if one has been appointed; 
b. An agent acting pursuant to a valid written power of attorney specifically authorizing the agent 
to make healthcare decisions; 
c. The patient’s spouse not judicially separated; 
d. Adult child(ren) of the patient; 
e. Any parent, whether adult or minor, for his/her child, unless there is a custody order giving a 
specific parent the sole right to make medical decisions; 
f. The patient’s adult sibling(s);  
g. The patient’s other adult ascendants or descendants;  
h. Upon the inability of any adult to give their own consent and in the absence of any person listed 
in Section 2(a) through (g) above, an Adult Friend of a patient, provided such Adult Friend  
OC 012 Informed Consent 
5 
signs and dates an acknowledgment form to place in the patient’s medical record certifying that 
such Adult Friend meets the definition of Adult Friend set forth above.   
i. Any person temporarily standing in loco parentis, whether formally serving or not, for the 
minor under his/her care and any guardian for his/her ward. 
j. A person chosen by the interdisciplinary team (as defined in La. R.S. 28:451.2) to make 
recommendations on behalf of an individual with a developmental disability. The 
interdisciplinary team shall exercise discretion in choosing, by majority vote, the family 
member, friend, or other person most familiar with the individual or most capable of making 
the decision. 
 
3. A person chosen by an ad hoc team assembled by any interested person for the purpose of addressing 
the medical decision at issue for an individual with a developmental disability, in accordance with the 
requirements of La. R.S. 40:1159.4(A)(12). d-h then the consent for medical treatment, invasive 
procedure, designated special procedure, or surgical procedure should be signed by the majority of 
those members of the class available for consultation. 
4. If none of the persons listed in classes a-i above are reasonably available, then the patient’s attending 
physician shall have the discretion to provide or perform any surgical or medical treatment or 
procedures, including but not limited to an autopsy, and may also make decisions regarding continued 
services needed by a patient, including but not limited to approving the placement or transfer of the 
patient, without the consent of the patient or person authorized to consent for the patient, provided that 
prior to taking action: 
a. the attending physician documents in the patient’s chart the facts establishing what medical 
decisions need to be made and why those decisions are needed without undue delay; 
b. the attending physician documents the steps taken to try to get Informed Consent from the 
patient or other person authorized to given consent; and  
c. Obtains confirmation from another physician, preferably the patient’s primary care physician if 
not the attending physician, of the patient’s condition and the medical necessity for action.  The 
confirming physician shall personally examine the patient and document the assessment, 
findings, and recommendations in the patient’s chart prior to the performance of the medical 
treatment or surgical procedure. 
5. If none of the persons listed above are reasonably available to make decisions for non-Emergency 
surgical or medical treatment or procedures, including but not limited to an autopsy, as well as for 
continued services needed by the patient including but not limited to placement or transfer of the 
patient to another facility, contact Risk Management for guidance on the provisions of state law R. S. 
40:1159.4. 
6. If the patient has a developmental disability and is a resident of a state-operated nursing home, then the 
following procedure becomes effective.   
a. Upon written recommendation of the treating physician, the following persons may consent to any 
surgical or medical treatment on behalf of any person with a developmental disability, who is a 
recipient of service from a state-operated supported living program or home-and community-based 
service provider, or who is a resident of a state-operated residential facility, community or group 
home for persons with a developmental disability or who is a resident of a state-operated nursing 
home: 
1. For a resident of a state-operated residential facility, community, or group home for persons 
with developmental disabilities, the administrator of the residential facility, community or 
group home.  
OC 012 Informed Consent 
6 
2. For a resident of a state supervised extended family living program, or a recipient of service 
from a state-operated supported living program or home-and community-based service 
provider, the office for citizens with developmental disabilities administrator or manager with 
administrative authority over the extended family living program, supported living program, 
or home- and community-based service provider for the region where the home is located or 
the service is being provided. 
3. For a resident of a non-state operated residential facility, community, or group home for 
persons with developmental disabilities, the chief executive officer of the provider 
organization which administers or operates the facility or home. 
4. For a resident of a state-operated nursing home, the administrator of the home or facility. 
b. Consent for any surgical or medical treatment on behalf of a person with a developmental disability 
or a resident of a facility, home, or program as described above is authorized under the following 
circumstances: 
1. When all reasonable efforts to contact the parent, family, or guardian of the patient have 
failed; or 
2. When the patient’s record does not contain the name of the parent, family member, or 
guardian. 
c. Consent shall be given in writing and shall comply with the provisions of this policy.  A copy of the 
signed written consent form and of the physician’s written recommendation shall be placed in the 
patient’s permanent record.   
d. Nothing in this policy shall be construed to authorize consent to surgical or medical treatment for a 
resident if the parent, family member, or guardian of the patient has been contacted and has refused 
to consent to medical treatment for the patient. 
e. Consent to surgical or medical treatment for residents will be implied where an emergency exists. 
 
C. Who Can Give Consent – Minors 
 
1. Emancipated Minors may consent to all medical treatment or surgical procedures without parental 
consent. 
 
2. Consent for Minors is implied during an Emergency, as defined above. 
 
3. A Minor who is or believes they are afflicted with an illness or disease can consent to the provision of 
medical or surgical care or services, which includes but is not limited to: 
a. Medical care or administration of medication to alleviate or reduce pain, discomfort, or distress 
of and during labor and childbirth; 
b. Treatment for drug abuse if the Minor believes they are addicted to a narcotic or other drug; 
c. If 16 years old, donation of blood with written consent of parent, legal guardian, or other person 
authorized; 
d. If 17 years old, donation of blood without parental, legal guardian, or other authorized person’s 
consent; 
e. Treatment for a venereal disease; and 
f. For preventative alcoholism and addiction counseling/treatment if the Minor requests is, 
withholds permission to contact parents to seek consent, a qualified professional determines 
that seeking parental consent would not be helpful and would be harmful to the Minor, and the 
Minor provides a statement of the reason for seeking such counseling with written consent. 
  
OC 012 Informed Consent 
7 
4. Minors cannot refuse treatment over parent or guardian consent. 
 
5. Minors cannot consent to any procedures or services that attempt to alter a Minor’s appearance in an 
attempt to validate a Minor’s sex if the Minor’s perception is inconsistent with the Minor’s sex, except 
where the Minor has already started the process as of January 1, 2024 and a healthcare professional 
determines and documents in the medical record that immediately terminating use of a drug or 
hormone would cause harm to the Minor. 
 
 
D. Emergency Situations 
1. In cases of an Emergency, consent is not necessary.  (See definition of Emergency above.)  The 
physician/provider performing the medical treatment, invasive procedure, designated special 
procedure, or surgical procedure performing a medical treatment or surgical procedure on an 
Emergency basis should document in the medical record the facts which render the situation an 
Emergency. 
E. Exception to obtaining Informed Consent (human immunodeficiency virus (“HIV”) or other infectious 
agents) 
 
1. Whenever an agent or employee of Entity, or a physician having privileges at Entity, has been exposed 
to the blood or bodily fluids of a patient to create any risk of infection with HIV or other infectious 
agent (in accordance with the infectious disease exposure guidelines of the CDC or the exposure 
standards of Entity), Entity shall conduct tests on blood previously drawn or bodily fluids previously 
collected, without the patient’s consent, to determine if the patient is infected with the virus or agent.  
If no previously drawn blood or collected bodily fluids are available or suitable, Entity is required by 
law to order the draw or collection to conduct the necessary tests. 
2. The results of the test shall not become part of the patient’s medical record and shall be confidential, 
except that Entity shall inform the exposed employee, agent, or physician, of the results of the test 
within one (1) hour of receipt of the results. 
3. The patient shall not be charged for tests performed under this Section (D).  
 
F. Consent to Medical Examinations (Anesthetized or Unconscious Patients) 
 
1. A pelvic or rectal examination shall not be performed on an anesthetized or unconscious patient unless 
at least one of the following conditions is met: 
i. The patient or the patient’s Personal Healthcare Representative provides written consent to 
the examination and the examination is necessary for instructional, preventive, diagnostic, 
or treatment purposes;  
ii. The patient or the Personal Healthcare Representative has provided informed consent to a 
surgical procedure or examination to be performed on the patient, and the performance of 
an examination is within the scope of care ordered for the surgical procedure or 
examination; or 
iii. The patient is unconscious and incapable of providing consent, the examination is medically 
necessary, and the healthcare provider who performs an examination informs the patient 
that an additional examination was performed and the nature of the examination before the 
patient is discharged. 
  
OC 012 Informed Consent 
8 
2. Learners in a clinical setting, including but not limited to an operating room, when the patient is under 
general anesthesia, shall perform an examination for teaching purposes only when all of the following 
conditions are met: 
 
i. The examination is explicitly consented to by the patient. 
ii. The examination is medically related to the planned or performed procedure. 
iii. The examination is performed by a Learner who has been recognized by the patient as a part 
of his care team. 
iv. The examination is conducted under direct supervision by the educator. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and OLOL reserves the right to deviate from, 
revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Louisiana Revised Statutes 40:1157.1 – 1160.4., 40:1098.4 and 40:1079.1. et. seq. 
• Louisiana Administrative Code Title 48, Part I, Chapter 23 
• Louisiana Civil Code Article 366 and 367 
• Patient Rights Condition of Participation for Informed Consent 42 CFR 482.13 (b)(2) 
• The Joint Commission Rights and Responsibilities of the Individual Standard RI.01.03.01 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
• N/A 
 
 