OC-014 
Page 1 of 7 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Care and Management of Justice 
Involved Individuals (Prisoners) 
Policy Reference #: OrgClin/014 
Supersedes #: AD/B/033 
Date of Origination: April 22, 1997  Last Review Date:  December 11, 2023 
Last Revision Date: June 9, 2023 
  
POLICY  
All team members shall treat justice involved (prisoner) patients with respect and dignity afforded all patients 
receiving treatment and services at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC)_. Justice 
involved (prisoner) patients shall be guarded at all times by an on-duty law enforcement or corrections officer and 
in appropriate restraints as applied by external Law Enforcement or Corrections officials. OLOLRMC Security is 
responsible for coordinating non-clinical management of the patient’s visit. Visitors to justice involved (prisoner) 
patients will be allowed at the discretion of clinical team in accordance to RS 15:833. Staff who have concerns 
about the behavior of correction officers shall notify the Charge Nurse or House Manager as soon as possible. 
 
PURPOSE 
To maintain the safety of staff, patients and visitors while providing essential care for justice involved (prisoner) 
patients.  
 
PROCEDURE 
I. Receiving a Justice involved (prisoner) at OLORMC: 
A. Hospital Security and the House Manager will be notified of every admission of a justice 
involved individual (prisoner), in addition to justice involved individuals (prisoners) receiving 
treatment in the Emergency Care Unit (ECU).  
 
B. For emergency visits, the hospital will be notified prior to arrival of any justice involved 
(prisoner) patient.  
1. The ECU Communications Tech (765-8061) will be contacted by the corrections facility 
and/or ambulance.  
2. The ECU Communications Tech will notify the House Manager and Security Dispatch.  
3. Security will meet the ambulance and escort the patient to the Emergency Department. 
4. Security will orient the law enforcement or corrections officer to OLOLRMC Policy and 
Procedures as soon as possible following arrival.  
 
 
II. Management of a Justice Involved Individual (Prisoner) while at OLOLRMC: 
A. The Law Enforcement or Corrections Officer is responsible for maintaining control of his/her 
justice involved (prisoner) patient at all times.  At nursing staff discretion, a Code White will be 
called for escalating behavior. 
 
B. Law Enforcement or Corrections Officers are to remain within the patient’s room on the inpatient 
units. Isolation/In Intensive Care Units the officer must maintain visual contact with the patient at 
all times. In Mental and Behavioral Health units, the officer may sit in a waiting area immediately 
outside of the unit. Officers are not to leave a justice involved (prisoners) patient’s room unless 
relieved by Correction staff or on request of the physician or other appropriate health care OC-014 
Page 2 of 7 
provider. 
1. If the officer on duty is requested to leave the room of the justice involved (prisoner) 
patient, the officer will assume a position to maintain visual contact with the justice 
involved (prisoner) patient, but of sufficient distance to protect the justice involved 
(prisoner) patient’s right to confidentiality. 
2. If cubicle curtains must be drawn or the door closed, the officer will assume a position 
that will prevent the justice involved (prisoner) patient’s escape. 
3. The officer will reenter the room of the justice involved (prisoner) patient as requested by 
the physician or other health care provider or on departure of the physician or health care 
provider. 
4. If the justice involved (prisoner) patient is scheduled for surgery, the officer shall remain 
with the patient until the patient is taken to the operating room (OR). Then the officer 
will leave and wait outside the OR. 
5. Exceptions to the provisions requiring the officer to be present in the justice involved 
(prisoner) patient’s room can be made due to the physical conditions in the room or in 
infection control considerations.  
a. Exceptions will be approved by administration in conjunction with the attending 
physician. The reason for the exception will be shared with the officer and the 
duration for such exception shall be noted. The decision shall be reevaluated on a 
daily basis.  
b. The Officer shall remain on duty outside the justice involved (prisoner) patient’s 
room.  
 
C. Patients received from East Louisiana State Hospital: 
1. If the justice involved (prisoner) patient is received from East Louisiana State Hospital 
Forensics Facility, State Facility personnel will remain with the patient at all times. 
2. If the justice involved (prisoner) patient is from East Louisiana State Hospital 
Intermediate Care or Acute Care Units, See NNA088 PEC/CEC. 
 
D. The hospital security department will assist officers when appropriate as directed by OLOLRMC 
policy. The hospital security department does not assume responsibility for the custody of the 
justice involved individual (prisoner).  
1. In the event of an extreme emergency that incapacitates the assigned external officer, the 
House Manager will arrange for external law enforcement agency replacement of staff 
and notify the Administrator on Call of the event. 
2. The custodial agency is responsible for providing staff throughout the patient’s 
admission. Hospital security will not provide relief coverage for external officers for 
purposes such as meals or personal breaks.  
3. In the event that a justice involved individual (prisoner) patient expires while at the 
hospital, the nursing unit will notify the law enforcement/corrections facility.  
 
E. To provide protection for physicians, nurses, other hospital personnel, visitors, and patients and to 
prevent the escape of the justice involved individual (prisoner), the external officer will use 
external restraints (which may include handcuffs, flex cuffs or leg irons) unless they directly 
interfere with required medical care.  
1. For safety in the event of defibrillation, flex cuffs will be used to secure the justice 
involved individual (prisoner) to the bed frame.  
2. The use of handcuffs, manacles, shackles, other chain-type restraint devices, or other 
restrictive devices applied by non-hospital employed or contracted law enforcement 
officials for custody, detention, and public safety reasons are not governed by the CMS 
Restraint Condition of Participation. The law enforcement officers who maintain custody OC-014 
Page 3 of 7 
and direct supervision of the justice involved individual (prisoner) are responsible for the 
use, application, and monitoring of these restrictive devices in accordance with Federal 
and State law.  
3.  Correction/ Contract Security Guards are responsible for managing all restrictive 
devices, however emergency cuff keys are secured in Security Dispatch as a backup for 
any medical emergency event requiring prisoner patient release.  
4. The hospital will provide safe, appropriate care to the justice involved individual 
(prisoner) patient based on an appropriate patient assessment.  
5. The routine Review of Systems and any additional PRN assessment performed by the 
Registered Nurse of justice involved individuals who are in law enforcement restraints 
should be focused on restraints that would adversely affect the health or safety of the 
justice involved individual. 
6. If the Registered Nurse or other clinical employee has unaddressed concerns with the use 
of law enforcement restraints these should be brought to the attention of the charge nurse, 
supervisor, manager, or House manager.  
 
F. Justice involved individuals (prisoners) who must leave their bed and room for any purpose, such 
as visits to ancillary treatment areas, must be accompanied by the assigned external officer. 
• Physical Medicine will work with the assigned Law Enforcement or Corrections 
officer to identify an appropriate location for ambulation/therapy. 
Correction/ Contract Security Guards are responsible for managing all restrictive 
devices, however emergency cuff keys well be security in Security Dispatch as a 
backup for any medical emergency event. 
 
G. Law enforcement and corrections officials will not interrogate or conduct official proceedings 
involving a justice involved individual (prisoner) unless the attending physician is informed and 
grants consent. This provision is to ensure that the justice involved individual (prisoner) is 
medically able to participate in such activity.   
 
H. No visitors or telephone calls shall be allowed, except 
➢ Immediate Family authorized by the custodial agency, who is responsible for screening all 
visitors and calls. 
➢ Visitation is permittable, when the inmate has sustained serious bodily injury requiring 
admittance to Intensive Care Unit or Trauma Unit. In accordance to Louisiana State Statute 
RS 15:833, or if the patient is at end of life.  
➢  These visits must occur during the hours of 10 a.m. and 2 p.m or the designated visiting 
guidelines authorized by Nursing Administration.  
o One visitor will be allowed during the visitation hours (10am to 2pm). There will not 
be the opportunity to exchange visitors with the exception if the patient is at end of 
life.  
o Visitors shall not enter the patient’s room with any personal items. Items must be left 
in the visitors personal vehicle, we will not store personal items on the nursing units.  
o Visitors may be subject to metal detector search upon arrival or while visiting the 
patient. 
o Law Enforcement or corrections officials shall remain present during all visitation. 
➢ Persons not identified by the custodial agency will not be allowed to visit.  
 
Security will conduct patrols/escorts to ensure visitation is managed according to policy.  
Admission of any representative from the press or media requires explicit concurrence from 
hospital administration. 
 OC-014 
Page 4 of 7 
I. If a physician gives an order that contradicts policy then the nurse will call and inform the 
physician of the contradiction. Unresolved conflicts with policy are addressed promptly with the 
appropriate nurse leader.  
J. Staff shall not engage in conversations with justice involved (prisoner) patient’s that do not 
directly relate to their medical condition. (See Appendix A: Employee Conduct Guidelines.)  
  
K. In cases where a patient is not a prisoner, but the hospital is notified he/she will be arrested upon 
discharge, the law enforcement agency may not provide security. Security and the House 
Manager will assess each situation to determine if risks to staff or other patients warrant 
additional action.  
 
Examples of risk are: 
• Threats to the patient; 
• Threats to staff by patient or outside individual(s) regarding the patient; and/or  
• Suspicious activity regarding the patient 
 
1. If the determination is made of associated risk, the Security Director and/or 
Administrator on Call should contact the corresponding law enforcement agency and 
request a law enforcement officer remains with the patient. 
2. In the absence of a law enforcement officer, an unarmed Security Officer may be 
provided at the request of the Administrator on Call. 
3. When the determination of risk is minimal, Security will increase patrols of the unit as a 
precautionary measure. 
4. When appropriate, the patient may be admitted as a privacy patient to protect his/her 
identity. 
 
 
III. Security of Justice Involved Individual in Operative or Invasive Procedure Areas 
Patients who are justice involved individuals (prisoners) shall remain in restraints at all times in the Operative 
or Invasive Procedure area except when under General Anesthesia. 
PROCEDURES: 
A. Application and maintenance of restraints: 
1. While justice involved (prisoner) patients are in the Preoperative Area, (SMAU/T or HVAU) 
the Preoperative Nurse will ensure they are shackled to the bed/stretcher with plastic or 
flexible binders with no metal components in a manner that sufficiently restricts movement 
but allows for nursing care to be administered.  The prisoner guard will apply these restraints. 
2. The Preoperative Nurse should acquire 4 restraints, (2 sets of 2), one for the justice involved 
(prisoner) patient’s guard to apply and one set for the Procedural Nurse to take to the 
operative area.  The Preoperative Nurse should also give the justice involved (prisoner) 
patient’s guard a yellow cover gown for use in the operative/invasive area as needed. 
3. Plastic restraints are to be stocked in the Preoperative Areas and in the OR cores.  The 
procedural area nurse should take at least one set, (two extra restraints) with them for 
removal/reapplication purposes during the procedure. 
4. Plastic restraints shall remain in place for the justice involved (prisoner) patients who are 
receiving General Anesthesia.  These restraints are removed (cut) by the procedural nurse OC-014 
Page 5 of 7 
only after the patient is deemed unconscious by the anesthesia provider.  Only then should the 
patient be moved to the operative/procedural bed. 
5. An adequate level of General Anesthesia should be maintained until the justice involved 
(prisoner) patient is moved to the postoperative bed/stretcher. 
6. The prisoner guard shall be summoned to the OR immediately prior to moving the patient 
from the procedure bed to the postop bed/stretcher to re-shackle the patient with plastic 
restraints in the OR room prior to transport to the PACU. 
B. Prisoner Guards 
1. Prisoner guards will be in visual contact of the procedure/OR room at all times, except during 
periods when General Anesthesia is achieved. 
2. If the prisoner guard’s “standard operating procedure” is to remain in direct visual contact 
with the justice involved (prisoner) patient until anesthesia is achieved, they shall be allowed 
to accompany the patient into the OR. 
3. Prisoner guards will be instructed by OR staff to don surgical attire (i.e., cover gown) over 
their uniform prior to entering the restricted OR procedure room. 
4. The guard should be present in a designated location adjacent to the operating room suite. 
5. Changing of guards during surgery is permitted only after handoff is communicated to the 
OR front desk.  The OR front desk personnel will communicate the change to the OR 
procedure nurse. 
IV. Discharge/Departing a Justice Involved (Prisoner) Patient from OLOLRMC 
A. The law enforcement or corrections officer is responsible for notifying the House Manager and 
Security if/when a justice involved (prisoner) patient is released from custody while a patient at 
OLOLRMC. 
 
B. Inpatient Discharges: Security will coordinate transport of the justice involved (prisoner) patient 
to the designated location.  
1. Prior to discharge, Security will communicate the designated departure location to the 
Law Enforcement/Corrections Agency. 
2. A Security Officer will meet the patient and law enforcement or corrections officer with a 
wheelchair and blanket. 
3. The blanket will be placed to cover handcuffs and shackles when present. 
4. Security will escort the patient and law enforcement or corrections officer to the 
departure location. 
 
C. Compassionate Release-an inmate may be authorized by the Department of Corrections to be 
compassionately released if: 
1.   Terminally ill- death is expected in the next 60 days and because of the condition 
present minimal danger to self or society. 
2.   Permanently disabled- meaning the prisoner is, because of an existing medical or 
physical condition, if permanent and irreversibly physically incapacitated and present 
minimal danger to self of society.  
3.  The compassionate release is contingent on the stipulations i.e. discharge to a nursing 
home, set forth in the Compassionate release and is subject to revocation. OC-014 
Page 6 of 7 
4.   The Correction facility should assist/locate an accepting facility prior to the 
compassionate release being issued. 
5.  The Department of Corrections or designee will notify the Social Worker/Case Manager 
of their intent to conduct a video compassionate release in writing with the date and time 
the video will be conducted by the Department of Corrections staff.  
6. The Social Worker/Case Manager will receive written notification of the request to 
conduct a video for compassionate release. 
a. The Social Worker/Case Manager or designee will notify the house manager, 
communications and security of the date and time for the compassionate release. 
b. The prison will notify the family of the compassionate release and any 
stipulations for the release. 
 
SUPPORT MATERIAL: 
 
 
Appendix A. Employee Conduct Guidelines 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
Patient Care Services Policy PEC/CEC NNA088 
 
Surgical Services Policy “Security of Prisoners in the Operative or Invasive Procedure 
Environment” SOP053. 
 
Security Department: Orientation Forensics Guide and Checklist  
 
Louisiana State Statute RS 15:833  
 
 OC-014 
Page 7 of 7 
Appendix A. Employee Conduct Guidelines 
1. Employees shall not engage in conversation with justice involved individual (prisoner) other than simple 
courtesies (i.e., Good morning) and shall refer all work related questions or instructions to the law 
enforcement or corrections officer. 
2. Employees shall not correspond with a justice involved individual (prisoner) by phone, email, note, or 
any other method. 
3. Employees shall not be affectionate with a justice involved individual (prisoner), including casual 
touching.  
4. There shall be no relationships with justice involved individual (prisoner) or his/her family/friends. 
5. Employees shall not call or accept calls from a justice involved individual (prisoner) or his/her family. If 
you should receive a call, reject it and immediately report it to hospital security. 
6. Employees shall not allow a justice involved individual (prisoner) to use a telephone. 
7. Do not leave valuables or contraband where it could be accessible to a justice involved individual 
(prisoner).  
8. Surgical or other medical equipment can be used as weapons by justice involved individual (prisoner). 
Use appropriate precautions to not allow these items to be accessible to the justice involved individual 
(prisoner). 
9. Plastic ware shall be provided for eating and accounted for when tray is removed.  
10. No personal or patient information shall be discarded in the trashcan or left in the room of a justice 
involved individual (prisoner). 
11. Computers shall be secured when not in use and not visible for reading when charting in a justice 
involved individuals (prisoners) room. 
12. Remove computer keyboard from justice involved individual (prisoner) access and allow access as 
directed/supervised by correction officer. 
13. Conduct hourly rounding as is needed for any other patient. 
14. Justice involved individual (prisoner) may walk in hall with correction officer supervision. 
 
 