OC-018 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Patient Identification/Alert Bands Policy Reference #: OrgClin/018 
Supersedes #: AD/B/009 
Date of Origination: October 1, 1982 Last Review Date:  January 31, 2024  
Last Revision Date:   November 7, 2024 
 
 
PURPOSE 
To define Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center's (OLOLRMC) patient identification process 
before any care, treatment, or service. This process starts at the time of registration and continues 
throughout the patient’s stay. 
 
 
POLICY 
1. All patients shall be registered with at least two identifiers Contact Serial Number (CSN), date of 
admission, age & Date of Birth (DOB), patient’s full name (first and last name): 
a. Inpatients (in areas with armbands):  Name and DOB  
b. Outpatients (in areas without armbands) :  Name and DOB  
c. Children:  Name and DOB.  Upon registration, a bracelet will be placed on the parent to 
be used as the third identifier. 
d. Neonate: Name and DOB for those infants whose birth certificate has been completed.  In 
instances in which the birth certificate has not been completed, DOB and the mother’s 
last name, baby, neonates gender and mother’s first name  (i.e. Johnson, Baby Girl 
Mary).  For those neonates with ambiguous genitalia,  DOB and the mother’s last name, 
mother’s first name and “baby” (i.e. Johnson, Mary Baby).  For multiple births, DOB and 
the mother’s last name, neonates gender and mother’s first name and birth order (i.e. 
Johnson, Baby Girl A Mary) (as stated in Patient Registration FIN.0425).  Upon 
registration, a bracelet will be placed on the parent to be used as the third identifier.   
i. For those neonates whose birth certificate has not been completed and are being   
transferred within the Franciscan system, the naming convention previously 
assigned will be retained to allow for continuity of the medical record.   
2. Two identifiers must be utilized for any care activity in which patient identification is to occur. In 
some areas a third identification process occurs through our barcode scanning process (i.e. Lab, 
blood product administration). 
3. This information is matched to the same identifiers in the medical record or physician order.  
4. After the patient has been registered, all patients with armbands are identified by verification of 
name and DOB 
5. Approved colored armbands are utilized to identify patients for distinct patient needs or conditions. 
a. Yellow – Falls Risk 
b. Pink – Limb Alert or Restricted Extremity 
c. Red – Blood Bank 
d. Blue – Difficult Airway 
e. Green – Patient with a Physicians Emergency Certificate (PEC) or Coroners Emergency 
Certificiate (CEC) 
6. Outpatients in areas without armbands are identified by verification of name and birth date.    
 OC-018 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
 
PROCEDURE 
1. All patients arriving for treatment or service are properly registered by Access Services (Refer to 
Policy FIN.04.022). Upon completion of registration an armband is placed on the patient with 
identification information. The patient/family/significant other verifies that the information on the 
armband is correct.   
2. Some outpatient services do not use patient armbands, such as the outpatient laboratory and off-site 
outpatient clinics, so the patient will be asked to state their name and date of birth.  This information 
is matched to the printed request form or medical record for identification. 
3. If the patient is unable to speak for themselves a family member or significant other will verify the 
information.  If no family available to verify patient’s identity then Patient Access will create an 
Anonymous Patient Record until the patient’s identity can be verified. 
4. The following information is printed on the patient armband if applicable: 
 Hospital Account (HAR)    Date of Admission 
 Contact Serial Number (CSN)   Age & Date of Birth 
 Medical Record Number (MRN)   Patient’s Full Name   
5. A barcode is also printed on the armband. The barcode is the patient’s CSN (Fourteen digit financial 
number). 
6. Prior to care, treatment, or service, employees check the patient’s armband for the correct name and 
DOB to identify the patient and match these identifiers with the patient’s name and DOB on the 
ordered treatment or service in the medical record. An additional step of patient identification is 
carried out in some areas through barcode scanning when required.   
7. When a Nursing home patient or a patient from another facility is admitted to OLOLRMC, an 
OLOLRMC armband is placed on the patient.  The previous facility’s armband is then removed and 
discarded.   
8. When an OLOLRMC armband is removed for any reason, the armband will be placed on an 
alternate limb. The individual who removes the armband is responsible for assuring that the patient 
has an armband located somewhere on the patient’s body. 
a. Reprint armband. 
b. Reapply new armband on patient’s limb (arm or leg) whenever possible.   
c. If this is not possible due to wounds, injury, amputation, very fragile skin, multiple IV lines, 
etc., the armband will be placed at an alternate site of the patient’s body, and the location will 
be identified on the front of the patient’s chart.    
d. Put two armbands together to enlarge an armband to use over fragile skin, a swollen limb, or 
a cast. 
e. Armbands should never be placed on the patient’s bed or any other piece of equipment with 
the exception of the critically ill neonate. 
f. Consult with your Manager, Supervisor, or the House Manger if unable to resolve. 
9. Inpatients’ armbands will be checked by transporters prior to transporting a patient to another 
department or the patient should not be moved except in life-threatening emergencies. 
10. If no armband is present, the patient’s nurse should be contacted immediately to identify the patient OC-018 
Page 3 of 4 
and place an armband on the patient. 
a. In a life-threatening emergency, the patient’s nurse, who can positively re-identify patient, 
will accompany the patient during transport, re-identify the patient at the department by 
verifying the patient’s name and DOB with the medical record in the department transported 
to and place an armband on patient. 
b. If a patient is transported to another department without an armband, the patient’s nurse, who 
can positively identify the patient, should be contacted immediately and report to that 
department with a correct armband, re-identify the patient by verifying the patient’s name 
and DOB  with the physician orders, and place an armband on the patient. 
11. Do not proceed with care, treatment or services (except for emergencies) if a patient does not have 
an armband (except in outpatient areas that do not use armbands). Verify the patient’s name and 
DOB with the patient’s medical record prior to placing a new armband on the patient. 
12. All neonates and pediatric patients (defined as any patient prior to the 15th birthday) are identified by 
verification of name and DOB and this information is matched to the same identifiers in the medical 
record or physician order.   
13. During the hospitalization of a pediatric patient, a parent/guardian or a designated responsible 
individual is requested to stay with him/her at all times.  
a. The parent/guardian or designated adult of the pediatric patient will wear a matched 
armband, which corresponds with the patient identification number on the child’s bracelet.  
b. The neonate in NICU will wear two identification armbands on two separate extremities. 
c. The armband should be worn until the patient is discharged from the facility. For the neonate 
in NICU who is criticall ill one of the identification bands maybe secured to the open-bed 
warmer or isolette.  As soon as the neonates condition stabilizes, the second identification 
band should be placed on extremity.      
d. If the neonate/pediatric patient is separated from the parents/guardian for a procedure, the 
health care worker will return the child only to the individual wearing the corresponding 
armband. 
e. In the event no parent/guardian is available and the patient requires a procedure, the staff will 
follow the Verification of Hospital / Informed Consent for Operations and Other Procedures 
policy. (Policy reference #Orgclin/012) 
14. Scanning the patient’s armband barcode contains only one identifier, the patient’s CSN (14-digit 
financial number). For the second identifier, employees must visually confirm that the patient name 
printed on the armband and DOB is matched to the patient name and DOB in the medical record.  
15. The two identifiers stated above are used to label laboratory samples at time of collection in the 
presence of the patient.  
16. The patient identification process is required every time the responsibility for care of the patient is 
transferred to another caregiver. If there is any question about the patient’s identity do not proceed 
with care, treatment or service, immediately report to supervisor.  
17. When patients are discharged and re-admitted due to regulatory requirements, (Psych, Rehab, or 
Rehab transfers), the Access Representative will take the new paperwork and armband to the unit. 
• Before placing the new armband on the patient it is compared to the previous band.  
18. Patients presenting for outpatient services in the Medical Center Laboratory will be identified at the 
time of registration by comparing the patient’s name, social security number, and birth date on their 
driver’s licenses or other picture identification cards, as available. This identification is matched to OC-018 
Page 4 of 4 
the information that is contained in their medical records.  
19. Patients will complete and/or update demographic and insurance information when they check in.  If 
it is determined that the patient has previously visited the facility, the record will be retrieved and 
updated as needed 
20. During hospitalization a patient will be identified with an additional colored armband for the 
identification and safety of the patient. 
a. A red blood bank identification band with an additional “Blood Bank Number” is placed on 
the patient at the time of collection for any blood bank testing (Policy reference NBL-002) 
b. For patients at risk for falls, a yellow identification band is utilized. (Policy reference NPC-
067). 
c. In order to identify a limb alert, a pink ID band will be added to the arm not to be used for 
procedures such as, but not limited to, IV insertions and blood pressure monitoring. 
d.  In order to identify patients that have a Physicians Emergency Certificate or Cororners 
Emergency Certificate, a green ID band will be added to the arm in order to assist with 
identication of patietns with this legal status.  
 
Cross Reference Policy: 
Fin.04.25 Patient Registration 