 
OC 010 Foreign Language Interpreters 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational/ Patient Care Services  
SUBJECT:  
Foreign Language Interpreters 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
October 30, 2019 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
11/7/2019   
REVISION DATE: 
April 12, 2024 
REVIEW DATE:  
March 29, 2024 
 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OC010 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations 
(collectively referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
Provide guidelines to promote effective communication with patients whose preferred language for discussing 
health care matters is not English. 
POLICY: 
A. Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) will use qualified foreign language interpreters to 
facilitate effective communication in providing health care information to non-English speaking 
patients/patient representatives. 
B. LanguageLine services shall be available to OLOL team members for patients/patient representatives 
requiring language assistance. 
C. All hospital departments have access to an Interpreter on Wheels (IOW) as well as language line phones. 
Each inpatient unit in the hospital has a designated IOW available.  
D. When using the IOW, video interpretation is recommended for detailed or complex conversations. 
E. Friends or relatives of non-English speaking patients should not be used for interpreting purposes except in the 
case of emergent situations and only until a qualified interpreter is available and located. 
F. In certain situations, the clinical team may determine an in-person face-to face interpreter is necessary. In such 
instances inpatient units can contact the House Managers to arrange for an in-person interpreter. Outpatient 
departments should contact their immediate supervisor or designee. The languages listed below are available 
for in-person interpretation in our area: 
• Arabic, Spanish, Korean, Mandarin, Vietnamese, French, and Russian.  
G. If the non-English speaking patient/patient representative insists that a family member or friend serve as the 
interpreter, this will be noted in the Electronic Medical Record (EMR). We will explain we are required to use 
a qualified interpreter to verify accuracy and obtain the IOW or language line phone.  
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
OC 010 Foreign Language Interpreters 
2 
DEFINITIONS: 
A. “LanguageLine Solutions” is a 24-hour communications center staffed with interpreters and linguists 
available for on-demand interpretation through traditional telephonic and digital audiovisual solutions. 
B. “Interpreter on Wheels (IOW)” is an on-demand video remote interpreting tool that features a tablet 
mounted to a rolling stand for increased mobility. 
PROCEDURE: 
The following steps should be followed when a team member encounters a non-English speaking person: 
 
For Accessing Language Line via IOW: 
1. Obtain designated IOW. 
2. Prior to entering the patient room, identify desired language and determine if video interpretation is available. 
If yes, determine if video or audio interpretation is most appropriate for the situation. 
3. Click on the desired language and mode of communication. 
4. The interpreter will provide their name and interpreter identification number – this will be documented in the 
EMR. 
5. Brief the interpreter on the situation. 
6. Enter the room with the interpreter on-line. Then communicate with the non-English speaking person through 
the interpreter to obtain all needed information using the Guidelines for Communicating Effectively Through 
an Interpreter (see Attachment A, also available  on Teamlink/Lake Applications/Communication 
Resources/Guidelines for Communicating Effectively Through an Interpreter.) 
7. The team member will terminate the conversation by clicking on the red phone icon on the screen. 
 
For Accessing Language Line via phone: 
1. The hospital operator or team member dials the Language Line Service access number: 
a. OLOL Main: 1-855-938-0330, provide your first name and Employee ID. 
b. OLOLPG: 1-855-938-0339, provide your cost center number and the patient’s first and last name. 
c. OLOL Children’s: 1-844-887-4941, provide your first name and Employee ID. 
d. LSU: 1-844-887-4942, provide your name and where you are calling from. 
e. Health Centers in Schools: 1-844-967-2980, you may need to provide your name. 
f. Ascension: 1-855-938-0331, you will have to provide your department name and your first and last 
name. 
g. RX ONE: 1-833-470-3639, you may have to provide your name. 
2. When Language Line answers there will be options for the frequently used languages. If unable to determine 
the language spoken, the Language Line Service will assist with identification. 
3. The interpreter will identify themselves by their ID number - this will be documented in the EMR. The 
interpreter may request the team member to verify the name of the patient, their name, Employee number or 
other specific information. 
4. The team member will then communicate with the non-English speaking person through the interpreter to 
obtain all needed information using the Guidelines for Communicating Effectively Through an Interpreter 
(see below and also see available and can be obtained from Teamlink/Lake Applications/Communication  
OC 010 Foreign Language Interpreters 
3 
Resources/Guidelines for Communicating Effectively Through an Interpreter.) 
5. The team member will terminate the call by saying "end of call". 
 
Based on the patient population demographics, some Spanish translated documents are available and can be 
obtained from Teamlink/Lake Applications/Communication Resources/Guidelines for Using the Language Line 
Service. 
 
For accessing Language Line via telehealth: 
1. When hosting an English as a second language video visit there is a direct link in EPIC to invite a language 
line interpreter to the video visit. 
2. The languages currently available for video visits are Spanish, Arabic, Russian, American Sign Language, and 
Vietnamese. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and OLOL reserves the right to 
deviate from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Refugee health, (2011.) Best Practices for Communicating Through an Interpreter. Retrieved 
December 1, 2016 from http://www.refugeehealthta.org/access-to-care/language-access/best-practices-
communicating-through-an-interpreter/ 
ATTACHMENTS:  
• Guidelines for Communicating Effectively Through an Interpreter 
 
 