OC-015 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Equipment Not Available at OLOLRMC Policy Reference #: OrgClin/015 
Supersedes #: AD/B/026 
Date of Origination: August 31, 1995 Last Review Date:  June 12, 2023 
Last Revision Date: May 10, 2024 
 
PURPOSE 
To determine when and how equipment brought in by patients  or from outside sources may be used at 
OLOL. 
 
DEFINITION: 
 
Medical Equipment:  Includes but is not limited to medication delivery devices, ventilator equipment, 
and durable medical equipment not available at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
(OLOLRMC) 
 
POLICY 
Medical equipment that is used in the diagnosis and/or treatment of patients must belong to Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL RMC), except in those instances when patient 
safety and/or medical therapeutics  (such as home CPAP/BiPAP equipment)  would be compromised 
without the use of such equipment as determined by the treating physician.  
 
MEDICATION DELIVERY DEVICE 
1) The hospital will not supply medication to support a patient’s home medication delivery 
device.  Medication will need to be provided by the patient, or the appropriate vendor.  
Implantable insulin pumps are the exception.  The pharmacy will provide the appropriate 
insulin product if patient’s own supply is depleted.  The pharmacy will supply the 
appropriate insulin product, even if it is non-formulary 
. 
B. If the provider determines it is essential to continue the use of the patient’s medication delivery 
device 
1) The provider must confirm that the patient’s mental status and cognitive ability is adequate 
for the independent operation of the equipment or device.   If the patient cannot operate the 
device independently, the nurse will contact the device vendor for  assistance 
2) The patient must complete a Hold Harmless and Indemnity Agreement (Form #NS-274) 
3) An order must be entered in the medical record. The order must contain the following 
information: 
(i)  Device name and purpose 
(ii) If the device is a medication delivery device, the order must also contain 
(a) Name of medication 
(b) Concentration, total volume and infusion rate. 
(c)  Expiration date (if available) 
 
4) A pharmacist must identify the medication according to Home Medication – Storage and 
Administration (NMA019).  OC-015 
Page 2 of 2 
5) A pharmacist must ensure that there is a 48 hour supply of medication onsite.   
6) If the patient or family member cannot provide a 48 hour supply of the medication, the 
pharmacist will contact the vendor managing the device.  
7) The nurse must notify the Biomed department of the patient’s own equipment, so the 
equipment can be evaluated for electrical safety.  
 
The nurse must notify the provider immediately , and the nurse must contact the device vendor for 
guidance  
 
 
PROCEDURAL DEVICES. 
If vendors bring their own equipment for use during a procedure:  
1. There must be a physician's order in electronic medical record.  
2. Obtain consent of patient on Hold Harmless and Indemnity Agreement (Form #NS-274). 
3. Obtain all reasonable available operating instructions and/or information regarding 
equipment 
4. All vendor owned equipment brought in for use on a procedure is checked by the Biomed 
Department for electrical safety before going to the unit 
5. Do not use equipment that appears to be defective in any way 
 
 
 
Reference Policy RC8-01 