OC-020 
Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Patient Rights, Responsibilities. 
Complaints, and Grievance Process 
Policy Reference #: OrgClin/020 
Supersedes #: AD/B/008 
Date of Origination: December, 1999 Last Review Date:    February 1, 2024 
Last Revision Date: February 6, 2018 
 
PURPOSE: 
To support our patient’s rights and responsibilities, and define a process for prompt resolution of patient 
grievances and complaints at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL). 
POLICY:  
Patients shall receive care, treatment and services with compassion and respect that fosters dignity, 
autonomy, positive self-regard, civil rights and the involvement of the patient, or when appropriate, the 
patient’s representative in care.  Patients have a right to not be discriminated, excluded or treated 
differently because of race, color, national origin, age, physical or mental disability, sex, religion, 
culture, language, socioeconomic status, sexual orientation and gender identity or expression. 
The patient, or when appropriate, the patient’s representative  are informed of patient’s rights in advance 
of furnishing or discontinuing patient care whenever possible.  
Patient’s Rights and Responsibilities are posted in registration areas, listed in the Patient Handbook, and 
available on the internal intranet. 
The patient has the fundamental right, without being subject to coercion, discrimination, reprisal or 
unreasonable interruption of care, to submit a verbal or written concern about the care received, to have 
the concern reviewed, investigated and when possible resolved within a reasonable time frame.  
Expressing a concern will not compromise the quality of care given nor solely compromise future access 
to care. 
DEFINITIONS: 
Complaint: 
An expression of dissatisfaction by the patient, or the patient’s representative, related to a relatively 
minor issue that can be immediately and effectively identified and addressed on a nursing unit or in the 
department where it occurred by the staff present.  Typically this includes but is not limited to issues 
related to a change in bedding, housekeeping a room, and serving preferred food or beverage. Staff 
present includes any hospital staff present at the time of the complaint or who can quickly be at the 
patient’s location (i.e. nursing, administration, nursing supervisors, patient advocates, etc.) to resolve the 
patient’s complaint. 
 
 OC-020 
Page 2 of 5 
Grievance: 
A patient grievance is a formal or informal written or verbal expression of dissatisfaction that is made to 
the hospital by a patient, or the patient’s representative, regarding the patient’s care (when the concern is 
not resolved at the time reported by staff present), abuse or neglect, issues related to the hospital’s 
compliance with the CMS Hospital Conditions of Participation (CoPs), or a Medicare beneficiary billing 
issue.   (See Suspected Abuse or Neglect, Reporting of Child/Adult Policy OrgClin-027) 
• A Medicare beneficiary billing complaint. 
• A written complaint is always considered a grievance.  This includes written complaints from an 
inpatient, an outpatient, a released or discharged patient, or a patient’s representative regarding the 
patient care provided, abuse or neglect, or the hospital’s compliance with CoPs.  An email or fax is 
considered “written.” 
• If an identified patient writes or attaches a written complaint on a patient satisfaction survey and 
requests resolution. If an identified patient writes or attaches a complaint to the survey but has not 
requested resolution, the hospital must treat this as a grievance if the hospital would usually treat 
such a complaint as a grievance. 
• When a patient or a patient’s representative telephones the hospital with a complaint regarding the 
patient’s care or with an allegation of abuse or neglect, or failure of the hospital to comply with one 
or more CoPs or other CMS requirements. 
• Insurance and TJC inquiries that were initiated by a patient or the patient’s representative. 
• Any complaint related to a patient right. 
According to CMS Hospital CoPs the following do not meet the criteria to be considered a grievance, 
and should be handled relatively quickly by staff, and do not require a written response: 
• General billing issues unless there are service or care issues included in the communication 
received from the complainant. 
PROCEDURE 
Notification of Right to File Complaint or Grievance 
1. Patients are informed of their right to file a complaint or grievance through the following: 
a. Patient Rights posters are displayed in strategic locations near patient registration areas. 
b. Upon admission each patient, or when appropriate, the patient’s representative is given a copy of 
the current Patient Handbook.  
These documents provide contact information for  
a. The OLOL Patient Representative  
b. The Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals (LDH) OC-020 
Page 3 of 5 
c. The Joint Commission (TJC) Action Center 
d. The OLOL Civil Rights Coordinator  
e. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office for Civil Rights 
Patients can directly contact LDH or TJC, regardless of whether a concern is filed with OLOL. 
2. The Medical Management Department can assist with timely referral of Medicare patient concerns 
(i.e. premature discharge, quality of care or coverage decisions) to the Quality Improvement 
Organization (QIO).  All Medicare beneficiaries who may have concerns are informed of the right in 
writing and given the telephone number of the QIO.  
Review Process 
1. The OLOL Board of Directors has delegated the responsibility for effective operation of the patient 
complaint and grievance process to the Grievance Committee. 
2. The Chair of the Grievance Committee or designee coordinates the referral of patient concerns to the 
appropriate services for investigation. 
a. Risk Management may participate in investigating concerns of any occurrence which exposes the 
hospital to potential risk. 
b. Corporate Compliance may participate in investigating concerns that involve organizational 
ethics and privacy. 
c. Medical Staff is responsible for investigating any concerns that involve members of the Medical 
Staff and other Licensed Independent Practitioners who have been granted clinical privileges by 
the Medical Staff to include, but not limited to: issues about the quality of care provided by a 
practitioner; or issues about a practitioner's disruptive behavior. 
d. Administration/Department Directors and Managers are responsible for investigating concerns 
that involve any other aspect of services provided in the Medical Center.   
e. The Civil Rights Officer may participate in investigating concerns involving civil rights. 
3. The Grievance Committee meets regularly and as needed to review all grievances, findings of 
investigations and corrective actions. The Grievance Committee keeps records of their meetings and 
findings, reporting to the OLOL Board of Directors through the Professional Affairs Committee. 
4. The chairperson of the Grievance Committee has the authority to review and take actions related to 
complaints and grievances. 
5. Patient grievance information is monitored and any trends reported to the Patient Experience 
Council and Professional Affairs Committee on a quarterly basis or as needed. OC-020 
Page 4 of 5 
Receiving a Patient Complaint  
1. All expressed concerns regarding care or treatment are entered into the approved complaint tracking 
software program.   
2. If someone other than the patient or the patient representative expresses a concern about care or 
treatment, contact the patient.  If patient confirms concern, then proceed with this policy. 
3. The person who first learns of the concern is responsible for entering the concern into the approved 
complaint tracking software program 
Investigation of Grievances 
1. The Grievance Committee determines if a concern is to be identified as a complaint,  grievance, or 
civil rights complaint.  
2. The leader or designee of the department where the issue occurred will be electronically notified 
when a concern has been entered for their area.  In turn, they will assign the concern to the 
director/manager of any additional departments named by the complainant to begin the investigative 
process.  
3. The investigation can include but is not limited to speaking with the patient or the patient’s 
representative, discussing the concern with staff involved, reviewing the medical record, reviewing 
any appropriate policies and procedures, reviewing any medical or clinical process, performing a 
physical and/or psychosocial assessment of the patient.  If the patient has been discharged, at least 
three attempts are made to contact the patient or the patient’s representative by phone to discuss 
concerns. 
4. Based on the findings of the investigation the Sr. Director/Director/Manager of the department(s) 
involved take appropriate actions to resolve the patient or patient representative’s concern. These 
actions can include but are not limited to employee education, change in policy or procedure, and/or 
change in clinical process.    
5. If the Sr. Director/Director/Manager of the department(s) is unable to resolve the issue alone, the 
appropriate resource person for the specific issue is notified for assistance. 
6. OLOL may use additional tools to resolve a concern, such as meeting with the patient and his/her 
family or the patient representative, or other methods it finds effective. However, in all cases, a 
written response is provided to each patient grievance. 
7. The Sr. Director/Director/Manager of the department(s) conducting the investigation documents the 
steps taken to investigate the grievance and key findings. 
8. Whenever possible, the investigation should be completed within an average of seven working days 
from receiving the grievance. If the investigation cannot be completed within seven working days, 
the hospital may send a written acknowledgment of the concern to the patient or the patient 
representative.  This written acknowledgment will include the name and phone number of the 
hospital contact person along with up to a 30 day timeframe for completion of the grievance. OC-020 
Page 5 of 5 
9. The Grievance Committee delegates to the Committee Chair the authority to extend beyond seven 
working days should the complexity of the grievance require additional time to appropriately 
investigate or resolve the grievance.  
10. If the Sr. Director/Director/Manager of the department(s) involved indicates that the issues can be 
best addressed by a change in the Medical Center’s policies or procedures, such changes do not have 
to be implemented prior to inclusion in the notification letter to the person filing the grievance. 
However, the notification letter should describe generally the expected changes and effects.   
11. Refer to the Nondiscrimination Policy OC059 for concerns regarding civil rights. 
Notification of Investigation Results 
1. When this policy requires that notification be provided to a patient or the patient’s representative 
filing a grievance, the Written Notice of Investigative Decision which contains the name of the 
Grievance Committee Chair or designee, the steps taken to investigate the concern, the results of the 
process, and the date of completion. 
2. The written response required by the policy will not be interpreted to mean that peer review 
information that is required by state law to be kept confidential will be released to patients. Concerns 
about the precise information that may be disclosed will be referred to the Medical Center Legal 
Counsel.  In these cases we may opt to not send the Written Notice of Investigative Decision. 
 
REFERENCES: 
1. TJC Standard RI.01.07.01 
2. CMS Section §482.13 Condition of Participation: Patient’s Rights 
3. Suspected Abuse or Neglect, Reporting of Child/Adult Policy OrgClin-027 
4. Office for Civil Rights:  81 FR 31375 
5. Nondiscrimination Policy OC059 
 
 
 
 