OC-022 
Page 1 of 4 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Patient Valuables and Home Medication 
Safekeeping 
Policy Reference #: OrgClin-022 
Supersedes #: AD/B/010 
Date of Origination: October 2, 1986 Last Review Date: October 3, 2023 
Last Revision Date:  November 5, 2024 
 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to describe the process for the safe keeping of patient valuables and home 
medications. 
 
POLICY 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) ensures the safe keeping of valuables and 
home medication that cannot be taken home by family and that are the property of our patients during 
their hospital stay if the patient has submitted the valuables and/or home medications for safekeeping. 
 
DEFINITION 
Valuables include but are not limited to cash, jewelry, glasses, credit cards, wallets, electronic devices, 
etc. Valuables for this process do not include biohazards such as dentures or clothing. 
 
PROCEDURE 
1. With the patient's approval, family members are encouraged to take home any valuables and/or 
home medications the patient has brought with him/her to OLOLRMC. OLOLRMC will not be 
responsible for any personal property belonging to a patient that is not submitted for safekeeping. 
2. Patient valuables are placed in serially numbered envelopes provided by OLOLRMC. Persons 
having valuables secured must disclose the items on the Valuables Inventory Form and sign where 
applicable. Two staff members may inventory and sign if the patient is unable to participate. 
3. Patient home medications are placed in serially numbered envelopes provided by OLOLRMC and 
are to be obtained only by licensed staff.  Persons having home medication secured must disclose the 
medications on the Patient Home Medication Inventory Form and sign where applicable.  
a. If the medication is a controlled substance, it must be inventoried with a witness and must 
have documented signatures on the Patient Home Medication Inventory Form.  The 
inventory may be completed by the patient (or patient’s representative) and a licensed 
practitioner or by two licensed practitioners if the patient is unable to participate. 
b. Non controlled substances do not require a witnessed inventory. 
4. The patient or the patient’s representative and an OLOLRMC designee or two OLOLRMC 
designees will receive the valuables and/or home medications. All content will be recorded on a 
Valuables Inventory Form or Patient Home Medication Inventory Form. The original Inventory 
Form is placed inside the serially numbered envelope. The envelope is then sealed in the presence of 
the patient, if possible. The envelope receipt is attached to the copy of the appropriate Inventory 
Form and both (form and receipt) are placed in the patient’s medical record. The valuables inventory 
is also documented in the Electronic Medical Record in the designated section. 
5. The valuables envelope is then taken to Security Dispatch by nursing staff or designee to be 
deposited and kept in a safe. 
6. The home medication envelope is then taken to Pharmacy by nursing staff or designee to be 
deposited for safekeeping. 
7. The deposit/retrieval process requires two parties for every transaction.  OC-022 
Page 2 of 4 
 
Valuables: 
a. The sealed valuable envelope will be deposited into the safe in the presence of both a 
Security officer and the nursing staff or designee handling the valuables. 
b. If the envelope appears compromised a safety event will be reported and an investigation 
will be conducted. 
c. The Security Officer and nursing staff or designee will record all information in the 
Patient Valuables/Home Medication Log. This information will be verified by both 
parties and both signatures will be provided.  
d. When retrieving a valuables envelope, nursing staff or designee should phone Security 
and notify of valuables pick up.  Security will begin to coordinate the retrieval process. 
Upon arriving in Security Dispatch, the nursing staff or designee will present the 
numbered receipt which coincides with the number which is recorded in the Patient 
Valuables/Home Medication Log 
 
Home Medications: 
e. The sealed home medication envelope will be handed to the pharmacy staff by the 
nursing staff or appropriate unit staff qualified to handle or transport medications. 
f. If the envelope appears compromised a safety event will be reported and an investigation 
will be conducted. The pharmacy will not accept a compromised home medication 
envelope. 
g. The pharmacy staff and nursing staff or designee will record all information on the 
envelope onto the Patient Valuables/Home Medication Log in the pharmacy department. 
This information will be verified by both parties and both signatures will be provided.  
h. When retrieving a home medication envelope from pharmacy, nursing staff or qualified 
designee should phone pharmacy and notify of a home medication pick up.  Pharmacy 
will begin to coordinate the retrieval process. Upon arriving in Pharmacy, the nursing 
staff or designee will present the numbered receipt which coincides with the number 
which is recorded in the Patient Valuables/Home Medication Log, and on the home 
medication envelope 
8. If the receipt is lost, appropriate efforts will be made to identify the correct valuables or medications 
for the patient.  Proper patient identification is required for retrieval. For medications, which may or 
may not be controlled substances, the pharmacy will need the patient ‘driver’s license to verify 
identity 
9. If the receipt cannot be located and valid identification cannot be made, Risk Management will be 
notified to provide guidance.  
10. Valuables and Home Medications may be deposited or retrieved 24 hours a day 7 days a week. 
11. Once Valuables and Home Medications have been retrieved and returned to the patient, the patient 
must sign the Valuables inventory Form and/or Home Medication Inventory Form in the return 
verification section, indicating all valuables and/or home medications have been returned. The 
original Inventory Form(s) will be place in the medical record. Any discrepancies will be 
investigated and will be entered as a safety event. 
12. SMA, SMAU, main ECU, Livingston ECU, EMBH, MBH off site locations and HVAU - When a 
patient is transferred from one of these areas to the main hospital, the valuables and/or home 
medication envelope is transferred from the unit safe to the Security Safe or Pharmacy by signing the 
envelope out of one log and into the receiving log.  
13. Patient home medications that have been ordered for continuation during the current admission by a 
prescriber will be managed according to policy NMA-019 Home Medications – Storage and OC-022 
Page 3 of 4 
Administration for medications being administered on the unit. 
14. If it is a Coroner’s Case, we follow policy # OrgClin-004. 
15. Attempts will be made to contact patients if valuables or home medications are left after discharge. 
After 30 days post discharge home medications will be destroyed per pharmacy protocol and 
valuables will be dispersed per Security protocol. Valuables left in unit safes should be delivered to 
Security. 
 
Reference: 
OrgClin-004 Coroner’s Case 
NMA-019 Home Medications – Storage and Administration 
 
 
 
 OC-022 
Page 4 of 4 
Valuables/Home 
Medicationsent home 
with famiy
Complete Valuables Inventory 
Form and record in EMR
Valuable
?
Attached Valuables envelope 
receipt to Copy of Valuables 
Inventory Form and place in 
chart
Patient Valuables and Home Medication Safekeeping Policy
No
No
Yes
Take copy of Valuables 
Inventory and Receipt(s) to 
Security or remove from unit 
safe
Patient 
Dispositioned/ 
Discharged
Take Valuables envelope to 
patient
Contents accurate 
as verified by 
patient and 
nurse?
Complete Safety Event 
report and begin 
investigation.  Notify patient 
we will investigate.
Yes
No
Yes
Yes Document in Medical Record 
(EMR)
No
Home 
Medication
?
Yes
Yes
No Yes
Being 
Administered 
in Hospital?
Follow Home Medications -
Storage and Administration 
Policy
Complete Patient Home Medication 
Inventory Form
Place Valuables and Original 
Valuables Inventory Form inside 
Valuables envelope, place 
patient name or label on 
envelope, and seal envelope
Place Home Medications and Original Patient 
Home Medication Inventory Form inside 
Valuables envelope, place patient name or 
label on envelope, and seal envelope
Notify Security Dispatch you are 
bringing valuables for Deposit
Attach Home Medications envelope 
receipt to Copy of Home Medication 
Inventory Form and place in chart
Place valuables in Security 
Safe or unit safe if applicable 
and log information on 
Valuables/Home Medication 
Log
Deliver Home Medications envelope 
to Pharmacy or store in unit safe if 
applicable and log information on 
Valuables/Home Medication Log
Notify Security Dispatch you are 
picking up valuables
Retrieve valuables envelope 
and sign log
Have patient open valuables 
envelope and verify contents to 
Valuables Inventory Form then 
sign indicating receipt.  Staff to 
sign form verifying patient 
receipt
Take copy of Home Medication 
Inventory and Receipt(s) to 
Take Home Medication envelope to 
patient
Retrieve home medications 
envelope and sign log
Have patient open Home 
Medications envelope and verify 
contents to Home Medication 
Inventory Form then sign indicating 
receipt.  Staff to sign form verifying 
patient receipt
Place original Valuables 
Inventory Form in Patient 
Medical Record and give 
copy to patient
Place original Home 
Medication Inventory Form 
in Patient Medical Record
and give copy to patient
Notify Pharmacy you are picking up 
valuables
 