 
Patient Rights and Responsibilities 
 
 
 
Personal Privacy and Visitation 
• Be treated with dignity and respect. 
• Keep your health information confidential per state 
and federal law. 
• Have your health information shared only with those 
who need to know so they can assist in your care.  
• Have your personal privacy honored. 
• Have a family member, friend or other person with you 
to provide emotional support unless doing so is 
disruptive. 
• Say yes or no to the making of recordings, films or 
other images of you for purposes other than 
identification, diagnosis, or treatment. 
Security and Safety 
• Be free from mistreatment; neglect; exploitation; and 
verbal, mental, physical and sexual abuse while 
receiving care, treatment and services. 
• Get protective, supportive and advocacy services. 
• Get care in a safe setting that preserves dignity and 
meets your personal needs. 
• Know restraints or seclusion will be used only when 
medically needed. 
Cultural and Spiritual Values 
• Have your customs and personal values, beliefs and 
preferences respected. 
• Receive religious and other spiritual services. 
Receive Care and Support 
• Be able to talk and interact with people who know how 
to help when you have questions or problems.  
• Receive safe, quality care in a timely manner that is 
flexible and respectful to your interests and needs. 
• Be able to participate in your discharge planning and 
be provided with information on how to have your 
care needs met at home. 
• Be provided information on resources and services as 
needed. 
• Receive care and services in a professional manner 
without being discriminated, excluded, or treated 
differently because of race, color, ethnic origin, age, 
physical or mental disability, sex, religion, culture, 
language, socioeconomic status, sexual orientation 
and gender identity or expression. 
Information  
• Tell us about yourself, what you need and how you feel. 
• Make, check or change your Living Will and have it 
honored in line with law, regulations and the hospital's 
capabilities. 
• Ask, if admitted to the hospital, that we inform a family 
member or representative of your choice as well as your own 
doctor of your admission.  
• Know the names and roles of those responsible for the 
delivery of your care and treatment. 
• Be able to identify all employees through proper 
identification. 
• Have your healthcare team partner with you and your family 
to plan care and acknowledge your needs, ideas, and 
concerns. 
• Have your healthcare team meet with you and your family so 
you can be informed of your health status and be involved in 
choices that affect you, including the right to say no to care, 
treatment and services. 
• Have your family or representative involved in your care, 
treatment and service choices when you are notable   to 
make these choices, as allowed by law. 
• Be informed of your responsibilities for your care, treatment 
and services. 
• Be informed about the results of care, treatment and services 
so you can participate in current/future healthcare choices. 
• Get information from your clinical records. 
• Have your wishes followed about organ donation, when you 
make such wishes known, in agreement with law/regulations. 
• Be safe and have your rights respected during research, 
investigative and clinical studies. 
• Have access to information on disclosures of personal health 
information, under law regulations 
• To receive information about your care in a manner and 
language you understand: 
 Access to free aids and services for people with 
disabilities to communicate effectively with us, such as 
qualified sign language interpreters and written 
information in other formats {large print, audio, 
accessible electronic formats, other formats). 
 Free language services for those whose primary 
language is not English, such as qualified interpreters 
and information written in other languages. 
 lf you need these services, please contact Patient Care 
Services at (225) 765-8828. 
 ATENCIÓN: Si habla español, tiene a su disposición 
servicios gratuitos de asistencia lingüíst ica. Llame al 
(225) 765-8828. 
 ATTENTION: Si vous parlez frani;ais, des services 
d'aide linguistique vous sont proposés gratuitement. 
Appelez le (225) 765-8828. 
 
As a patient, you and your family are important to us. During your visit, you have rights and responsibilities.  
 
As a patient, you have the right to . . .  
continued on back Pain Management 
• Be asked about your pain and know staff will work with 
you to make a plan so you can be as comfortable as 
possible. 
Express Concerns, Complaints or Grievances 
• Be able to safely express feelings and concerns when 
afraid or hurting.  
• Express concerns about any aspect of your care, 
treatment and services. To express concerns, 
complaints and/or a grievance as a patient with Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Our Lady of 
the Lake Ascension, Our Lady of the Lake Children’s 
Hospital, Our Lady of the Lake Livingston, Our Lady of 
the Lake North Baton Rouge, and Our Lady of the Lake 
Assumption Community Hospital: 
 You may call (225) 765-8450. 
 If you failed to receive services or were 
discriminated on the basis of race, color, national 
origin, age, disability or sex, you can file a 
grievance in person, by mail or email with Civil 
Rights Coordinator Tammi Aidt, Our Lady of the 
Lake RMC, 5000 Hennessy Blvd., Baton Rouge, 
LA 70802, civilrights@ololrmc.com, (225) 765-
3295, (225) 765-9279 (fax). 
 You can also file a civil rights complaint with the 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
(HHS), Office for Civil Rights, electronically 
through the office for Civil Rights Complaint  
Portal, available at https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/ 
portal/lobby.jsf, or by mail or phone at HHS, 200 
lndependence Avenue, SW, Room 509F, HHH  
Building, Washington,  D.C. 20201, (800) 368-1019, 
(800) 537-7697 (TDD). 
 Louisiana Department of Health Hospital Complaint 
Desk, Health Standards Section, P.O. Box 3767, 
Baton Rouge, LA 70821 or call (225) 342-6429. 
Medicare beneficiaries may call (800) 315-0636. 
• Patient safety concerns can be reported to the Joint 
Commission: 
 At www.jointcommission .org, using the “Report a 
Patient Safety Event” link in the “Action Center” on 
the home page of the website.   
 By mail to the Office of Quality and Patient Safety, 
The Joint Commission, One Renaissance Boulevard, 
Oakbrook Terrace, IL 60181. 
• To express concerns, complaints and/or a grievance as  a 
patient with Our Lady of the Lake Physician Group:  
 You may call (225) 765-1573 
 If you failed to receive services or were 
discriminated on the basis of race, color, national 
origin, age, disability or sex, you can  file a grievance 
in person, by mail or email with Civil Rights 
Coordinator Kaki Strange, Franciscan Missionaries of 
Our Lady Health System, 4200 Essen Lane,  Baton 
Rouge, LA 70809, ololpgcivilrights@ololrmc.com, 
(225) 765-1573, (225) 765-9998 (fax). 
 
 
 
Give Pertinent Information 
• Give us complete and accurate health information  
about your past and present health, changes in your 
health problem or symptoms including pain and all 
drugs you are taking. 
• Give us complete and accurate personal information 
including name, address, phone number, date of birth, 
social security number and health insurance coverage. 
• Give us a copy of your Living Will if you have one. 
• Give us a copy of any legal document related to  
decision making. 
• Tell us if you need a translator or translation services. 
Ask Questions and Partner with Healthcare Team 
• Speak up. Let us know if you do not understand the 
information we give you about your condition, 
treatment, procedures or drugs. 
• Work with your doctor, nurse and other healthcare 
providers to make choices about your care and work 
with your healthcare team to implement. 
• Tell your concerns to any team member as soon as 
possible. 
Be Responsible 
• Request information regarding your bill. Pay your bill or 
make financial arrangements. 
• Leave your personal belongings at home or have someone 
take all valuables home. 
Show Respect and Consideration 
• Respect the knowledge and skills of your healthcare team. 
• Keep your scheduled appointments and call us if you need 
to reschedule. 
• Be thoughtful and helpful by treating everyone with 
courtesy and respect. Any abusive or rude behavior could 
result in your dismissal from our care. 
• Not smoke or use tobacco products, including e-cigarettes 
on our property. 
• Not leave your care area without talking with staff. 
• Respect the rights and property of others and the building. 
• Not bring illegal drugs, alcohol, guns or other weapons 
onto our property. 
• Not take photos or videos of hospital or clinic staff, other 
patients or people. 
 
As a patient, you have the responsibility to . . .  
Revised May 2021 