American Nurses Association Position Statement on
RISK AND RESPONSIBILITY IN 
PROVIDING NURSING CARE
Effective Date:  J une 2015
Status: R
evised Position Statement
Written By:  A
NA Center for Ethics and Human Rights
Adopted By:  A
NA Board of Directors
I.  PURPOSE
Nurses have a duty to care for patients and are not at liberty to abandon them; 
however, nurses are challenged to thoughtfully analyze the balance of professional 
responsibility and risk, including moral obligations and options, in order to preserve 
the ethical mandates in situations of risk to the nurse or profession. 
II.  S TATEMENT OF ANA POSITION
The American Nurses Association (ANA) believes that nurses are obligated to care
for patients in a nondiscriminatory manner, with respect for all individuals. The
ANA recognizes there may be limits to the personal risk of harm nurses can be
expected to accept as an ethical duty. Harm includes emotional, psychological,
physical or spiritual harm.
III.   RECOMMENDATIONS: 
According to the Code of Ethics for Nurses with Interpretive Statements (ANA, 2015a)
1. “
When a particular decision or action is morally objectionable to
the nurse, whether intrinsically so or because it may jeopardize a
specific patient, family, community, or population, or when it may
jeopardize nursing practice, the nurse is justified in refusing to
participate on moral grounds.” (p. 21)
2. “
When nurses are placed in circumstances that exceed moral
limits or that violate moral standards in any nursing practice
setting, they must express to the appropriate authority their
conscientious objection to participating in these situations.” (p. 21)
3. “
Acts of conscientious objection may be acts of moral courage and
may not insulate nurses from formal or informal consequences.
Such refusal should be made known as soon as possible, in
advance and in time for alternate arrangements to be made for
patient care.” (p. 21)
Attachment AAmerican Nurses Association Position Statement on Risk and Responsibility in Providing Nursing Care
2
4. “Conscience-based refusals to participate exclude personal preference, prejudice, bias, 
convenience, or arbitrariness.” (p. 21)
5. The nurse needs to base his or her assessment of risk on evidence-informed practice as defined 
in the Code of Ethics:
 “In any role or setting, practice that is characterized by combining the best available 
research; role or practice expertise; applied nursing, research, and health care ethics; and 
clinical or experiential insight.  In patient care, it includes patient preferences, cultural 
backgrounds, and community values.” (p. 43)
6. Nurses have a duty to themselves to act in a manner to preserve wholeness of character, and 
integrity. When faced with threats to professional or personal integrity, nurses have a “duty 
to act according to their personal and professional values and to accept compromise only 
if reaching a compromise preserves the nurse’s moral integrity and does not jeopardize the 
dignity or well-being of the nurse or others.” (p. 20)
Additionally: 
1. Identified risks should be communicated through the appropriate institutional channels so 
adequate safeguards can be initiated. 
2. It is incumbent upon the particular health care institution to provide adequate safeguards 
such as risk-reducing equipment, enforce protective procedures that minimize risk, educate 
staff concerning risks, and engage in research to identify actual and potential risks that impact 
nursing care.
ANA’s Bill of Rights for Registered Nurses states, “Nurses have the right to a work environment that is safe for 
themselves and their patients.” (ANA, 2001, para 6)  The health care institution should have in place policies 
and procedures addressing conscientious objection.
IV.   BACKGROUND
Even with the benefit of early recognition and guidelines for prevention, it is the nature of health problems to 
raise questions for the nurse regarding personal risk and responsibility for patient care. Potential risks include: 
cytomegalovirus, hepatitis, human immunodeficiency virus, severe acute respiratory syndrome, the threat of 
bioterrorism agents, bubonic or pneumonic plague, smallpox, Ebola virus disease, other emerging infectious 
diseases, violence in the community and natural or man-made disasters.  Violent and combative behaviors of 
patients also pose dangers to the nurse. Catastrophic events can require nurses to evaluate their personal risk 
and responsibility for patients in unique and unimaginable situations. Workplace dilemmas may be present in 
a variety of settings, including acute and chronic care facilities, community clinics, home care, and schools, 
among others.
For assistance in resolving questions about risk and responsibility, 
 “nurses must engage in discernment, carefully assessing their intentions, reflectively 
weighing all possible options and rationales, and formulating clear moral justifications 
for their actions.  Only in extreme emergencies and under exceptional conditions, 
whether due to forces of nature or to human action, may nurses subordinate human 
rights concerns to other considerations. This subordination may occur when there is 
both an increase in the number of ill, injured, or at risk patients and a decrease in access 
to customary resources and health care personnel.” (ANA, 2015a, p. 33) 
In order to differentiate between benefiting another as a moral obligation or duty and benefiting another as a 
moral option, the nurse must examine the particular situation in light of four fundamental criteria. 
A moral obligation exists for the nurse if all four of the following criteria are present:
1.  The patient is at significant risk of harm, loss, or damage if the nurse does not assist.American Nurses Association Position Statement on Risk and Responsibility in Providing Nursing Care
3
2.  The nurse’s intervention or care is directly relevant to preventing harm.
3.  The nurse’s care will probably prevent harm, loss, or damage to the patient.
4.  The benefit the patient will gain outweighs any harm the nurse might incur and does not 
present more than an acceptable risk to the nurse.
“The nurse’s primary commitment is to the recipient of nursing and health care services…”  
(ANA, 2015a, p. 5); nurses are morally obligated to care for all patients.  However, in certain situations the 
risks of harm may outweigh a nurse’s moral obligation or duty to care for a given patient. Each nurse when 
faced with a potential for harm must assess risk. Accepting personal risk exceeding the limits of duty is not 
morally obligatory; it is a moral option. In certain situations, the moral imperative of others influences the 
determination of moral imperative for nurses.  One example is the provision of appropriate personal protective 
equipment when caring for patients with infectious diseases. 
In 2004 the National Quality Forum published the National Voluntary Consensus Standards for Nursing-
Sensitive Care. Within this document is the Practice Environment Scale of the Nursing Workforce Index, which 
can be used to measure nurses’ ability to navigate and impact the risks within their institutions. Additionally, 
the bibliography offers selected readings and research studies related to this issue.
It has been well documented in the literature that evaluating and decreasing risk is an economically sound 
practice (Institute for Safe Medical Practice, 2014). While it is effectively impossible to create a risk-free 
environment for nursing practice, the need to recognize, evaluate and efficiently minimize risk while 
recognizing the responsibility of our profession is an essential component of professional nursing practice.
V.  HISTORY/PREVIOUS POSITION STATEMENTS 
Historically, nurses have given care to those in need, even at risk to their own health, life, or limb. Indeed, 
the suggested Code of 1926 proclaims “the most precious possession of this profession is the ideal of service, 
extending even to the sacrifice of life itself . . .” (Committee on Ethical Standards, 1926). Nursing history is 
replete with examples of nurses who have knowingly incurred great risk in order to care for those in need of 
nursing or to contribute to the advancement of health science.
Contemporary nurses, too, knowingly place themselves at risk when providing care in war-torn areas, places of 
poverty and poor sanitation, and situations of natural or human-made disaster. Nurses also encounter personal 
risk when providing care to patients with known and unknown communicable or infectious diseases, as well as 
in other dangerous situations.
Supportive Material
ANA’s essential documents, Nursing: Scope and Standards of Practice (ANA, 2015b), Code of Ethics for Nurses with 
Interpretive Statements (ANA, 2015a), and Nursing’s Social Policy Statement, 3rd Edition (ANA, 2010) provide 
background for this position. The first provision of the Code of Ethics for Nurses with Interpretive Statements 
describes compassion and respect for the inherent dignity, worth, “unique attributes, and human rights of all 
individuals.” (ANA, 2015a) This central axiom of respect for individuals directs the nursing profession. The Bill 
of Rights for Registered Nurses (ANA, 2001) states that nurses have “the right to freely and openly advocate for 
themselves and their patients, without fear of retribution.” (ANA, 2001, p16) When moral objection is made, 
the nurse is obligated to provide for the patient’s safety and ensure that alternate sources of nursing care are 
available. It is essential that nurses first evaluate the potential exposure to risk in the workplace and move to 
minimize those risks.  
This issue is addressed in:
OSHA’s (2015) Guidelines for Preventing Workplace Violence for Health Care and Social Service Workers. 
OSHA has developed guidelines and recommendations to reduce worker exposures to environmental 
conditions associated with workplace assaults and identify control strategies that have been implemented 
in a number of work settings.American Nurses Association Position Statement on Risk and Responsibility in Providing Nursing Care
4
Summary 
Nurses provide care to individuals with respect for human dignity and regardless of the patient’s socioeconomic 
or personal attributes or the nature of the patient’s health problem. (ANA, 2015) In some situations, the 
nurse may identify a degree of personal risk in caring for a patient and must differentiate between caring 
for the patient as a moral obligation and caring for the patient as a moral option. Four fundamental criteria 
are identified to assist the nurse in making this determination. When not all of the criteria can be met, the 
individual nurse must evaluate the situation according to the criteria and determine if he/she is willing to accept 
the personal risk exceeding the limits of duty.
 
 American Nurses Association Position Statement on Risk and Responsibility in Providing Nursing Care
5
VI.  REFERENCES 
American Nurses Association. (2011). Health and safety survey report.  Retrieved May 15, 2015, from 
http:// nursingworld.org/DocumentVault/OccupationalEnvironment/HealthSafetySurvey/2011HS-Survey.pdf 
American Nurses Association. (2001). The American Nurses Association’s bill of rights for registered nurses. Silver Spring, MD: 
www.Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2015a). Code of ethics for nurses with interpretive statements. Silver Spring, MD:  
www.Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2010). Nursing’s social policy statement (3rd edition) . Silver Spring, MD:  
www.Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2015b). Nursing: Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD:  
www.Nursesbooks.org.
Committee on Ethical Standards. (1926). A suggested code: A code of ethics presented for the consideration of the 
American Nurses Association. The American Journal of Nursing, 26, 599-601.
Johnson, S., & Weber, R. J. (2014). Principles and practices of medication safety. Institute for Safe Medication Practices.  
Retrieved May 15, 2015, from 
http://www.mhpharmacotherapy.com/0071800530/online_pdfs/03_Dipi_Web_Ch03_031-038.pdf.
 National Quality Forum. (2004). National voluntary consensus standards for nursing-sensitive care: An initial performance 
measure set. Retrieved May 15, 2015, from  
http://www.qualityforum.org/Publications/2004/10/National_Voluntary_Consensus_Standards_for_Nursing-Sensitive_
Care__An_Initial_Performance_Measure_Set.aspx.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration. (2015). Guidelines for preventing workplace violence for health care and social 
service workers.  Retrieved May 15, 2015, from https://www.osha.gov/Publications/osha3148.pdf.American Nurses Association Position Statement on Risk and Responsibility in Providing Nursing Care
6
Bibliography
Aiken, L., Sloane, D., & Klocinski, J. (1997). Hospital nurses’ occupational exposure to blood: prospective, retrospective, 
and institutional reports. American Journal of Public Health, 87(1), 103-107. doi:10.2105/AJPH.87.1.103.
American Nurses Association (n.d.). Bullying and Workplace Violence.  Retrieved May 15, 2015, from 
http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/WorkplaceSafety/Healthy-Nurse/bullyingworkplaceviolence. 
Campbell, S. (2004). Management of HIV/AIDS transmission in health care. Nursing Standard,  18(2), 33-35.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2003). Exposure to blood: What healthcare personnel need to know. 
Retrieved May 15, 2015, from www.cdc.gov/HAI/pdfs/bbp/Exp_to_Blood.pdf. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2001). Facts about Pneumonic Plague.  Retrieved May 15, 2015, from 
www.bt.cdc.gov/agent/plague/factsheet.asp.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2003). Infectious disease information. Viral hemorrhagic fever.  Retrieved 
May 5, 2015, from www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvrd/spb/mnpages/dispages/vhf.htm. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2003). Plague. Retrieved May 15, 2015, from 
www.cdc.gov/plague/. 
Corbo, S. A., & Siewers, M. H. (2001). Hazardous to your health. Nursing 7 Management, 32(3), 44C-44F.
Iezzoni, L. I. (Ed.). (2003). Risk Adjustment for Measuring Health Care Outcomes (3rd edition) . Chicago, IL: Health 
Administration Press.
Laschinger, H. K. S., Goldenberg, D., & Bello, D. D. (1995). Community health nurses’ HIV care behavior. Journal of 
Community Health Nursing, 12 (3), 147-159.
Lashley, F. (January 31, 2006). “Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Beginning of the 21st Century”. Online Journal of 
Issues in Nursing. Vol. 11 No. 1, Manuscript 1.
Muenning, P. (2002). Designing and conducting cost-effectiveness analyses in medicine and health care. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass. 
Papa, A., & Venella, J., (2013) Workplace Violence in Healthcare: Strategies for Advocacy. Online Journal of Issues in 
Nursing, 18(1), 1. doi:10.3912/OJIN.Vol18No01Man05.
Sobaszek, A., Fantoni-Quinton, S., Frimat, P., Leroyer, A., Laynat, A., & Edme, J-L. (2000). Prevalence of 
cytomegalovirus infection among health care workers in pediatric and immunosuppressed adult units. Journal of 
Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 42, 1109-1114.
Twedell, D. (2009). Duty to care. Journal of Continuing Education in Nursing,  40(2), 53-54.  
doi:10.3928/00220124-20090201-04. 
Tzeng, H. M. (2004). Nurses’ professional care obligation and their attitudes towards SARS infection control measures 
in Taiwan during and after the 2003 epidemic. Nursing Ethics,  11(3), 277-289.