OC-034 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Transportation Policy Reference #: OrgClin-034 
Supersedes #: AD/B/038 
Date of Origination: January, 1998 Review Date:  January 31, 2024 
Revision Date:   September 26, 2022 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for the transportation of a) goods and services, and b) patients without transportation 
at time of discharge by using taxi or rideshare services at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center  
 
POLICY: 
A. Goods and Services 
▪ Responsibility for transportation of laboratory items, blood or blood products will be administered 
by the respective departments.  All efforts will be made to use existing hospital resources before 
considering use of taxi services.   
▪ Should taxi services be necessary, the departments will use the appropriate forms. 
▪ Exceptions for distance limitation will be made for transportation of blood and blood products. 
 
B. Patients without transportation at time of discharge 
▪ When all attempts to arrange transportation with family and friends are unsuccessful, 
transportation for the patient may be arranged by Our Lady of the Lake  Regional Medical 
Center (OLOLRMC). 
▪ Transportation of patients within a 20-mile radius can be arranged after exhausting all other 
opportunities.  Transportation for patients to a site more than 20 miles away must be approved 
by the Senior Director Care Management or House Supervisor. A fee for this transportation will 
be added to the patient’s bill. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. Monday - Friday -- 8:00 am - 5:00 pm - If there are no other means of transportation, transportation will 
be arranged through Care Management or Director/Manager. 
 
2. The Directors/Managers who have approval authority during normal business hours are in the following 
areas: 
▪ Care Management 
▪ Mental & Behavioral Health 
▪ Elderly Services 
▪ Emergency Care 
▪ Patient Care Services 
▪ Blood Distribution Center 
 
3. The Directors/Managers of the following areas are also authorized to arrange transportation of goods 
and services as needed: 
▪ Lab Supervisor OC-034 
Page 2 of 2 
▪ Blood Bank Supervisor 
 
4. Evenings, Nights and Weekends - For patient transportation, the House Manager/Supervisor should be 
notified of all transportation requests and will provide or obtain authorization.  In Mental and 
Behavioral Health (MBH) the MBH Administrator on Call/designee will provide or obtain 
authorization. 
 
5. Documentation of Patient Transportation: 
 
▪ Taxi Services:  
i. A three -part Yellow Cab Authorization Slip must be completed prior to patient 
transportation.   
ii. The original (white copy) is given to the taxi driver to attach to the Yellow Cab 
Transportation Receipt.   
iii. The yellow and pink copies should be forwarded to Patient Care Services.   
 
▪ Rideshare:  
i. Authorized team members (provisioned through Care Management)  will use the 
Lyft Concierge portal to arrange patient transportation.  
 
 