OC-035 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Right to Effective Pain Management Policy Reference #: OrgClin/035 
Supersedes #: AD/B/044 
Date of Origination: February, 2000 Last Review Date:  August 12, 2024 
Last Revision Date:  June 14, 2021 
 
PURPOSE 
To achieve optimal patient comfort with a respect for the patient’s right to appropriate assessment and 
management of pain. While it is not possible to achieve total alleviation of all forms of pain, every effort 
will be made by the medical and nursing staff to relieve pain.    
 
DEFINITIONS of PAIN RATING SCALES   
A. Numeric Pain Scale – A self-reporting scale on which the patient assigns a numeric value to 
his/her pain level on a scale from 0 (no pain) to 10 (worst possible pain). 
B. Wong-Baker FACES - uses facial expressions (happy to crying faces) to measure pain; 
typically used in pediatrics but can be used for any age or development level 
C. Advanced Dementia - PAINAD (Pain Assessment in Advanced Dementia) uses observations 
for use in non-communicative advanced dementia patients 
D. Adult Non-Verbal Pain Scale Measures pain in non-verbal or intubated adults using behavioral 
and physiological dimensions 
E. FLACC - (Face, Legs, Activity, Cry, Consolability) measures pain in children between the ages 
of two months and seven years, as well as children who are unable to communicate or are 
intubated 
 
POLICY 
A. The plan for managing a patient’s pain shall be established with information (input) from the patient, 
family, significant other, and members of the health care team.   
B. The patient’s report of pain shall be accepted as the key indicator of the amount of pain experienced.   
C. The patient’s healthcare provider shall be notified of levels of pain exceeding the established pain 
management goal, which is agreed upon by the patient.  
D. Pain shall be assessed utilizing a pain rating scale.  
E. As a Catholic health care facility, we care for all patients with dignity despite the nature of their 
health problem or social status.  The well-being of the whole person must be taken into account in 
deciding about any therapeutic intervention (Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health 
Care Services, Directives 1, 23 and 33). 
F. In the specific instance of caring for the dying patient, one of the primary purposes of medicine is 
the relief of pain and the suffering caused by it.  Patients should be kept as free of pain as possible so 
that they may die comfortably and with dignity.  Medicines capable of alleviating or suppressing 
pain may be given to a dying person, even if this therapy may indirectly shorten the person’s life so 
long as the intent is not to hasten death.  (Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care 
Services, Part Five: Issues in Care for the Seriously Ill and Dying, Directive #61.) 
 OC-035 
Page 2 of 3 
 
PROCEDURES 
A. Pain Scale Ratings 
1. All patient pain assessments and reassessments will utilize a numeric pain score rating. The 
patient will be asked to verbally rate their pain on a scale of 0 to 10.  
▪  Zero (0) represents no pain and a rating of ten (10) indicates that the patient is 
experiencing intolerable pain. 
2. If the adult patient is unable to verbalize or comprehend the Numeric Pain Scale, the Adult 
Non-Verbal Pain Scale or the Wong Baker Scale of facial expressions for pain will be used.  
For patients with dementia, the Advanced Dementia scale will be used.   
▪ A numeric pain score is derived from the selections made on these scales. 
3. In the pediatric population, the Wong Baker Scale is used.  If the patient is unable to 
comprehend, the FLACC scale is used.   
▪ A numeric pain score is derived from the selections made on these scales. 
4. In acute care areas, pain assessment shall be addressed with each scheduled patient body 
assessment, at least every shift, and as indicated by the patient’s complaint of pain.  All 
other patient care areas shall utilize an established process to assess, reassess, document, 
and report unrelieved pain as appropriate to their particular setting.   
5. Pain shall be reassessed within one hour after administration of oral analgesic, and within 
30 minutes after IV analgesic. 
6. Whenever possible, pain assessment and reassessment documentation shall include other 
descriptors of the patient’s pain (i.e.: location, type, onset, etc.) 
7. The patient’s healthcare provider is notified of the patient’s pain when treatment fails to reduce 
the pain to a level acceptable to the patient. 
B. Plan of Care 
1. A plan of care for managing pain shall be initiated when assessment indicates the patient is 
experiencing pain.  
2. The patient shall be included in goal–setting; and either numeric scale goals or functional 
goals will be developed with the patient and significant others.  
3. Nursing interventions may include, but are not limited to: environmental control, 
positioning, distraction, applications of cold or heat, activity, imagery, music, relaxation, 
emotional support, and consultation with Pastoral Care Services. 
4.  For pediatric patients, a Child Life consult may be requested to assist with these 
techniques and education of the patient and family. 
C. Education 
1. The nursing staff in the acute care setting shall formulate an individualized pain 
management plan which includes patient education that considers the patient’s personal, 
cultural, spiritual, and/or ethnic beliefs.  
2. All other patient care areas shall develop their pain and education plan based on their 
specific health care setting. OC-035 
Page 3 of 3 
3. Evidence of learning (verbalization, return demonstration, need for follow-up) by the 
patient and/or family members shall be documented in the medical record. 
D. Discharge Planning 
1. If the patient’s pain is not resolved by time of discharge, pain management shall be 
included in the discharge plan for the patient. 
 
REFERENCES: 
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, (2018).  Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic 
Health Care Services (Sixth Edition). 
 
 Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference. 
 
Bernhofer, E., (2011) "Ethics and Pain Management in Hospitalized Patients" OJIN: The Online Journal 
of Issues in Nursing Vol. 17 No. 1. 
 
   