OC-036 
Page 1 of 8 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: 
Restraint and/or Seclusion and Safe 
Patient Behavior Management 
 
Policy Reference 
#: OrgClin/036 
Supersedes #: AD/B/032; OrgClin/043 
Date of Origination: December, 1996 Last Review Date: September 9, 2024 
Last Revision Date: November 28, 2022 
 
 
Philosophy 
Leaders of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center are committed to creating a culture that 
minimizes the use of restraint and seclusion. The Medical Center provides education and training of the 
appropriate staff through a variety of formal and informal educational methods to safely manage those 
patients who exhibit violent, aggressive, or self-destructive behaviors.   A safer environment can be 
ensured for all patients, team members, and visitors by identifying patient populations and events or 
environmental factors that may trigger circumstances requiring the use of clinical interventions 
necessary to safely manage those patients who exhibit violent, aggressive, or self-destructive behaviors.  
Whenever restraint must be used, the least restrictive device is utilized.  When either restraint or 
seclusion is employed, each patient’s rights, dignity, and physical and psychological well-being will be 
protected.  
 
Purpose 
1. To outline the nursing management of restrained or secluded patients in order to maintain their 
safety and protect them from injury. 
2. To provide guidelines for the protection of others from harm that might result from the patient’s 
actions or behaviors. 
3. To provide for safe patient behavior management focusing on prevention 
4. To maintain compliance with the CMS Conditions of Participation for regulatory requirements of 
restraint death reporting and internal log. 
 
Policy 
The patient has the right to be free from restraint or seclusion that is not deemed clinically appropriate 
and justified.  The decision to use restraint or seclusion is not driven by setting or diagnosis, but by a 
comprehensive individual assessment which concluded that for this patient, at this time, the use of less 
intrusive measures poses a greater risk than the risk of using restraint or seclusion. 
 
Definitions 
1. Restraint:  
• Any manual method, physical or mechanical device, material or equipment that is applied 
with or without the patient’s permission that immobilizes or reduces the ability of a 
patient to move his or her arms, legs, body or head freely. 
• A drug or medication when it is used as a restriction to manage the patient’s behavior or 
restrict the patient’s freedom of movement and is not a standard treatment or dosage for 
the patient’s condition. OC-036 
Page 2 of 8 
2. Seclusion:  The involuntary confinement of a patient alone in a room or area from which the 
patient is physically prevented from leaving.  Seclusion may only be used for the management of 
violent or self-destructive behavior. 
3. Episode:  The period of time between application of restraint or seclusion and its discontinuation 
because the patient no longer meets restraint rationale criteria. Reapplication of restraint or 
seclusion after discontinuation constitutes a new episode and requires a new order.  
 
What Is Not Considered a Restraint: 
• Handcuffs or other restrictive devices applied by law enforcement officials, who are not 
employed by or contracted by the hospital, for custody, detention, and public safety reasons, and 
are not involved in the provision of health care. 
• Adaptive supports: Mechanisms intended to permit a patient to achieve maximum bodily 
functioning (Examples: orthopedic appliances, braces, tabletop chairs or other devices to 
posturally support the patient.) 
• Medical immobilization: Mechanisms usually and customarily employed during medical, dental, 
diagnostic, or surgical procedures/tests. (Examples: I.V. arm boards, surgical positioning, use of 
restraint for post-op/post anesthetic care, and protection of surgical and medical treatment sites in 
pediatric patients.)  
• Protective devices: Mechanisms intended to compensate for a specific physical deficit or to 
prevent incidents not related to cognitive dysfunction.  Also, age or developmentally appropriate 
protective interventions that a safety-conscious childcare provider outside of a healthcare setting 
would utilize to protect an infant, toddler or preschool-aged child. (Examples: protective 
helmets, raised crib rails, bumper pads, stroller and highchair safety belts) 
• Four raised side rails on specialty beds whose function would be impaired if all side rails were 
not raised. (Example: cribs, beds which automatically turn patients) 
• Physical re-directing, therapeutic holding or comforting of children. 
• Mitts that are not secured to the bed. 
 
General Guidelines for the Use of Restraint or Seclusion 
1. May be utilized only when clinically justified and never as a means of coercion, discipline, 
convenience or retaliation by staff. 
2. Alternatives to restraints must have been determined to be ineffective in protecting the patient or 
others from immediate harm. 
3. Restraint or seclusion requires a physician’s order and is never written as a standing order or on 
an as-needed (prn) basis. 
4. Is performed in a setting in which the patient must be assessed, monitored and reevaluated. 
5. Must be in accordance with a documented modification of the patient’s medical treatment plan 
and nursing plan of care.  The plan of care must reflect assessment, intervention, evaluation and 
re-intervention. 
6. Every opportunity is taken to provide an environment in which restraint or seclusion can be 
eliminated at the earliest possible time, regardless of the length of time identified in the order. 
7. Discontinuance shall be guided by criteria for release and shall be under the direction of a 
competent registered nurse. 
8. If a patient is released from restraints or seclusion and suddenly exhibits behavior that can be 
handled only by re-application of restraint or seclusion, a new order will be required.  However, 
temporary release for patient care activities, while under the direct supervision of staff, is not OC-036 
Page 3 of 8 
considered to be a discontinuation of the intervention.  
9. All staff who engage in direct patient care must have ongoing education and training in the proper 
safe use of restraint techniques and alternatives to restraints and seclusion.  
10. There is an ongoing performance improvement process to evaluate the use of restraint and 
seclusion and reduce their frequency. 
11. If restraint is being utilized for medical or surgical healing, refer to section entitled “Restraint 
Procedure for the Management of the Acute Medical/Surgical Patient”.  If restraint is being used 
for Behavior Management, refer to section entitled “Restraint Procedure for Behavior 
Management”. 
Alternatives to the Use of Restraint 
• Medication:  Appropriate type and dose to calm patient or alleviate pain.  This approach is not 
used to chemically restrain but to prevent such distress as would escalate beyond a patient’s 
ability to cope.  This also includes evaluation of current medications for adverse reactions, 
including confusion and agitation.  
• Provide companionship/supervision that includes family, friends, volunteers or available staff. 
• Change/eliminate bothersome treatments if medically feasible. 
• Modify the environment:  Place items within reach (commode, call light, glasses, personal 
belongings); reduce environmental noise; provide additional lighting at night; provide staff 
support. 
• Provide reality orientation/psychosocial interventions:  Verbal re-orientation to time and place; 
explanation of procedures and reassurance; use of calendars, clocks or television to provide 
reality links; verbal redirection and de-escalation techniques; time out. 
• Offer diversion activities:  Enlist aid of occupational therapist, television, music, recreation or 
hobby (as provided by family); provide ROM; assist up in chair, ambulate or reposition; other 
means of alleviating restlessness. 
• Attend to comfort needs: Pain relief, oral care, bowel and bladder assessment, and establish a 
toileting schedule. 
• Nutrition/Fluid:  Offer liquids or food as appropriate. 
• Relocate to room close to nurse’s station and keep door open as much as possible. 
 
Staff Training 
1. Staff receive training and demonstrate competency in restraint and seclusion use, according to 
their skill level: 
• Initially, as part of orientation period 
• As deemed competent to participate in restraint application 
• Subsequently on a periodic basis. 
2. Training according to skill level may include, but  not be limited to: 
a. Specific needs of the patient population: 
i.   Techniques to identify staff and patient behaviors, events, and environmental factors that 
may trigger circumstances that require the use of restraint or seclusion, 
ii.   Choosing the least restrictive intervention based on individualized assessment, 
iii.   Recognizing and responding to physical and psychological distress, 
iv.   Clinical identification of specific behavioral changes that indicate the restraint or 
seclusion is no longer necessary. 
b. Applying restraints 
c. Implementing seclusion OC-036 
Page 4 of 8 
d. Assessment and monitoring of the physical and psychological well-being of a patient in 
restraint and/or seclusion, including, but not limited to: 
i.   Respiratory and circulatory status  
ii.   Skin integrity 
iii.   Vital signs   
iv.   Special requirements of the 1-hour face-to-face evaluation when behavioral restraint or 
seclusion is used  
e. Providing care for a patient in restraints and/or seclusion. 
3. Physicians and other licensed practitioners authorized to order restraint or seclusion have a 
working knowledge of the restraint and seclusion policy. 
 
RESTRAINT PROCEDURE FOR MANAGEMENT OF THE NON-VIOLENT/NON-SELF 
DESTRUCTIVE(MEDICAL/SURGICAL) PATIENT INTERFERING WITH 
MEDICAL/SURGICAL TREATMENT 
This procedure applies to the patient who, despite clinical assessment, reassessment, and alternative 
interventions, continues to disrupt their medical care and prolong their medical healing by attempting to 
remove devices. 
1.  Assessment:  May include, but is not limited to, the following: 
a. Patient’s understanding/ability to use the call bell. 
b. Causes of pain/discomfort. 
c. Range of motion. 
d. Mental status and ability to comprehend and follow instructions. 
e. The need for food/fluids. 
f. Proper placement of medical devices. 
g. Patient’s ability to control his or her behavior. 
h. Any pre-existing medical conditions or any physical disabilities or limitations that would 
place the patient at a greater risk during restraint. 
i. History of sexual, physical, verbal or financial abuse which increases psychological risk of 
restraint. 
2.  Order:   
a) In the absence of a physician or other authorized licensed practitioner, a Registered Nurse, 
trained and competent, may initiate restraint  
i. The attending physician must be notified immediately, informing him/her of the 
rationale for use and the patient’s immediate physical and psychological status 
ii. The physician may provide a telephone order.  
iii. Advance practice professionals (NP and PA) may write orders for restraint for 
patients interfering with medical/surgical treatment (Medical/Surgical Restraint). 
b) The order must specify the rationale for use, the type and reason for restraint  
c) If the attending physician did not order the restraint, the attending physician must be 
consulted as soon as possible. 
d) If restraint orders are initiated, there will be modification of the treatment plan based on the 
patient’s assessed needs. 
e) All orders for restraint of the medical/surgical patient are time limited. Continued use of 
restraint beyond the first calendar day is authorized by a physician renewing the original 
order or issuing a new order if restraint use continues to be clinically justified.  Such renewal OC-036 
Page 5 of 8 
or new order is issued no less often than once each calendar day and is based on the 
physician’s examination of the patient. 
3.  Application:  
a. Restraint use may be initiated only by a physician (or other authorized licensed practitioner) 
or registered nurse.  Restraints may be applied by other qualified staff under the direction of 
a physician (or other authorized licensed practitioner) or registered nurse. 
b. Restraint shall be implemented in the least restrictive manner possible and shall be in 
accordance with safe and appropriate restraining techniques. 
c. Select the type of restraint that is appropriate for the patient’s condition or behavior. 
d. Prior to application, explain the use/rationale for the device and criteria for removal to the 
patient and/or significant other as appropriate. 
e. Apply restraint appropriately and in a manner that will not cause pain or discomfort.  Secure 
restraint to bed frame with a quick-release knot. 
f. Provide for patient call system/communication device.  
4.  Physician Evaluation: The physician or authorized licensed practitioner responsible for the patient’s 
care must conduct a face-to-face evaluation of the patient within 24 hours of issuance of the order. 
5.  Monitoring and Documentation:  Monitoring is accomplished by observation, interaction with the 
patient, or related direct examination of the patient by qualified staff.  Documentation of patient 
observation, range of motion, and neurovascular checks will occur every 3-hour intervals. 
  
6.  Discontinuation:  Restraint is discontinued when the patient is no longer: 
a. Interrupting medical/surgical care 
b. Interrupting treatment 
c. Interfering with medical devices, tubes and dressings 
d. At risk of harming self/others due to medical condition 
 
RESTRAINT OR SECLUSION PROCEDURE FOR MANAGEMENT OF VIOLENT 
BEHAVIOR (BEHAVIORAL) 
The use of restraint or seclusion for behavior management is an emergency measure that may be used 
only in those situations when unanticipated, severely aggressive or destructive behavior places the 
patient or others in imminent danger.  Patients are informed of their right to be free from restraint or 
seclusion imposed as a means of coercion, discipline, convenience, or retaliation by staff.   
1.  Assessment:  May include, but is not limited to, the following: 
a. Mental Status Assessment    
b. Restraint/Seclusion Risk Assessment including: 
i. Any medical condition or physical limitation that may affect the use of restraint or 
seclusion 
ii. Previous placement in restraint or seclusion due to risk of harming self or others 
iii. History of violent or assaultive behavior 
iv. History of physical or sexual abuse 
v. Alternative methods or tools that could be effective in helping to control behavior 
2.  Order:   
a. In the absence of a physician, psychologist, medical psychologist, or psychiatric mental 
health nurse practitioner, a Registered Nurse, trained and competent, may initiate restraint or 
seclusion (Behavioral Restraint). OC-036 
Page 6 of 8 
i. The attending physician must be notified immediately, informing him/her of the 
rationale for use and the patient’s immediate physical and psychological status. 
ii. The physician may provide a telephone order. 
iii. Advance practice professionals (NP or PA) may not write orders for restraint and/or 
seclusion for management of violent behavioral (Behavioral Restraint) 
b. The order must specify the rationale for use, the type and reason for restraint or seclusion, 
and the duration of the order. 
c. If the attending physician did not order the restraint or seclusion, the attending physician 
must be consulted as soon as possible. 
d. If restraint orders are initiated, there will be modification of the treatment plan based on the 
patient’s assessed needs. 
e. All orders for restraint for behavior management are time-limited and may not exceed: 
  4 hours for the adult patient 
  2 hours for the youth/adolescent aged 9-17 years 
  1 hour for children under 9 years   
3.  Application:  
a. Restraint or seclusion may be initiated only by a physician or registered nurse.  The 
interventions may be applied by other qualified staff under the direction of a physician or 
registered nurse. 
b. Restraint shall be implemented in the least restrictive manner possible and shall be in 
accordance with safe and appropriate restraining techniques. 
c. Select the type of restraint that is appropriate for the patient’s condition or behavior. 
d. As early as feasible in the restraint or seclusion process, the patient is made aware of the 
rationale for restraint or seclusion and the behavior required for discontinuation. 
4.  Physician Evaluation/Reevaluation: The physician responsible for the patient’s care, or a qualified 
registered nurse (RN) or physician assistant (PA), must evaluate the patient within one hour after 
initiating restraints or seclusion. The RN or PA must report and consult with the attending physician 
as soon as possible after the evaluation. 
                         
Time Frames for Reevaluation/Reordering of Adult Behavioral Restraint or Seclusion 
     
                  TIME FRAMES                                                          INTERVENTIONS 
Within first hour after emergency application of 
restraint or seclusion applied by authorized and 
qualified non-physician staff. The one hour face to 
face must be still be completed if the restraints or 
seclusion are discontinued within the first hour.  
Physician, or if unavailable, a qualified RN (an RN who 
receives specific training to conduct the one hour face to 
face)  
After the first four-hour order expires. RN reevaluates the patient's need for continuation of 
restraint or seclusion. 
If restraint or seclusion is still required after 
reevaluation. 
Physician is notified and, if unable to enter a written or 
electronic order, may provide a telephone order for restraint 
or seclusion, not to exceed the time frame of the initial order.  
After eight hours of continuous restraint or 
seclusion  
Physician conducts an in-person reevaluation of continued 
need for restraint or seclusion. A new order, not to exceed 
the four-hour maximum, may be written or entered 
electronically by the physician.  OC-036 
Page 7 of 8 
The four-hour RN reassessment and the eight-
hour in-person evaluation by the physician are 
repeated.   
As long as the restraint or seclusion remains clinically 
necessary.   
If the patient has been held in restraint or 
seclusion continuously for 24 hours: 
The next of kin or responsible party is notified by the 26th 
hour. 
   
 
5.  Monitoring and Documentation:    
a. The 1-hour face-to-face evaluation includes at least the following: 
i. The patients immediate situation, 
ii. The patient’s reaction to the situation, 
iii. The patient’s medical and behavioral condition, 
iv. The need to continue or terminate the restraint or seclusion. 
b. Patients in restraints or seclusion for behavior management must be continuously observed 
by qualified staff.  Evaluation and documentation must occur every 15 minutes regarding the 
continued need for restraint or seclusion. 
6.  Notification of Management: 
a. The Nurse Manager/Director or designee should be notified of any instance in which a 
patient remains in restraint or seclusion for more than 12 hours, or experiences two or more 
separate episodes of restraint and/or seclusion of any duration within 12 hours. 
b. Thereafter, the Manager/Director or designee is notified every 24 hours if either of the above 
conditions continues. 
7.  Discontinuation:  Restraint and/or seclusion shall be discontinued when the patient no longer poses 
an imminent threat to self or others.  Behaviors which indicate readiness for release include: 
a. Calm, quiet 
b. Alert 
c. Follows instructions 
d. Absence of impulsiveness 
8.  Debriefing:  The patient and, if appropriate, the patient’s family shall participate in a debriefing with 
staff who were involved in each restraint/seclusion episode and who are available at the time of 
debriefing. 
The debriefing occurs as soon as possible and appropriate, but no longer than 24 hours after the 
discontinuation of restraints/seclusion. The debriefing is used to: 
a. Obtain information that could reduce the recurrent use of restraint/seclusion. 
b. Ascertain that the patient’s physical well-being, psychological comfort and rights to privacy 
were addressed. 
c. Counsel the patient involved for any trauma that may have resulted from the incident. 
d. Modify the patient’s treatment plan when indicated. 
e. Information obtained from debriefings will be used in performance improvement activities. 
 
Guidelines for CMS Restraint Death Reporting Requirements 
1. The hospital Administration must report the following information to CMS no later than the  
 close of business on the next business day following knowledge of a patient’s death: 
 a.   Each death that occurs while a patient is in restraint or seclusion, except when no  
seclusion has been used and the only restraint used was a soft, cloth-like two point    
wrist restraints OC-036 
Page 8 of 8 
 b.   Each death that occurs within 24 hours after the patient has been removed from  
 restraint or seclusion, except when no seclusion has been used and the only restraint 
used was a soft, cloth-like two point wrist restraints 
       c.   Each death known to the hospital that occurs within 1 week after restraint or seclusion    
      where it is reasonable to assume that use of restraint or placement in seclusion      
contributed directly or indirectly to a patient’s death, regardless of the type(s) of 
restraint used on the patient during this time. 
2.         The reports required must be submitted to the CMS Regional Office and must include basic  
  identifying information related to the hospital, the patient’s name, date of birth, date of death, 
  name of attending physician/practitioner, primary diagnosis, cause of death (preliminary, in case 
  a final, official cause of death is not yet available), and type(s) of restraint or seclusion used. 
3.       Hospitals must document in the patient’s medical record the date and time each reportable death   
 associated with the use of restraint or seclusion was reported to the CMS Regional Office. 
Guidelines for CMS Restraint Death Internal Log Requirements 
1. When no seclusion has been used and when the only restraints used on the patient are those  
applied exclusively to the patient’s wrist(s), and which are composed solely of soft, non-rigid, 
cloth-like materials, the hospital staff must record in an internal log or other system, the 
following information: 
a. Any death that occurs while a patient is in such restraints 
b. Any death that occurs within 24 hours after a patient has been removed from such 
restraints 
2. Each entry must be made not later than seven days after the date of death of the patient. 
3. Each entry must document the patient’s name, date of birth, date of death, name of attending 
physician or other licensed independent practitioner who is responsible for the care of the 
patient, medical record number, and primary diagnosis(es). 
4. The staff must document in the patient’s medical record the date and the time the death was 
recorded in the internal log or other system. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
The Joint Commission. 2021. Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
     Services. December, 2006. Conditions of Participation: Patient Rights Final Rule 
CMS, State Operations Manual, Appendix A. Revision 151, 11/20/15. 
Louisiana Revised Statute: Title 28 (Mental Health Law)  
References: Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 