OC-046 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Rapid Response Team / Condition H 
Policy / Code FAST 
Policy Reference #: OrgClin/046 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: December 29, 2008 Last Review Date: May 18, 2023 
Last Revision Date:  December 9, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide a rapid response intensive care team to assess treatment and provide early intervention for 
patients at risk for a clinical decline. 
 
POLICY: 
A. The Rapid Response Team (RRT) can be activated by any team member noticing a decline or 
change in an inpatient, observation, or ambulatory admitted patient’s condition.  A Code Blue is 
called for staff, visitors, and patients who are not registered as an admit to the hospital. 
B. A Condition H (HELP) can be activated when a family member or guest notices a decline or change 
in a patients’condition. Family members can dial extension 1000 to activate a Condition H. 
C. RRT activation should not delay the notification of the attending physician for any acute change in a 
patients’status. 
D. The RRT is available to respond when called 24hrs per day. 
E. The RRT consists of: 
▪ House Manager 
▪ Respiratory Therapist 
▪ Critical Care Nurse (when needed) 
▪ Critical Care Intensivist (as needed when attending physician unable to respond) (Ascension 
Campus- attending physician will respond) 
▪ EKG availibility  
F. Minimum Qualifications  
▪ Current ACLS (Advanced Cardiac Life Support), and BLS (Basic Life Support) as applicable 
to job class 
▪  Registered Nurse  or Respiratory Therapist 
G. Criteria for Activation of RRT may include any one of the following: 
▪ Anytime a team member feels there is a significant change in a patients’ condition. 
▪ Acute change in heart rate to less than 40 or greater than 130 beats/min 
▪ Acute change in systolic blood pressure to less than 90mm Hg 
▪ Acute change in respiratory rate to less than 8 or greater than 30 breaths/min 
▪ Acute change in pulse Oximetry saturation to less than 90% despite oxygen administration 
▪ Acute change in conscious state/neurologic status 
▪ Acute change in urine output to less than 50 mL in 4 hrs 
▪ Complaint of chest pain 
H. Criteria for Activation of Condition H includes anyone of the following: 
▪ When a family member or guest notices a sudden medical change 
▪ Difficulty breathing 
▪ Sudden onset of confusion 
▪ Less responsive OC-046 
Page 2 of 3 
▪ When there are serious concerns about how care is being managed 
I. Code FAST 
▪ If the House Manager responds to the RRT for acute neurologic changes and determines the 
patient could be having an acute stroke, he/she will instruct the staff nurse to perform a 
stroke screen in the EPIC Flowsheet. If this screen is positive, the staff nurse will call a Code 
FAST 
If the physician deems the patient a Code FAST, the Code Fast algorithm will be followed. 
RRT  PROCEDURES 
1. Team Member calls the Paging Operator at extension 5-1776  (Ascension Campus- dial “0” for the 
operator or page overhead by dialing *71) 
a. The PBX operator will announce on the overhead paging system RRT or Condition H 
and the room number. 
2. The RRT will respond to the designated location within 5 minutes. 
3. Units who will not access RRT 
a. Critical Care Units 
b. Post Anesthesia Care Units 
c. Emergency Care Unit except for the Emergency Department Observation Unit (EDOU) 
and Emergency Mental and Behavioral Health Unit (EMBH) 
d. Units in TAU Building 
e. Offsite locations 
f. Exceptions: 
SMA will utilize the Standard Operating Procedure for a pediatric RRT     
                                                                                
                         A Pediatric RRT can ONLY be called in SMA as this is the only unit that has admitted  
                         inpatient pediatric patients. 
 
                          Pediatric RRT Team Members 
▪ AG 
▪ Attendant 
▪ EKG 
▪ House Manager 
▪ PACU RN 
▪ Respiratory 
▪ SMA RN 
 
                             Successful RRT 
▪ Patient remains in SMA 
 
                             Unsuccessful RRT/Code Blue 
▪ Patient will be transferred to PACU 
▪ AG MD will assume care of the patient 
▪ AG MD to contact Pediatric Intensivist for patient hand off 
▪ Pediatric transport team contacted and transports patient to children’s hospital 
 OC-046 
Page 3 of 3 
4. Responsibility of Primary Nurse 
a. Provide assessments to RRT 
b. Remain at patient bedside 
c. Assist with obtaining equipment or supplies 
d. Complete electronic document 
e. Situation, Background, Assessment, Recommendation (SBAR) report provided to next 
level of care. 
5. Responsibility of House Manager/RRT Nurse 
a. Assess patient 
b. Initiate interventions within the scope of practice and/or ACLS guidelines 
c. Stay with patient until stable or assist with transport to a higher level of care 
d. Notify Intensivist for intervention if attending physician has not responded within 10 
minutes 
e. Provide education and support to primary nurse 
f. Complete the RRT documentation  
6. Responsibility for RRT Respiratory Therapist 
a. Perform advanced respiratory assessment 
b.  Initiate interventions within their scope of practice 
c. Documentation 
d. Assist with transport as needed 
7. Attending Physician or Intensivist (if attending is not available) (Ascension campus- attending 
physician will respond)  
a. Initiate orders to stabilize patient 
b. Communication with care team 
c. Documentation 
8. RRT data analysis and reporting will be completed quarterly. 
 
ReferencesCode Fast-Stroke (sharepoint.com) 
 
 
 