 OC-048 
Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Rotations For Student Clinical Education Policy Reference #: OrgClin/048 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: August 12, 2006 Last Review Date: January 2, 2024 
Last Revision Date: January 2, 2024 
 
PURPOSE 
To provide guidelines for rotations for clinical training for Students  
 
PROCEDURES: 
1. Affiliation Agreement/Contract between the Hospital and the School.   An Affiliation 
Agreement attached as an Exhibit, between Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“Hospital”) and 
Healthcare Program (“School”) is required to be executed before the Student is allowed to 
participate in a clinical rotation at Hospital.  The Affiliation Agreement provides the basic 
framework within which graduate and undergraduate medical education or community service is 
conducted by the School and Hospital and delineates the respective responsibilities of the School, 
Hospital and Students.   The Affiliation Agreement also includes: 
▪ A written description of the roles, responsibilities, and patient care activities of the Students 
under the supervision of the School Faculty (“Individual Program Description”) including the 
number of Students that the School wishes to send to the Hospital, in the format of 
Attachment 1 of the Affiliation Agreement form (to be completed by School) and signed by 
Hospital and School and attached to the executed Affiliation Agreement as an Exhibit.  
▪ Current proof of professional liability insurance of the School, for itself and for each Faculty 
Member and Student by their participation in the Patient Compensation Fund of the State of 
Louisiana or in the amount that is required by the Affiliation Agreement. 
▪ Each Student will be required to sign a Student Agreement, Protected Health Information, 
Confidentiality and Security Agreement and Statement of Responsibility as delineated in 
Attachments 1, 2 and 3 of the Affiliation Agreement form before being allowed to participate 
in a clinical rotation at Hospital. 
 
A. Additional Programs of School.   If a School has more than one program (“Program”) that 
desires a clinical rotation at Hospital, then an Individual Program Description for each Program 
shall be completed and added as additional Exhibits to the Affiliation Agreement and made a part 
thereof.  After execution of the Affiliation Agreement, additional Programs may be added by 
Amendment to the Affiliation Agreement. 
 
2. School Responsibilities.   The School initiates the process of affiliation by contacting the Division 
of Academic Affairs and department responsible for coordinating clinical rotations at the hospital to 
make arrangements for clinical rotations.  The School is responsible for:  
A. Completing an Exhibit for each School Program.  The School shall complete an Exhibit, for each 
program that requests clinical rotations, which is attached to the affiliation agreement in 
alphabetical sequence after attachments 1, 2, and 3.  
 
B. Malpractice Insurance.  The School shall provide current proof of professional liability insurance 
of the School, for itself and for each Faculty Member and Student (as applicable) as specified in  OC-048 
Page 2 of 5 
the Affiliation Agreement.  Schools without malpractice insurance that covers the Faculty, and 
the student shall not be permitted to perform clinical functions with the Hospital. 
 
C. Clinical Instructors.  The School shall select qualified school faculty to instruct and supervise 
students in coordination with Hospital personnel. The School is responsible for providing 
Hospital with a list of qualified faculty and contact information for each rotation. 
 
D. Scheduling.  The School is responsible for providing the individual/department that coordinates 
clinical rotations with a master student rotation schedule, which should include a list of the names 
of Students, Student’s year in Program and Student’s dates of Rotation prior to the beginning of 
Rotation. The School is responsible for notifying the Hospital of any changes throughout the 
year.  The final decision regarding placement of Students rests with the Hospital.   
 
E. Selection of Qualified Students. The School is responsible for ensuring that all Students selected 
for participation in the clinical experience have satisfactorily completed the prerequisite portion 
of their curriculum and are prepared for effective participation in the clinical education phase of 
their overall program. The School will also use its best efforts to see that the clinical education 
experiences of the Students are conducted in such a manner as to enhance patient care.  The 
School will retain ultimate responsibility for the education of its Students. 
 
F. Licensure.  On an annual basis, the School shall ensure that all Faculty and Students have a 
current unencumbered Louisiana license (as applicable). 
 
G. Health Status of Faculty and Students.  The School is responsible for ensuring and certifying that 
each Participant has satisfied the required screening including, but not limited to, Tuberculin Skin 
Test within the past 12 months, influenza vaccine or declination waiver, and drug screening. 
School is also responsible for ensuring that the Students have no physical or mental health 
problems which would interfere with the clinical education experiences requested.  
 
H. Training and Certification. School shall provide prerequisite regulatory training to all Students 
including, but not limited to, BLS and OSHA Training for Bloodborne Pathogens and Airborne 
Pathogens and provide certification if requested by Hospital.  
 
I. The School shall verify that no Participant is now listed nor has been listed by a federal agency as 
excluded, debarred, suspended, or otherwise ineligible to participate in federal programs, 
including Medicare and Medicaid or is listed on the U.S. Treasury Office of Foreign Assets 
Control List of Specially Designated National and Blocked Persons (SDN).  
 
J. The School shall verify that each Student and/or Faculty Member has completed an acceptable 
drug screen and background check, both in accordance with Hospital policy as may be amended.  
 
 
3. Hospital Responsibilities.  The hospital designates employees from applicable departments to 
coordinate student credentialing and onboarding and ensure the following is performed and/or 
completed:  
A. Affiliation Agreement with Exhibit A between the Hospital and the School.  Responds to request 
for Affiliation by School and/or verifies that the Affiliation Agreement with an Exhibit A for each 
Program and proof of professional liability insurance for all participants are complete and current.  OC-048 
Page 3 of 5 
 
B. Student Agreement.  Verifies that each Student has signed a Student Agreement, Protected Health 
Information, Confidentiality and Security Agreement and Statement of Responsibility as 
delineated in Attachments 1, 2 and 3 of the Affiliation Agreement form. (See Section 1 above).  
 
C. Health Status of Faculty and Students.  Verifies that each faculty member and student has 
submitted required health documents. 
 
D. Background Check.   Verifies that School has certified that each Participant has passed a drug 
screen and a background check, in accordance with current Hospital policy.   
 
E. General Orientation.  Provides a clinical orientation to each Student which may include but is not 
limited to: mission of the organization, HIPAA guidelines, parking guidelines, fire safety issue, 
confidentiality, smoking policy, workplace violence, variance events, cultural diversity and 
sensitivity, patient rights, patient safety, infection control guidelines, hospital security, and 
corporate compliance.  Additional orientation will include the use of the EHR documentation 
system as appropriate.  
 
F. Scheduling.  The hospital-designated employee in the applicable department shall be responsible 
for processing the School’s requests for student placement and coordinating with the School the 
identification of specific dates and times for student placement, maintaining a current Student 
File with the names of all participating students and their assignments, and for ensuring all 
required documents are current prior to the beginning of training.   
 
G. Notification.  The hospital-designated employee in the applicable department is responsible for 
notifying the appropriate clinical departments at Hospital whenever a Clinical Instructor and a 
Student are participating in a clinical rotation.  This includes, but is not limited to, clinical area of 
care and Clinical Information Services. 
 
4. Clinical Instructors (School Faculty).   Clinical Instructors shall be responsible for the following:  
A. Rules and Regulations.  Complying with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations 
including, but not limited to, any applicable provisions of the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996, (“HIPAA”) regarding the protected health information s/he/they may 
encounter during their activities at Hospital.  They shall also comply with all rules and 
regulations of Hospital as set forth in its bylaws, policies and regulations, the Joint Commission 
(JC) and the Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, as amended.  
 
B. Computer Confidentiality.  Clinical Instructors needing access to OLOL electronic medical 
record system, must sign the “Systems Access and Confidentiality Agreement” and follow the 
applicable hospital policies to obtain access to the computer system. 
 
C. Name Tags.  Clinical Instructors must wear a name tag specifically stating his/her status as 
appropriate. 
 
D. Scheduling.  The School is responsible for providing the individual/department that coordinates 
clinical rotations with a master student rotation schedule, which should include a list of the names 
of Students, Student’s year in Program and Student’s dates of Rotation prior to the beginning of 
Rotation. The Clinical Instructor shall confirm the accurate list of students participating in the  OC-048 
Page 4 of 5 
clinical rotation to the Clinical Education Liaison, for nursing students at least 2 weeks before the 
rotation begins. 
 
E. Supervision.  The Clinical Instructors (Providers or Academic Clinical Instructors) and 
Preceptors (Hospital Employee) shall have joint supervision, as delineated in the Affiliation 
Agreement, of the students in all clinical activities. It is imperative that clinical instructors 
communicate and /or provide hospital staff with a set of the student’s clinical objectives and the 
level of clinical experience the students have attained.  Students will not provide direct patient 
care or perform procedures except under the supervision and guidance of their instructor.   
 
1) Direct Supervision: The supervising practitioner or clinical instructor is physically 
present next to the student and the patient. 
2) Indirect Supervision: The supervising practitioner or clinical instructor is physically 
within the hospital or other site of patient care and is immediately available to provide 
direct supervision to the student as the situation necessitates. 
 
If the instructor is not present to provide appropriate supervision during their clinical experience, 
the experience will be observational only, except those students who have signed an agreement 
with staff as preceptors. 
 
In the event the student is assigned to a Preceptor, the clinical instructor is to be available by 
phone and round on the student based on the student’s level of academic/clinical experience and 
interaction with the patient.  Requirements for the clinical instructor are outlined below:  
3) Undergraduate Direct Care-High Risk (Nursing):  Daily 
4) Undergraduate Direct Care-Low Risk (Radiology, Respiratory):  Weekly 
5) Undergraduate Indirect Care: Bimonthly 
6) Graduate: Twice/Semester 
 
If the School is out of state or greater than a 50-mile radius from the Hospital, School Faculty is 
expected to communicate with the Student’s Preceptor at least twice during the semester or more 
often if necessary. 
 
F. The patient and/or family is to be made aware that care is being provided by a student. It is 
understood by all parties that patients and /or families have a right to refuse care rendered by 
students.  The preceptor or hospital employee assigned to the patient, always retains the primary 
responsibility for the patient. 
           
G. Teaching.  The Clinical Instructors and/or Preceptors shall assign learning activities to the 
Student which support and enhance the educational outcomes identified in the Student’s course 
objectives and provide constructive feedback to the Student in relation to his/her performance in 
the clinical setting. 
 
H. Evaluations.   The hospital will provide an opportunity for clinical instructors and students to 
evaluate clinical experiences. Preceptors will evaluate Student performance in a timely manner on 
evaluation forms provided by the School Program. 
 
 
  OC-048 
Page 5 of 5 
5. Student Responsibilities.   
A. Prior to Students beginning clinical rotations, they shall submit the following: 
    
1) Student Rotator Application Form 
2) Student Agreement.  Student shall complete and sign the Student Agreement, Protected 
Health Information, Confidentiality and Security Agreement and Statement of 
Responsibility as shown in Attachments 1, 2 and 3 in the Affiliation Agreement form 
prior to beginning their clinical rotation. Included in the Student Rotator Application 
Form 
3) Statement of Responsibility Included in the Student Rotator Application Form 
 
4)Computer Confidentiality.  Student shall sign, with their faculty member the Computer 
“Systems Access and Confidentiality Agreement,” if s/he is to have access to the computer 
system as outlined herein. Included in the Student Rotator Application Form: 
Sponsoring Practitioner Letter (if applicable) 
Proof of current BLS Certification as required by clinical area) 
Proof of TB Skin Test with Copy of Test Results in past 12 months 
Proof of Influenza Vaccination * - (applicable if rotation dates are during active flu 
season) 
 
B. Name Tags.  Students shall wear a School/university/college name tag specifically stating his/her 
status as a student.  
 
C. Unsatisfactory Performance.  Failure to perform in a satisfactory manner and/or when his/her 
behavior is disruptive or detrimental to the Hospital and/or patients, will be cause for termination 
of clinical rotation without recourse or hearing.  The unsatisfactory performance will be reported 
directly to the Clinical Instructor and the School. 
 
D. Remuneration.  No fees for service rendered will be assessed by the Hospital to the School of the 
Student concerned; likewise, the Student will receive no remuneration from the Hospital 
simultaneously while s/he is functioning as a student.  The student may be employed by the 
Hospital outside of clinical hours as appropriate.   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
References: 
 
Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services Sixth Edition United States 
Conference of Catholic Bishops. (2016) ethical-religious-directives-catholic-health-service-sixth-
edition-2016-06.pdf (usccb.org) 