OC-047 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Elopement Policy Reference #: OrgClin/047 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: June 22, 2009 Last Review Date: June 24, 2024 
Last Revision Date:  June 24, 2024 
 
 
 
PURPOSE 
To establish guidelines to follow during elopement situations affiliated with Our Lady of the Lake 
Health (Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Our Lady of the Lake Ascension, Our Lady of 
the Lake Livingston, Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital, Our Lady of the Lake North Baton 
Rouge, Our Lady of the Lake Tau Building including adjacent Medical Office Buildings) 
 
DEFINITION 
• Elopement - When a patient wanders away, walks away, runs away, escapes, or otherwise leaves 
an around the clock care setting, including the emergency department, unsupervised, 
unauthorized, unnoticed, and/or prior to their scheduled discharge. 
 
• Against Medical Advice (AMA)- When a patient decides to leave a facility after being informed of 
and appreciating the risks of leaving without completing treatment.  (Fully competent patients are legally 
able to discharge themselves without completing treatment.) 
 
• Absent without Leave (AWOL)-a patient that leaves the premises without authorization. 
 
POLICY 
Patients admitted to the emergency department (ED) or an around the clock setting who leave the 
facility based on the elopement definition will be reported as an elopement. 
 
Staff may detain any patient attempting to leave the hospital facility or grounds who is on one of the 
following legal statuses: 
1. Formal Voluntary Admission to a Mental and Behavioral Health (MBH) unit (a planned 
placement to an inpatient MBH unit) 
2. Order of Protective Custody (OPC) 
3. Valid Physician’s Emergency Commitment (PEC) 
4. Valid Coroner’s Emergency Commitment (CEC) 
5. Judicial Commitment for mental health or substance abuse treatment (JC) 
 
 
PROCEDURES 
 
Patient admitted on an above noted Legal Status: 
1. Patient attempting to leave. 
a. If patient is attempting to leave, a staff member is to call a “Code White” for additional 
assistance and to attempt to deescalate the situation. OC-047 
Page 2 of 3 
2. If efforts by the staff are unsuccessful in keeping the patient on the unit or at the facility, or if the 
elopement was not witnessed by staff, the charge nurse or designee will immediately contact the 
House Manager/Supervisor and utilize Policy ECSE001 Code Pink Missing Person Plan.  
a. If the patient elopes, the “Code White” is cancelled. A Code Pink Adult PEC will be called to 
the PBX operator.  
b. A copy of the legal hold documents should be faxed to law enforcement. 
c. House Manager/Supervisor notifies the Hospital Administrator on Call (AOC), Risk 
Management and Regulatory Management 
d. If the patient is an MBH inpatient, the MBH unit Charge Nurse will notify the House 
Manager, MBH Nursing Director or Senior Director of Nursing and the Attending Physician 
or On Call physician. The MBH Nursing Director on call will notify the MBH Chain of 
Command and the Regulatory Department.  
e. Notification of the elopement should be made to all contact numbers available in the patient 
record. 
3. A complete description of the patient, including clothing being worn at the time the patient was last 
seen, is to be provided to people notified who will be searching for patient. 
4. If the patient’s location becomes known, law enforcement is notified of the location. 
5. The patient who has eloped is not discharged until an order is received from the attending physician 
and/or has not returned to the unit or facility within 4 hours. 
6. A description of the event(s) with specific time of incidents including the patient’s behavior, 
interventions employed, notification of physician and others, and other pertinent information, is 
documented in the patient care notes and in a safety event report. 
7. A note is made every shift as to the status of the patient until the patient is returned to the unit or 
discharged. 
 
 
Key Contact Phone Numbers  
a. Security (OLOL Baton Rouge – 765-8825; OLOL Livingston – 271-6050) 
b. Law Enforcement Notification   
1.) Tau Center (Charge nurse will contact) – Baton Rouge City Police (225)389-2000. 
2.) Regional Campus (Security will contact) - Baton Rouge City Police (225)389-
2000.  
                              3.) OLOL Livingston (Security will contact) - Livingston Parish Sheriff’s Office 
(225) 686-2241 
                              4.) North Baton Rouge ER (Charge nurse will contact) EBRSO on-site then phone 
Baton Rouge City Police (225) 389-2000 
5) OLOL Ascension (Security will contact) – Ascension Parish Sheriff’s Office 
6.) For other facilities, contact the law enforcement agency specific for your location.  
 
 
Patient admitted who is NOT on an above noted Legal Status: 
1. Patient attempting to leave or missing. 
a. If patient is attempting to leave a staff member should follow the hospital policy regarding 
Patients Leaving Against Medical Advice. 
b. If patient is missing, follow Policy ECSE001 Code Pink Missing Person Plan Policy  OC-047 
Page 3 of 3 
2. If the elopement was not witnessed by staff, the charge nurse or designee will immediately contact 
the following to locate the patient and encourage them to return to the hospital: 
a. Security  
b. Attending Physician or on call physician 
c. House Manager who notifies the Hospital Administrator On Call, Risk Management and 
Regulatory Management 
d. Page Operator utilizes Policy Code Pink Missing Person Plan policy to announce the person 
is missing. 
e. Medical Management to assist with discharge plans which may be finalized to assist with 
discharge of patient.   
3. A complete description of the patient, including clothing being worn at the time the patient was last 
seen, is to be provided to people notified who will be searching for patient. 
4. If there is concern for the patient’s safety the AOC will decide regarding notification of law 
enforcement and/or completing an Order of Protective Custody (OPC).  
a.  An OPC is completed by going to the coroner’s office and describing to them the reason the 
person should be returned to the facility for further evaluation. 
5. The patient who has eloped is not discharged until an order is received from the attending physician 
and/or has not returned to the unit or facility within 4 hours. 
6. A description of the event(s) including the patient’s behavior, interventions employed, notification 
of physician and others, and other pertinent information, including specific times is documented in 
the patient care notes and on a safety event report. 
7. A note is made every shift as to the status of the patient until the patient is returned to the unit or 
discharged. 
 
 
References: 
Policy ECSE001 Code Pink Missing Person Plan  
 
M.07.001 Mental Health Legal Status 
https://fmolhs.sharepoint.com/sites/TeamLink/Policy/FMOLHS/Operations/Care%20Management/CM.07.001_M
ental%20Health%20Health%20Legal%20Status%20(01.20.2021).pdf 
 
U. S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2015). Plain Language: A Promising Strategy for Clearly 
Communicating Health Information and Improving Health Literacy. Rockville: Office of Disease Prevention and 
Health Promotion.  
 
United States Department of Homeland Security. (2006). Plain Language Frequently Asked Questions (FAQS). 
Washington: Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
 
Appendix DTJC (v2020B2) (jointcommission.org) 
 