 
OrgClin 050 Palliative Sedation for Refractory suffering at end of life 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational - Clinical 
SUBJECT:  
Palliative sedation for refractory suffering at end 
of life 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
June 13, 2011 
 
REVISION DATE: 
November 13, 2023 
Reviewed  
December 9, 2024 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OrgClin 050  
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for treating refractory or intractable symptoms at the end of life to minimize unnecessary 
suffering. 
POLICY: 
“One of the primary purposes of medicine in caring for the dying is the relief of pain and the suffering caused 
by it.  Effective management of pain in all its forms is critical in the appropriate care of the dying.  The task of 
medicine is to care even when it cannot cure.”  Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care 
Services, Sixth Edition - Part 5 – Issues in Care for the Seriously Ill and Dying).   
 
Patients should be kept as free of pain as possible so that they may die comfortably and with dignity…Medicines 
capable of alleviating or suppressing pain may be given to a dying person, even if this therapy may indirectly 
shorten the person’s life so long as the intent is not to hasten death.  (Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic 
Health Care Services, Sixth Edition - # 61). 
 
The goal of palliative sedation is to relieve intolerable and intractable symptoms, not to hasten death. 
 
Palliative sedation will be used only when: 
1. The patient has a terminal illness 
2. The patient has intractable/refractory symptoms that cannot be adequately controlled despite aggressive 
efforts to identify a tolerable therapy within a tolerable time frame  
3. The patient is a do not resuscitate (DNR) 
4. Death is imminent (within days) 
 
Current hospital monitoring standards for conscious sedation are not applicable in the care of the dying patient.  
Palliative sedation can be provided outside the intensive care unit setting. 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
OrgClin 050 Palliative Sedation for Refractory suffering at end of life 
2 
Due to the complexity of care and decision making involved, the Palliative Care  and Hospice team must be 
participating in the care of the patient.   
 
Prior to initiation of palliative sedation, there must be a discussion with the patient and/or surrogate decision 
maker of the option of palliative sedation including clinical, ethical, and legal ramifications and this discussion 
will be documented in the physician progress note. 
 
Palliative sedation can be provided in the following settings: adult ICU, PCU, Oncology as well as PICU, 
Pediatric Oncology and Pediatric Progressive Care Unit.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Palliative Sedation: the use of sedative medication to relieve suffering in the dying patient resulting from 
distressing symptoms that cannot be controlled despite other aggressive measures.  
 
Refractory / intractable symptom must have the following three attributes: 
1. Aggressive efforts short of sedation fail to provide relief 
2. Additional invasive/noninvasive treatments are incapable of providing relief and 
3. Additional therapies are associated with excessive / unacceptable morbidity, unlikely to provide relief 
in a reasonable time frame. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
In principle, medications should be started at small doses and increased gradually until symptoms are palliated 
with minimum suppression of level of consciousness and undesirable effects. 
 
Ongoing nursing assessment of palliative sedation to include: 
• Severity of suffering (verbal complaints, facial expressions, body movements) 
• Level of consciousness (responses to verbal and physical stimulations in ordinary nursing care) 
• Undesirable effects (psychiatric symptoms, respiratory suppression, lowering of root of tongue, 
aspiration, and circulatory suppression) 
 
Nursing care of the patient should demonstrate respect for and dignity of the patient and includes talking to the 
patient, and maintaining a calm, peaceful environment.  Oral care, eye care, toileting, personal hygiene, and 
skin care should be provided. 
 
Care for the family should include listening to families’ concerns, supporting them in their grief and 
physical/psychological burdens.  Encourage the family to continue meaningful interaction i.e., talking and 
touching the patient and provide comfort interventions in a manner that is consoling to the patient. 
 
Family education should include information on the patient’s condition, degree of suffering, and anticipated 
changes.   
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and OLOL reserves the right to deviate from, 
revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion.  
OrgClin 050 Palliative Sedation for Refractory suffering at end of life 
3 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• AAHPM position statement on Palliative Sedation, September 15, 2006. 
 
• Braun, T. C., Hagen, N. A., and Clark, T., (2003).  Development of a clinical practice guideline for 
palliative sedation.  Journal of Palliative Medicine: 6, 345-350. 
 
• Kirk, T. W. and Mahon, M. M., (2010).  Salacz, M. E., and Weissman, D. E. (2005).  Controlled Sedation 
for Refractory Suffering: Part I and Part II.  Journal of Palliative Medicine: 8, 136-138. 
 
• Schuman, Z. D., Lynch, M., and Abrahm, J. L., (2005). Implementing institutional change: An 
institutional case study of palliative sedation.  Journal of Palliative Medicine: 8, 666-676. 
 
• United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, (2018), Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic 
Health Care Services (Sixth Edition). 
• Palliative Care Analgesic Infusion Therapy (NMA-025) 
ATTACHMENTS:  
•  ethical-religious-directives-catholic-health-service-sixth-edition-2016-06.pdf (usccb.org) 
 
 