OUR LABY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER

Section: Clinical

Policy Reference #: 0C-053

Last Date Reviewed: | September 26, 2016

Policy Manual: ! Organizational

Code Blue/Cardiopulmonary
Resuscitation BR Market -excluding
OLOLRMC and Children’s Hospital

August 8, 2013

Title:

Date of Origination:

Last Date Revised: October 14, 2024

PURPOSE:

To establish response protocols when a medical emergency exists 4t locations not at the Regional Medical
Center hospital campus to ensure the safest and best outcome for the patient.

Policy:
Based on an assessment of the populations served the following areas will have a crash cart, emergency box,
or emergency supplies available:
Crash Cart:

o Hospital Outpatient Departments and Clinics where: Moderate and/or Deep Sedation is used.
Emergency Box (AED, Ambu Bag, Oxygen, limited emergency medications):

e Urgent Care Clinic without attached ED

o Areas where contrast is used, and a Crash Cart is not available at the site.
Emergency Supplies (AED, Ambu Bag, and Oxvgen)

o Areas at sites not addressed above with either Crash Cart or Emergency Box per site.

All areas:

L. Any staff member who discoversa patient, visitor, and/or employee in néed of emergency care is
responsible for-activating the emergency medical procedure (CPR, etc.). The employee informs the
operator or staff that a Code Blue needs to be called (in areas where paging is available) and the location
of the emergency situation.

2. Inthe event the victim is a child (under the age of 15); the employee will tell the operator or staff that a
Pediatric Code Blue needs to be calied and the location of the emergency situation.

3. OLOL personnel initiate resuscitation procedures and call a Code Blue for all cardiac arrest or life-
threatening situations uinless the attending physician has writfen an order to the contrary.

4. Yor off-campus sites without an emergency room, staff will notify 911 of the emergency and give the
location within the site. Basic life support procedures will be continued until the arrival of a physician
and/or an order is réceived from a physician to cease resuscitation efforts.

PROCEDURE:
Campuses with a crash cart and no emergency room-on premises, will follow these guidelines:
1. A code team provides personnel and equipment to the Jocation,
2. RN’s, mid-fevel providers, and physicians responding to Code Blue will have Advanced Cardiac Life
Support (ACLS).
3. Crash carts are placed in areds that allow for staff observation when not in use.


A

Emergency Equipment
a. Prior to defibrillation ensure that the oxygen source is removed from the area/bed.
b. The charge nurse ordesignee will check Monitor/Defibrillator battery function once a maonth
and document on the Crash Cart Check Sheet.
Personnel will bring the crash cart to the emergency site.
The following personnel constitute the “Code Team™ and will respond to a "Code Blue"
notification/call (as staffing permits):
Any Physician at the site
RN
Nurse Leader or Designee
RN Recorder
Nurse assigned to the patient and other clinic staff
Anesthesia
Pharmacist
h. Additional staff should respond when necessary or as requested by the Code Team.
Responsibilities of Code Team Members
a. The:patient’s unit nurse and/or other unit staff:
i Notify 911 of the emergency
il. Call Code Blue-and initiate CPR
iii. Have erash eart-and cardiac board brought to patient’s room/location, bring
Defibrillator connect leads/pads to patient
iv. Remain with the patient to provide pertinent patient information/history.
v. Notify attending physician of events.
vi. Have patient’s chart, and rolling laptop if available, brought to the rooni/location.
vii. Record resuscitation events.on““Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Record”.
viii. Notify family.
ix. Atconclusion of the code, assure-the following has occurred:
1. A stocked cart from Central Supply has been exchanged for the used crash
cait.
2. Acopy of a completed “Cardiac Arrest Record™ is given to.the nurse manager.
This includes filling out the critique on back of the Code Sheet.

@ oo ae ot

b. Physician
i. Direct the Code Team
ii. Provides handoffto emergency personnel
iil. Provides telephone handoff to emergency department
c. Pharmacist (if available)
i. Dispenses:emergency medications.
ii. Prepares I'V fluids.
iii. Obtains additional medicatiens as needed.
d. Nursing staff performs CPR and assists with transport of patient to designated area,
e. RN draws requested blood work and delivers specimen to laboratory.

8. Checking the Crash Cart

a. The crash cart is checked daily by the charge nurse, or their designee and the completed crash

cart log is retained in the area

9. Crash Cart Exchanges Restocking of Crash Cart (after a Code)

a. If'the cart has been used for a Code Blue, the cart will be resealed with a red lock, indicating

~


that the cart has been used. These locks will be taped to. the medication drawer (not the
meédication tray).

b. Nursing staff wiil transport the sealed crash cart to the Pharmacy for removal of medication
trays.

c. Pharmacy will break the red lock (used after a code) and remove both drug trays. A patient
charge sheet will accompany the cart.

d. Once Pharmacy removes the drug trays, the cart is then brought to Centrai Supply.

After Central has completed restocking the cart, they will call Pharmacy.

f. Pharmacy will bring the two replacement medication trays to Central Supply and seal the cart
with a yellow lock and a yellow tag, indicating the earliest diug expiration date.

4

10. Restocking of Crash Cart (priorto expiration 'of drugs/supplies)

a. Crash Carts are ehecked by pharmacy each month for pending expiration of drugs.

b. The Pharmacy Tech will notify the Nurse Manager or designee if a crash cait requires an
exchange.

c. The Nurse Leader or designee will contact Central Supply via phone to exchange the cart for

one with more appropriate dating.

Central will transport the sealed crash cart to the pharmacy for restocking.

Pharmacy will break the yellow lock and remove both drug trays.

Once Pharmacy removes the drug trays, the cart is then brought to Central Supply.

After Central has completed restocking the cart, they will call Pharmacy.

Pharmacy will bring the two replacement medication trays to Central Supply and seal the cart

with a yellow lock and a yellow fag, indicating the earliest drug expiration date.

Fe oo

11. The responsible physician will review the arrest and resuscitation record for accuracy and

completeness.

12. An incident report will be submitted.

Campuses with an emergency room on premises, will followthese guidelines:
(reference hospital property description per Adm 01)

1.

2.

-
2.

A code team provides personnel and equipment (stretcher, AED/Emergency Box or crash cart, and
oxygen/Ambu-bag) to the location.
Eimergency personnel (RN’s, mid-level providers, and physicians) responding to Code Blue will have
Advanced Cardiac Life Suppert (ACLS).
The following personnel constitute the “Code Team™and will respond to a "Code Blue"
notification/call:
a. Any Emergency Room Physician and/or mid-level provider on duty in the Emergency Room
b. ‘RN
¢. Nurse Leader or Designee
d. Nurse Tech (if available)
e. Additional staff should respond when necessary or as requested by the Code Team.
Responsibilities of Code Team Members
a. The patient’s unit nurse and/or other unit/clinic staff:
i. Call Code Blue and initiate CPR
ii. Have AED brought to patient’s room/location, bring Defibrillator connect leads/pads
1o patient
iii. Remain with the patient to provide pertinent patient information/history.
iv. Notify attending physician of events.

[

v. Have patient’s chart, and rolling laptop if available, brought to the room/location.
vi. Record resuscitation events
vii. Notify family.
b. Emergency Room Physician and/or Mid-Level
viii. Direct the Code Team
ix. Receives handoff of patient to emergency personnel care.
c¢. Nursing staff performs CPR and assists with transport of patient to the Emergency
Déepartment.
5. Theresponsible physician will review the arrest and resuscitation record for accuracy and
completeness.
6. An incident report will b submitted.

Campuses with an emergency room (Ascension Campus) on premises with an inpatient sctting, will
follow these guidelines:

(For Children’s Hospital Campus, please refer to Policy NPP-038)
PROCEDURE

1. The employee first identifying the emergency situation presses the code blue button on the nurse call
console in the room to immediately aleit PBX and an employee dials the designated cxtension when
using a landline.

2. The employee informs:

a. The operator that a Code Blue needs to be called and the location of the emergency sitvation.

3. Basic life support procedures will be initiated and eontinued until the arrival of & physician and/or an

order is receiyed from a physician to cease resuscitation efforts.

4. The ECU physician shall direct the "code" until the arrival of the patient's physician or designee.

5. Emergency Equipment

a. Crash cart obtained from nearest location; for pediatric codes, universal crash carts will be used.
b. Prior to defibrillation ensure that the oxygen source is removed froim the patient’s bed.

¢. The charge nurse or designee will check Monitor/Defibrillator battery function once a month and
document on the Crash Cart Check Sheet.

6. Appropriately trained personnel respond to the Code Blue and constitute the Code team:

Physician

House Manager/Nurse Manager or Designee

Code Team RN Recorder

Unit Nurse assigned to the patient and other unit staff

Respiratory Therapist

Laboratory Personnel

Additional staff should respond when necessary oras requested by the Code team.

7. Follow the facility protocol for crash cart exchange

Arcas with an Emergency Box will follow these guidelines:
1. The following personnel constitute the “Code Team™ and will respond, as notified, to a "Code Blue"
notification/call:
a. Any Physician, Physician Assistant, and/or Nurse Practitioner at the site

RN

Nurse or MA Recorder

Nurse assigned to the patient and other elinic-staff

e. Additional staff should respond when necessary or as requested by the Code Team.

2. A code team provides personnel and equipment to the location.

Emergency medications are placed in areas that allow for staff observation when not in use.

4, Emergency Equipment

a. Priorto defibrillation ensure that the oxygen souice is removed from the patient’s area/bed.

5. The charge nurse or designee will check AED function weekly, Emergency Box and oxygen daily
and document on the Emergency Response Inventory check sheet. A note will be made when an area
is closed.

6. Personnel will bring the following to the emergency site:

a. AED
b. Emergency Box
c. Oxygen
7. Responsibilities of Code Team Members
a. The patieni’s unit.nurse and/or other unit staff:
i. Notify 911 of the emergency . !
ii. Call Code Blue and initiate CPR
iii. Have emergency equipment noted above to patient’s room/location and connect
leads/pads to patient i
iv. Remiain with the patient to provide pertinent patient information/history.
v. Notify attending physician of events.
vi. Have patient’s chart, and rolling laptop if available, brought to the room/locatiot.
vii. Record resuscitation events on “Medical Emergency Record™.
viii. Notify family.
ix. At conclusion of the code, assure the following has occurred:
1. Restock emergency supplies and oxygen
2. Notify pharmacy to restock emergency medications.
3. A copy of a completed “Medical Emergency Record” is given to the nurse
managet.

oo

i

b. Physician
i. Direct the Code Team
il. Provides handoff to-emergency personnel
iii. Provides telephone handofl to emergency department

c. Nursing staff performs CPR and assists with transport of patient to designated area.
8. Checking the Emergency supplies

a. The emergency supplies are checked daily by the charge nurse or their desigiree and the

completed Emergency Inventory Log is retained in the area.
9. Restocking of Emergency Box (after a code)

a. If the Emergency Box has been used fora Code Blue, the medication drawer will be resealed
with a red lock, indicating that the box has been used. These locks will be taped to the
medication drawer (not the medication tray).

Nursing staff will notify Pharmacy for replacement of medication tray.
Pharmacy will break the red lock (used after a code) and replace the drug tray. Pharmacy will
charge for the medications used.

o v

d. Pharmacy will:seal the drawer with a yellow lock and a yellow tag, indicating the earliest drug
expiration date.
e. Nursing or technician will restock supply drawers and reseal with blue locks and a blue tag,
indicating the earliest supply expiration date.
10. Restocking of Emergency Box (prior to expiration of drugs/supplies)
a. Medications
i. Emergency Boxes are checked by pharmacy each month for pending expiration of
drugs.
il. Pharmacy will replace any medication which will expire prior to-the next check.
iii. Pharmacy will seal the Emergency Box medication section with a yellow lock and a
yellow tag, indicating the earliest drug expiration date.

b. Supplies
i. Emergency Boxes are checked by nursing each business day. for pending expiration of
supplies.

i, Nursing or technician will replace any supplies whiclk will expire within seven days.
iii. Nursing or technician will seal the Emergency Box supply section with a blue lock
and a blue tag, indicating the earliest drug expiration date.
11. The responsible physician will review the Medical Emergency Record for accuracy-and
completeness.
12. An incident report will be submitted.

Areas with-an AED, Ambu, Oxygen will follow these guidelines:
1. The following personnel constitute the “Code Team” and will respond toa "Code Blue"

notification/call:
a. Any Physician, Physician Assistant, and/or Nurse Practitioner if onsite
b. RN

c. Nurse or MA Recorder (MHT Recorder for TAU)
d. Nurse assigned to the patient and other clinic staff
e. Additional staff should respond when necessary or as requested by the Code Tear.
2. Emergency Equipment
a. Prior to defibrillation ensure that the oxygen souree is removed from the patient’s area/bed.
b. The charge nurse or designee will check AED function weekly, Emergeney Box and oxygen
daily and document on the Emergency Response Inventory check sheet. A note will be made
when an area is closed.
3. Personnel will bring the following to the emergency site:

a. AED
b. Emergency Supplies Box
¢. Oxygen

4. Responsibilities of Code Team Members
a. The patient’s unit.nurse and/or other unit staff:
i. Notify 911 of'the emergency
ii. Call Code Blue and initiate CPR

iii. Have emergency equipment noted above 1o patient’s room/location and connect
leads/pads to patient

iv. Remain with the patient to provide pertinent patient infoimation/history.


v. Notify attending physician of events:
vi. Have patient’s chart, and rolling laptop if available, brought to the room/location.
vii. ‘Record resuscitation events on *Medical Emergency Record”.
viii. Notify family.
ix. At conclusion of the code, assure the following has occurred:
1. Restock emergency supplies and oxygen
2. A copy of a completed “Medical Emergency Record” is given to the nurse
nmanaget.
b. Physician (if onsite) / RN
i. Direct the Code Team
ii. Provides handoff to emergency personnel
ili. Provides telephone handoff to emergency department
c. Nursing staff performs CPR and assists with transport of patient to. designated area.

5. Checking the Emergency supplies
a. The emergency supplies are checked daily by the charge nurse, er their designee.and'the
completed Emergency Inventory Supply Logis retained in the area.
6. Restocking of Emergency Box (after a code)
a. Nursing will restock supplies and reseal with blue locks and a blue tag, indicating the earliest
supply expiration date.
7. Restocking of Emergency. Box (prior to expiration of drugs/supplies)
a. Supplies
i. Emergency Boxes are checked by nursing each business day for pending expiration of
supplics.
ii. Nursing will replace any supplies which will expire within seven days.
ili. Nursing will seal the Emergency Box supply seéction with a blue lock and a blue tag,
indicating the earliest drug expiration date.
8. The responsible physician will review the Medical Emergency Record for accuracy and
completeness.
9. An incident report will be submitted.

NOTE:
If an area does not have an AED, the area will follow basic life support and/or obtain an AED from the
nearest area.


