 
Clinical photography of wounds and pressure ulcers, and/or skin abnormalities 
1 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational / Clinical 
SUBJECT:  
Clinical photography of wounds and pressure ulcers, 
and/or skin abnormalities. 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
March 9, 2015 
REVIEW DATE:       
November 4, 2024 
REVISED DATE: 
November 4, 2024 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OC 055 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System, Inc. (“FMOLHS”) and its wholly owned sponsored 
organizations (collectively referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt System wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for utilizing clinical photography across the Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady 
Health System.  
POLICY: 
Clinical photography images will be used for medical care only.  A photograph can be part of the assessment 
and evaluation and complement documentation encompassing but not exclusive of the appearance of an injury, 
burn, wound, and pressure ulcer or skin abnormality.  Sexual assault images will not be taken by clinical staff.    
Only an approved application and/or hospital equipment will be used for clinical photography.  This applies to 
any photography being sent from a system facility to another entity for on-going treatment. 
The equipment used for clinical photography shall not come into contact with the patient. 
Once the picture is taken, the image is saved directly into the media file within Electronic Medical Record 
(EMR). The media file will automatically save the name of the person who uploaded the image and the time.  
Physicians, Advanced Practice Providers (APP), and WOC nurses may use approved application to insert a 
photograph into progress note. 
Instances in which a physician and/or other provider may take a clinical image outside of the EMR, the image 
must be stored on an encrypted account and in accordance with approval by Information System (IS) 
requirements.   
In the event, an image is saved to the incorrect patient, Health Information Management (HIM) should be 
contacted and a Chart Correction completed within EMR.   
Release of Image: 
Photographs may be released to the patient in accordance with a patient’s right to access and obtain a copy of 
their protected health information. 
 
Clinical photography of wounds and pressure ulcers, and/or skin abnormalities 
2 
Consent: 
The Consent to Treat form signed on admit allows for clinical photography; a separate consent is not necessary 
however a patient does have the right to refuse.  Use of clinical photography images for purposes of 
reproduction in illustrations, scholarly work and/or publications requires a separate consent.   
In cases of actual or suspected abuse and/or neglect of the pediatric or geriatric patients, consent does not have 
to be obtained from the legal guardian.  As a mandated reporter, if any images are taken of actual and/or 
suspected abuse or neglect, the Department of Health and Family Services must be notified. 
 Clinical photography must be used in compliance with applicable state and federal law as well as 
organizational policies and procedures.  HIPAA regulations regarding the photographs still apply and staff 
should only access photographs if they have clear need to review photographs as part of their regular work 
duties. 
 
LOPA: 
Louisiana Organ Procurement Agency (LOPA) clinical staff may use LOPA provided photographic devices to 
do clinical photography of organs, tissues and/or eyes after receiving written authorization for donation.  
Photographs taken by LOPA staff with these devices are uploaded to a LOPA/United Network for Organ 
Sharing (UNOS) secure site to aid in placement of organs, tissue and/or eyes as well as to when requested by 
law or the coroner to aid in investigations.  Once uploaded, the photos are deleted from the device.  
Photographs taken by LOPA do not become part of the deceased patient EMR. 
 
Guidelines for Clinical Photography: 
 
The following standards for clinical photography shall be utilized:   
• Approved patient identification process must be followed in accordance with the Organizational 
Policy. 
• To maintain the dignity of the patient and to provide privacy, screen and drape the patient as 
appropriate. 
• When the skin abnormality does not involve the face/head area, avoid imaging the face of the patient. 
• Whole body shots should not be taken unless clinically indicated. 
• Other individuals should not be discernable in images.  
• Anatomic location should be in the description field of the image.  If more than one skin abnormality is 
being photographed each image must have a discrete description of the location.  
  
Clinical photography of wounds and pressure ulcers, and/or skin abnormalities 
3 
 
• As appropriate and if clinically indicated, thoroughly clean the area, pressure ulcer, and/or skin 
abnormality and surrounding area before photographing in order to minimize the possibility of 
misinterpretation. 
o Include a wide area of healthy tissue in order to establish the precise location and scale of the 
wound. 
o Utilize a disposable measuring device on close up images in order to delineate wound size and 
depth. 
o Position the patient so the wound is clearly visible; do not reposition the patient between 
images when taking a series of images. 
o Place a blue pad or similar solid colored background beneath the limb/area to be photographed. 
o Clinical staff may hold patient and/or extremity to ascertain best image.  
o Photograph the skin abnormality from a distance of 2 to 3 feet to document anatomical location; 
close up photographs should be taken approximately 6 to 8 inches to document details. 
•  
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Bloemen, E., Rosen, T., Cline, J.A., Clark, S., Mulcare, M.R, Stern, M.E., . . .Hargarten, S.  (2016).  
Photographing Injuries in the acute care setting:  Development and Evaluation of a Standardized 
Protocol for Research, Forensics, and Clinical Practice.  Society for Academic Emergency Medicine, 
23, 653-659.  doi: 10.1111/acem.12955     
 
 
 