  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER   
Policy Manual:  Organizational  Section: Clinical    
  
Title:  
  
Life Support Credentialing Guidelines  
Policy Reference #:  OC058  
Supersedes #:    
Date of Origination:  August 24, 2015  Last Date Reviewed:   October 8, 2024  
 Last Date Revised:  February 1, 2023    
  
 PURPOSE: To describe the process and the employee’s responsibility in completing a Life Support 
course required at Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL).  
  
DEFINITIONS:  
  
ACLS – Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support 
 
BLS – Basic Life Support 
 
PALS – Pediatric Life Support 
 
NRP – Neonatal Resuscitation Program 
 
Clinical Education Center (CEC) is an OLOL unit that provides education for OLOL clinical employees. 
OLOL includes OLOL Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC), Ascension, Assumption, Children’s 
Hospital, Livingston, North Baton Rouge Emergency Departments, Lake Physician Group, LSU Health 
Baton Rouge, Healthcare Centers in Schools, Senior Services and Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady 
University.  
 
OLOL AHA Training Center is an AHA authorized Training Center.  
 
OLOL AHA Training Site is an AHA authorized Training Site that is not located at OLOL but is another 
hospital that is under the OLOL AHA Training Center.  
 
Hospital Affiliated AHA Training Center or Training Site includes an AHA Training Center and Training 
Site that includes a hospital name in the title. Cards from an AHA Training Center or Training Site that 
does not include a hospital name or Laerdal Medical Corporation, do not meet criteria for successful 
completion of a certification course.  
 
Proof of Current Certification for full-time and part-time employees is a signed AHA card from the OLOL 
AHA Center/Site which displays Laerdal Medical Corporation. For prn employees, it is an AHA card from the OLOL AHA Training Center, that includes Laerdal Medical Corporation, or a Training Site that 
displays Laerdal Medical Corporation or a hospital affiliated AHA Center or Site.  
  
Team Members that are credentialed through the Medical Staff Services, include Certified Registered 
Nurse Anesthetists, Nurse Practitioners, Physician Assistants, and Physicians.  
  
 
POLICY:  
 
1. New Team Members:  
a. When a job description requires BLS, new team members must provide proof of current 
certification prior to hire.  
b. The BLS certification must be current for a minimum of 60 days or greater from the first 
day of orientation. 
c. American Heart Association (AHA) cards, American Red Cross, and the Military Training 
Network (MTN) cards are the only cards accepted for new hires. American Red Cross is 
accepted on hire only.  
d. Life support cards that do not meet criteria mentioned above will not be accepted. Staff 
member will not be compliant until the Clinical Education Center has a valid card on file. 
e. In certain areas and in certain job roles there is also a requirement for ACLS, PALS and/or 
NRP. These certifications will be required to be obtained within six months of hire or as 
mandated by the hiring unit/department. Check with leader, educator or CEC for 
requirements related to job role. 
f.  First time participants in ACLS, excluding Pharmacy and Respiratory, must have 
successfully completed the OLOL Basic Electrocardiography (ECG) course or 
successfully passed the ECG challenge exam.  
g. First time participants in PALS who work in pediatric units, must have successfully 
passed the Pediatric ECG exam or the Pediatric OLOL Basic ECG course/challenge exam 
prior to PALS course. Team members that require PALS, but work in non-pediatric units, 
are required to have successfully completed the OLOL ECG course (pediatric or adult) 
prior to taking the PALS course. 
 
2. Current Full-time or Part-time Team Members 
a. All required certifications (BLS, and/or ACLS/PALS/NRP) must be kept current. 
b. Full-time and part-time team members who must maintain AHA certification, are required 
to take AHA course(s) through the OLOL AHA Training Center, located at OLOLRMC, 
OLOL Ascension, Children’s Hospital, or the Assumption campus. For employment 
locations that are greater than 25 miles away from the OLOL AHA Training Center or 
OLOL Training Site, the employee may take their certification course at an approved 
Affiliated OLOL AHA Training Site. For approved sites, contact the CEC at 225-765-
5220 prior to taking a course at a different location. 
c. Life support cards that do not meet criteria mentioned above will not be accepted. Staff 
member will not be compliant until the Clinical Education Center has a valid card on file. 
d. Team members that do not require a certification for their job role may purchase a course 
from the CEC. 
 3. PRN Team Members  
a. Must maintain AHA certifications BLS, and/or ACLS/PALS/NRP as required for job role. 
b. AHA certification courses must be completed at an OLOL AHA Training Center or at an 
approved Hospital Affiliated AHA Center or Site. Hospital Affiliated AHA Centers or 
Sites must include a hospital name in their title. Prior to taking a course at a site that is 
not a OLOL Training Center or Site, contact the CEC at 225-765-5220.  
c. PRN employees may request a complimentary life support certification by emailing 
ClinicalEducationCenter@fmolhs.org. After a team member or leader request a 
complimentary life support certification course, the employee will be held responsible to 
complete the course at an OLOL facility and will no longer be able to submit a 
certification card from another hospital. Complimentary courses can be requested to be 
assigned, in the LMS, 60 days prior to card expiration.   
d. Life support cards that do not meet criteria mentioned above will not be accepted. Staff 
member will not be compliant until the Clinical Education Center has a valid card on file. 
The Clinical Education Center must always have current life support card(s) on file. If a 
card is obtained from an approved hospital site and a complimentary course has not been 
requested, send a copy of the front and back of the certification card to 
ClinicalEducationCenter@fmolhs.org. 
e. Leaders of departments requiring NRP will maintain copies of NRP certification. 
 
4. Agency, Contract, or In-house Contract 
a. Must maintain AHA certifications BLS, and/or ACLS/PALS/NRP as required for job role. 
b. AHA certification courses must be completed at an OLOL AHA Training Center or at an 
approved Hospital Affiliated AHA Center or Site. Hospital Affiliated AHA Centers or 
Sites must include a hospital name in their title. Prior to taking a course at a site that is 
not a OLOL Training Center or Site, contact the CEC at 225-765-5220.  
c. Life support cards that do not meet criteria mentioned above will not be accepted. Staff 
member will not be compliant until the Clinical Education Center has a valid card on file. 
d. AHA Heartcode BLS, ACLS, and PALS is available for purchase at the Clinical 
Education Center. To purchase course, email ClinicalEducationCenter@fmolhs.org or 
call 225-765-5220.  
e. The Clinical Education Center must always have current life support card(s) on file. If a 
card is obtained from an approved hospital site send a copy of the front and back of the 
certification card to ClinicalEducationCenter@fmolhs.org. 
 
5. Medical Staff Services   
a. Team Members that are credentialed through the Medical Staff Services office, for 
primary or secondary job, will follow the Life Support certification guidelines of the 
Medical Staff Office.  
b. The OLOL AHA Training Center will not offer complimentary AHA BLS, ACLS and 
PALS courses to these team members.  
c. Medical Staff team members may purchase a course through the CEC. 
 
6.  FMLA 
a. Team members must consider certification status when planning leave (FMLA). b. If any certification will expire during scheduled leave, the team member is responsible to 
recertify prior to scheduled leave. 
c. If any certification expires during unscheduled leave, the team member is responsible to 
recertify 14 days upon return to work or date listed in the Learning Management System 
(LMS). 
d. Staff members needing access to the Learning Management System, after FMLA must 
submit approved Return to Work document from Employee Health. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. Complimentary Course 
a. The OLOL AHA Training Center offers complimentary BLS, ACLS and PALS course(s) 
to current full-time and part-time team members whose job roles require life support 
certification.  
b. The course is available in the LMS 60 days prior to certification expiration date.  
c. The Skills check-off is required for life support certification.  
d. Course completion includes successfully completing the online module and skills check 
off by the listed expiration date on the course in the LMS or on certification card.  
e. Team members must complete the online certification course and skills check-off during 
work hours.  
i. Leaders may allow employees time for course completion during non-work 
hours. This is either to be completed in employed unit or at the CEC.  
ii. Team members will only be compensated by Kronos clock in and clock out time. 
iii. Employees will not be compensated for work completed at home. 
f. PRN employees are responsible to give a copy of the front and back of certification 
card(s) to the CEC prior to certification expiration.  
g. The due date for team members taking ACLS or PALS for the first time, is the due date 
listed in the LMS. After listed due date, the employee will incur late fees. 
h. Any certification card that does not meet the Life Support guidelines will not be 
accepted. Late fees will apply if the appropriate AHA card is not received prior to 
expiration date. 
 
2. Team members will be charged late fees for expired certification card or course as listed below. 
a. BLS - $70.00  
b. ACLS - $230.00  
c. PALS - $235.00 
 
 
3. Team members with expired life support certification(s) or certification course(s) are not allowed 
to work.  
 
4. Failure by an employee to successfully complete all required competencies and education will 
result in disciplinary action up to suspension and including termination.  
 
5. NRP will be facilitated through the Children’s Hospital educator.  REFERENCES:  
  
American Heart Association  
OLOL AHA Training Center  
Policy OrgOps/HR/E/008  
   
  