 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organization Section: Clinical 
Title: Administrative Discharge Policy Policy Reference #: OrgClin/063 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: November 11, 2019 Last Date Reviewed: August 25, 2023 
Last Date Revised: September 23, 2024 
 
POLICY: 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (“OLOL”) and all property owned or operated by OLOL 
does not tolerate behavior that threatens maintaining a therapeutic environment for all patients.  We will 
use appropriate means including administrative discharge to prevent harm to patients, guests, and/or 
team members.    This policy can be utilized in conjunction with the Disruptive Behavior Plan for 
Patients and Guests Policy (ESCE021).  
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines to assist team members with risk assessment and management of patients who are 
engaging in disruptive behavior, with the goal of maintaining a safe environment for patients, guests, 
and team members. 
 
 
APPLICATION OF POLICY: 
The policy applies to any patient with intact decisional capacity, regardless of race, gender, creed or 
funding, exhibiting behavior that warrants administrative discharge and except when their behavior is a 
direct result of a psychiatric or substance induced disorder that precludes reality testing or appreciation 
of the consequences of such behavior (simply having a psychiatric or substance induced disorder does 
not automatically exempt a patient from this policy).   In addition, application can be utilized for any 
behavior as described below and in the Disruptive Behavior Plan for Patients and Guests Policy 
(ESCE021).  The policy is applicable to all patients without emergent medical conditions including 
patients that could benefit from continued medical care.  
 
 
BEHAVIOR THAT WARRANTS ADMINISTRATIVE DISCHARGE: 
Behavior that warrants administrative discharge means any conduct or behavior that interferes with or is 
inconsistent with a safe working environment; inhibits the ability to provide safe and effective patient 
care; or constitutes the physical or verbal abuse of others involved with the patient (including other 
patients, guests or team members) or the care being provided.  Disruptive behavior and disorderly 
conduct definitions can be found in the Disruptive Behavior Plan for Patients and/or Guests Policy 
(ESCE021).  Examples of such behavior can be but not limited to the following:  
 
1. Refusal to comply with reasonable requests from medical staff and/or OLOL team members, 
including refusal to comply with medical protocol and/or OLOL rules and regulations. 
2. Leaving assigned patient care area 
3. Possession or use of illegal drugs, alcohol, and use of tobacco products on OLOL premises, and  
 
guns or other weapons. 
4. Use of prescription medications that are not prescribed to the user. 
5. Use of substances or procedures that are not approved in writing (or electronically) by a member 
of the OLOL medical staff. 
6. Intentional interference with medical care such as manipulating IV pumps, IV lines, or 
“cheeking” medications. 
7. Disruptive confrontations, threats or verbally or physical intimidating behavior. 
8. Intentional failure to adhere to organizational rules and/or policies. 
 
 
PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTRATIVE DISCHARGE: 
 
The Administrative Discharge procedure is as follows: 
 
1. Prior to the administrative discharge the following documentation should be present in the 
medical record: 
a. Assessment and description of the behavior and how it was managed by the team 
members. 
b. Assessment of the patient’s clinical condition including stable vital signs and competency 
of the patient.  
c. Documentation of the steps taken, if any, prior to the administrative discharge  
2. When administrative discharge is requested, the House Manager will be notified by the unit 
leadership and will assess behavior.  The House Manager will determine if the behavior warrants 
administrative discharge per the policy and authorize the team to proceed with administrative 
discharge process.   
3. The Administrator on Call (of the OLOL Main Campus) will be notified of the administrative 
discharge as well as other members of leadership including nursing, care management, medical 
staff office, and any other applicable leader as needed.    
4. Discharge orders, prescriptions, and paperwork should be provided to the patient when possible 
and documented in the medical record.  
5. For continued medical needs to ensure continuity of care as appropriate, a list of alternate 
providers can be provided to the patient and reasonable assistance can be offered to make 
alternate arrangements for care when feasible.  
6. Patient should be escorted immediately off the patient care unit to a family member providing     
transportation or a ride share service can be utilized for patients without transportation.    If 
patient refuses to leave the property, security should be notified.   
7. A report in the patient safety event reporting software should be completed by the House    
Manager.  
8.  A workplace violence prevention safety flag is to be placed in the patient’s electronic medical 
record. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
IMMEDIATE THREAT: 
• If the disruptive behavior poses an immediate risk of violence, assault, or bodily harm to 
patients, guests, or team members in the immediate area, a Code White will be activated.  
Security will assist with the process of Administrative Discharge.    If at any point the behavior 
arises to the level of a criminal act, contact local law enforcement.   
 
Subsequent treatment of patients who have been administratively discharged: 
 
1. When a patient who has been Administratively Discharged subsequently presents himself/herself 
for treatment at an ambulatory setting, the physician may treat the patient or refer the patient to 
another facility for treatment. 
2. If the Administratively Discharged patient seeks care in the Emergency Department, a medical 
screening exam will be performed to determine the appropriate treatment.  
3. If hospitalization appears necessary or desirable, consideration should be given to transferring 
the patient elsewhere whenever the patient’s medical condition permits. All transfers must be 
handled in accordance with applicable policies and procedures.  
4. The treating physician should document that in his/her opinion, the patient’s condition is such 
that referral elsewhere for treatment is feasible.  
5. If a patient who has been Administratively Discharged must be admitted as an inpatient, the 
admitting and discharge departments should consult with the House Managers on duty regarding 
the patient’s assigned location. 
 