                                                                                                                                                    Page 1 of 2 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section:   Clinical 
Title: Vaccination Refusal 
Policy Reference #: OrgClin/064 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: December 30, 2020 Last Date Reviewed: July 9, 2024 
Last Date Revised: March 8, 2021 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the parents and guardians of our pediatric patients are well -informed of the importance of 
protecting against the acquisition of serious and lethal communicable illnesses by receiving immunizations. 
This policy also serves as a guide for the preservation of the safety of our clinics so all patients can be treated 
with minimal exposure to contagious diseases  and the management of  patients in our offices who have not 
received vaccines to protect immuo-compromised patients. 
DEFINITIONS: 
This policy applies to all employed pediatric ambulatory clinics. It is not applicable to inpatient or 
emergency care areas. 
“Vaccinations” mentioned in this policy shall specifically refer to the following vaccines: 
• Diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis (DTaP) vaccine 
• Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) vaccine 
• Measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine 
• Measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella (MMRV) vaccine  
• Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine (PCV13) 
• Polio vaccine 
• Rotavirus vaccine 
• Chickenpox (Varicella) vaccine 
 
POLICY: 
Providers will teach, advocate, promote and discuss the importance of vaccinations as the patient and 
provider relationship is cultivated . Attempts to make our organization’s stance on the importance of 
vaccinations known prior to any clinical visit are encouraged when possible.  
Providers will reserve the right to dismiss a patient due to a refusal to vaccinate if the provider believes this 
refusal is preventing a healthy provider -patient relationship. In that event, the standard patient dismissal 
policy and procedure should be followed (GN-019). In accordance with anti-discrimination laws, this right to 
dismiss based on a refusal to vaccinate does not apply if the stated reason for the refusal is a religious belief.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
At times, a patient or a parent/guardian will refuse vaccinations for either themselves or their dependent . In 
these situations, the provider will use these strategies to continue to manage the patient’s care.                                                                                                                                                     Page 2 of 2 
 
 
1. The provider will offer additional education to the patient, parent or guardian and ensure all 
questions/concerns have been addressed . Providers should d iscuss a reasonable time frame or “time 
period” for the patient to receive the immunizations.  
2. A continued refusal or the end of the agreed upon time  period to vaccinate should prompt the 
following actions by the provider: 
a. Place the order for the vaccine within EPIC.  
b. Defer (or have clinical staff defer) the vaccine order within EPIC with a reason of Patient 
Refused. The patient’s vaccine will clearly display that the vaccine was ordered and refused by 
the patient within the Immunizations Activity and Encounter report for that date of service.  
c. Have the patient, parent or guardian sign the Refusal to Vaccinate form (NM006f). 
d. When the refused vaccine is for an airborne illness, treat the unvaccinated individual as if s/he 
were always contagious.  
a. When possible, encourage the use of video visits . When scheduling in -clinic visits, 
encourage days or times when patient volume is lower.  
b. When inside the clinic, the patient may be asked to wear a mask that covers their nose and 
mouth. They should attempt to maintain a distance of at least six feet from others.  
c. The patient may also be asked to  wait outside the waiting room/clinic until the provider is 
ready for the examination, depending on the distancing capabilities within the clinic.  
e. Continue to advocate for the patient to receive the designated vaccines. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reference: Epic Tip Sheet Immunization Consent and Refusal Forms (Ambulatory) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 