 PH-03-30 
Page 1 of 2 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Clinical 
Title: Medications: Malignant Hyperthermia 
Policy Reference #: OrgClin/062 
Supersedes #: PH-03-30,         
PH-16-06C 
Date of Origination: 08/01/2000 Last Date Reviewed: July 6, 2023 
Last Date Revised: 8/9/2024 
 
 
 
PURPOSE:  to provide guidance in the rapid response to management of patients with malignant 
hyperthermia (MH) crisis. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Malignant hyperthermia:  a rare life-threatening condition usually triggered by exposure to certain drugs 
used for general anesthesia such as inhaled anesthetics (e.g. halothane, isoflurane, sevoflurane) and 
neuromuscular blockers (succinylcholine). 
 
POLICY: 
This policy applies anywhere that patients may be exposed to triggering agents. These areas are to include 
operating room (OR) core and adult/pediatric trauma.  Mediations to treat MH will be stored in the 
following locations: 
OLOL & Childrens: MH carts are stocked and maintained in OR Core areas and trauma areas. At least 3 
additional vials of Ryanodex are located in the main pharmacy.  
LSUHealth Baton Rouge PSC: One MH cart is stocked and located at entrance to OR core.  
 
Lake Ascension:  One MH cart is located inside the entrance to the Main OR. It is stocked with three vials 
of Ryanodex. One additional vial is kept in Pharmacy. 
 
SCREENING 
I. All patients undergoing general anesthesia should have a thorough assessment to determine risk 
of MH. Assessment should include the following questions: 
a. Is there a family history of MH? 
b. Have there ever been unexplained deaths or complications from anesthesia in any family 
members? 
c. Have you had any history of a muscle disorder, cola-colored urine, or unexplained high 
fever or muscle rigidity during surgery? 
II. If a patient is known to be MH susceptible, a fully stocked MH cart, ice, cold IV/irrigation 
solutions, and a cooling blanket should be immediately available.  PH-03-30 
Page 2 of 2 
 
III. Ryanodex prophylaxis should be considered on a case-by-case basis, but is not recommended for 
most MH susceptible patients.  
IV. In the event additional medication is needed, pharmacy personnel must be notified immediately. 
 
TREATMENT 
I. Treatment of MH must be started within 10 minutes of diagnosis/occurrence  
II. When pharmacists are made aware of MH cases, they are to forward the patient name and 
medical record number to the to the critical care clinical pharmacist for review. 
III. In the event of an MH crisis, The Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States 
(MHAUS) should be called at 1-800-644-9737 for any assistance and necessary documentation 
for their national registry. 
 