Holter SOP Respiratory Therapist: 
RMC, Ascension, Livingston, North, Assumption 
Order and Patient Data entry: 
1. Order placed by provider. (3-7 day or 8-15 day) 
2. Therapist reviews for accuracy in EPIC profile 
3. Locate Body Guardian Mini EL and check date located on the side of the box. Please make sure 
that device has not been shelved longer than 30 days, if so, this device should be charged or 
another device should be used for testing.  
4. Remove three serial labels located in setup box, these labels are used for device tracking and 
departmental logs.  
5. Enroll patient in Preventice Portal, https://secure.preventice.com/, or 
http://www.preventice.com/ 
6.  please user Patient view Login located at top right of user window.
 
a. Type your Username and Password and click Login. 
b. Click the Enrollment tab
 
c. *Enter the physician and patient information. Required fields are marked in yellow. * 
7. In the Patient Device Information section, make the following selections: 
•  Service Type: Holter.  
• Device: Body Guardian Mini. 
• Hook-up Location: Home or Office. Always Select OFFICE 
• Delivery Type: Given to Patient or Send to Patient. 
• Serial Number: Select or type the serial number for the device, if applicable. 
• Deploy Duration: Duration of the study. 
8. Complete the remaining fields, as appropriate. 
9. Click Enroll 
10. Click Save & Enroll 
11. If any required fields are empty, Patient View displays a message. Enter any missing. 
12. information and click Submit. 
*** If a physician is new or not found in drop “Ordering Physician” a NPI will be needed for the 
Physician, this information can be found on https://npiregistry.cms.hhs.gov/ 
Patient set-up: 
 
1. If hair is present, remove hair where the patient will place the Strip or the electrodes. 
Apply Strip or electrodes only to intact, clean skin. Do not apply over open wounds, 
lesions, infected, or inflamed areas. If you have skin allergies, hypersensitivities, or 
experience skin irritation while wearing the monitor, consult your doctor to select the 
most appropriate option. 
2. Thoroughly clean the area with soap and water. Dry the area completely. 
• Important: Do not abrade the skin. Do not use Nu Prep, alcohol wipes, or any solution not 
provided in the Preventice box. 
3. Do not apply any lotions or oils. 
4. Attach the Body Guardian Mini monitor to the Strip. 
• Place the Strip on a flat surface. 
• Slide the monitor into the black molding on the Strip until the micro-USB connector on the Strip 
is inserted completely into the monitor. 
• Ensure the connector on the Strip is inserted completely into the monitor. There should be no 
space showing between the black molding and the monitor. 
• Vertical placement (recommended) 
•  
• Note Ensure the uppermost arrow on the Strip on your chest is pointing up. 
• One finger below the Jugular Notch 
Horizontal placement 
If you are placing the monitor horizontally, place the right side of the Strip near the center of the chest 
over the sternum: 
 
 
5. Apply the Strip 
• Hold the monitor and Strip assembly and peel away backing (1) from the Strip. 
• Important: When removing the adhesive backing, make sure there are no folds or wrinkles in 
the patch, as this will damage the patch and prevent it from working properly. 
• Place the portion of the Strip with the adhesive exposed flat on your chest in one of the 
placement locations. 
• Slowly peel away backing (2) from the Strip as you press the Strip flat on your chest. Press the 
entire surface of the Strip against the skin to ensure it adheres.  
o Caution: Apply only to intact, clean skin. Do not apply over open wounds, lesions, 
infected, or inflamed areas. If you have skin allergies, hypersensitivities, or experience 
skin irritation while wearing the monitor, consult your doctor to select the most 
appropriate options. 
 
Power on the monitor: 
1. Press the power button once to power on the Body Guardian Mini 
 
If contact between the Strip or electrodes and the patient's skin is satisfactory: 
The monitor makes a quick series of three rising beeps and the green light blinks every 5 seconds. 
This means you are successfully monitoring. 
 
 
If contact between the Strip or electrodes and the patient's skin is NOT satisfactory: 
The monitor alerts you with two beeps every second. If this occurs revisit the previous steps to ensure 
that: The monitor is securely attached to the Strip, Bridge or ECG lead set, The Body Guardian Mini is 
properly placed and securely adhered to the patient's chest. 
2. Power on the monitor by pressing and releasing the center button on the monitor once. 
 
3. If the monitor does not beep twice every one second, you are successfully monitoring. 
 
Patient notes/Education: 
• The accessories (Strips, Bridge, and ECG lead set) are waterproof and can safely be submerged in 
water as deep as three feet. The monitor is waterproof when plugged into an accessory that 
does not leave the micro-USB port exposed. The micro-USB port should not be exposed to 
water. You do not need to remove Body Guardian Mini when showering or bathing. If you are 
swimming in water deeper than three feet, remove the monitor. If micro-USB connector on an 
unattached monitor is exposed to water, open air dry for at least 1 hour before reattaching to a 
strip, lead set or charger. 
• If you feel symptoms related to why your monitor was prescribed, such as dizziness, chest pain, 
or shortness of breath, press the Body Guardian Mini button once until you hear a beep. You 
can also manually record in the patient diary (located in setup box), write the date, time, 
and any symptoms that you experienced. When you finish monitoring, return the patient diary 
with the monitor. 
• Once setup is complete, please instruct the patient on how to send the device back to 
Preventice: 
 
1. Place all equipment into shipping box. 
2. Call 888-500-3522 for pickup at patient’s residence (preferred method) 
3. Any UPS or FedEx (no USPS) 
4. Failure to return device will result in additional charges billed to the patient. 
5. Please write the day on estimated Holter completion on the outside of BOX 
prior to patient leaving, this ensures Preventice knows the length of the study 
ordered.  
6. Educate on turning off device prior to closing box and shipping.  
7. If there are any issues with device, please make sure that the Patient contacts 
the customer service number to trouble shoot device. (888-500-3522) 24/7 
service is provided.  
 
Therapist will complete the charges in EPIC, under flowsheet
 
 
 
 
Once the Holter report is processed by Preventice and the report is ready to be read by a cardiologist,  
Kelly.Gondron@fmolhs.org, Kelly SaizanGondron, at LCA will link the report to an order in EPIC and 
assign to cardiologist. 
FOR PRACTICE ADMINISTRATION USERS: 
Billing:
 
 
*You can Filter as needed within excel, note that the CPT code reference column will need to be 
expanded to see all billable codes for each patient.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 