ECLS-012 (Pre-op ASC 7711) 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER-Ascension Campus 
Policy Manual: Pre-op ASC Ascension   Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for OLOLA ASC Pre-op 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 7711 ASC Pre-
op 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 03/05/2018 Review Date: 6/3/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exit signage above Waiting Room Door 
• Exit Signage above TV Monitors by Scheduling Desk 
• Adjacent Smoke Compartments include the following locations: 
o Surgery Waiting Room  
o OR Rooms 
 ECLS-012 (Pre-op ASC 7711) 
Page 2 of 3 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• The following team members will clear the egress routes of all stretchers, carts, and any other 
obstacles by relocating these items to the PACU: Registered Nurse or Designee 
• The following team members will ensure all fire doors on the unit are closed: Registered Nurse 
or Designee 
• The following team members will assist with moving patients and visitors to safety explaining 
“The hospital is conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety”: All Available Staff 
• The following staff members will prevent people from using the elevators: Registered Nurse or 
Designee 
• The following team members will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those 
with sensory or mobility disabilities: Registered Nurse or Designee 
• The following team members will ensure all employees are accounted for: Registered Nurse or 
Designee 
• The following team members will ensure each room is empty This position will mark the 
door/door frame with chalk to indicate the room is empty): Registered Nurse or Designee  
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• The Medical Gas Shut Off Valves is located in the hallway on the wall between pre-op and 
PACU, by the TV Monitors and between the Endo rooms  
• The Nurse Managers, OR Registered Nurse, and Anesthesiologist has the authority and may 
designate the authority to any staff member to turn off the medical gas.  
 
   Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments                           
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• For horizontal evacuations, we will use wheelchairs and stretchers for those that are not 
ambulatory. 
• · For vertical evacuations, we will use equipment such as stretcher mattresses and sheets. 
Additional sheets are located on the linen cart in the Supply hallway. 
• · We anticipate most patients to be partially ambulatory. If assistance is needed, the Manager or 
designee will seek help from the OR. 
     Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations.  
• Fire extinguisher is located between the Pre-op and PACU space 
• Manual pull stations for Pre-op are located in the hallway by the stairwell by the scheduling 
desk.    
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Medical Gas supplied to Pre-op/PACU would need to be turned off 
• Special patient population may include non-ambulatory patients due to anesthesia, specific 
surgery, or pain medication. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary Horizontal evacuation will be to the next smoke compartment in the Surgery Waiting ECLS-012 (Pre-op ASC 7711) 
Page 3 of 3 
Room  
• Secondary Horizontal evacuation will be next to the smoke compartment in Operating Rooms 
• Primary Vertical evacuation out of the building would be to exit through the stairwell to the 
first floor to the outside parking lot on the side of Medical Plaza II  
 