  
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE: Emergency Oxygen Failure Response 
 
DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care/Plant Services 
SOP No:  OLOLM-SOP  
AUTHOR: Shantelle Graves 
EFFECTIVE DATE: August 6, 2021 REVIEW DATE: August 6, 2021 
 
                                                                                                                                                                        SOP No: OLOLRMC-SOP11 
 Page 1 of 1 
 
Purpose:   
This SOP delineates the process to follow in the event of an Oxygen Delivery Failure. 
Procedure:   
When oxygen pressures on the unit drop below 40 psi, the team will begin the emergency response to deliver oxygen as 
needed to supply the ventilators, Bipaps, High-Flow Oxygen, and low-flow oxygen. When the oxygen pressure on a 
nursing unit drops, it should alarm. The charge nurse or respiratory therapist should call plant services at 765-8292. 
Plant services will then let the nursing unit know if the issue will be resolved quickly or if we need to use the emergency 
oxygen delivery system. 
 
Notifications  
1. As soon as plant services identifies a failure, the respiratory supervisor and the house manager should be 
notified immediately.  
2. The house manager will notify all units that will be affected.  
 
Responsibilities 
Charge Nurse –  
1. On the following units, the charge nurse would shut off the zone valve on units: COVCC, Med1, SDU1, Med5, and 
Nephrology 
2. Notify unit nurses of oxygen failure and assist with getting oxygen cylinders to all patients. 
3. Call central supply to get more E cylinders if there isn’t enough for all patients on O2. 
 
Bedside nurse –  
1. Place any patient that is on NC oxygen or non-heated high-flow NC on a portable E cylinder. 
2. Works with the respiratory therapist to transition all vent, bipap, and Vapotherm patients to the portable 
cylinders for each device. 
 
Respiratory Supervisor –  
1. Notify respiratory therapists of impacted areas. 
2. Turn on the 12 H cylinder bank for each unit affected.  
 
Respiratory Therapist –  
1. Transition all patients to an E cylinder that is on Vent, Bipap, Vapotherm 
2. Check with the nurse to make sure all other patients on Oxygen have been placed on an E-cylinder. 
 
Plant Services –  
1. Turn off the zone valve in the ceiling for SDU2.  
2. Turn on the 12 H cylinder bank located outside to feed SDU and SDU2 
3. Work on restoring the oxygen system and communicate with the respiratory supervisor and house manager. 
 