OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 1 of 2 
AU.102 
MORGUE/AUTOPSY MANUAL 
AU.102 
AUTOPSY CONSENT  
        Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By D Leger 9/6/22 11/2/2022 11/2/2022 
Lab Administration Review J Teague 10/13/22 Origination Date 
Laboratory Medical Director Review A Nunez 10/12/22 9/6/22 
 
PRINCIPLE 
Proper consent must be obtained and an Autopsy Consent form must be completed prior 
to any autopsies performed. Consent is obtained by the ordering physician or Patient Care 
Services at the facility.   
 
 
PROCEDURE 
Upon a patient’s death, it is the responsibility of the facility/physician to perform the 
following tasks:  
• Pronounce the patient deceased 
• Notify the next-of-kin or emergency contact person regarding the death of the 
patient.  The emergency contact(s) can usually be found in the patient’s medical 
record, if submitted by the patient 
• Complete the appropriate forms and notifications per facility policy.   
o Death Notification Form 
o Coroner Cases 
▪ If the case falls under the coroner’s jurisdiction, notify the 
coroner’s office that presides over the parish in which the incident 
occurred in conjunction with the House Supervisor 
o LOPA Notification  
o Autopsy Consent Form 
▪ Consent must be obtained from the legal next-of-kin 
• Dictate a death summary into the electronic health record 
• Complete the physician section of the Louisiana Electronic Event Registration 
System  (LEERS), the electronic death certificate, within 24 hours of notification 
from LEERS. 
• Provide a copy of the completed consent form to the pathologist and or their 
representative.   
 
 
CONSENT 
Any one of the following persons in the following order of priority, if there is no person 
in a prior class who is reasonably available, willing, and competent to act, is authorized 
and empowered to consent (either orally or otherwise) to any surgical or medical 
treatment or procedure, including autopsy (i.e., is the surrogate decision maker):  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY ADMINISTRATION 
BATON ROUGE, LA     70808 
Page 2 of 2 
AU.102 
 
1.  Any adult with capacity for him/herself (usually moot in the case of autopsy) 
2. The judicially appointed tutor or curator of the patient, if one has been 
appointed; 
3. An agent acting pursuant to a valid mandate specifically authorizing the agent 
to make healthcare decisions (i.e., healthcare power of attorney); 
4. The patient’s legal spouse (not common law spouse), if not judicially 
Separated (or divorced); 
5. Any adult child (including natural, adopted, foster, and step) of the patient; 
6. Any parent (including natural, adopted, foster and step), whether adult or 
minor, for his/her minor child; 
7. Any adult sibling (by birth, adoption, fostering, or marriage) of the patient; 
8. Any other adult ascendants or decedents of the patient; 
9. Any person temporarily standing in loco parentis, whether formally serving or 
not, for a minor under his/her care and any guardian for his ward.  
a. This person shall sign a NonLegal Custodian Affidavit form provided 
by the hospital and the completed form shall be scanned into the 
patient’s medical record. 
10. A person chosen by the interdisciplinary team to make recommendations on 
behalf of an individual with a developmental disability, if required. The team 
shall exercise discretion in choosing, by majority vote, the family member, 
friend, or other person most familiar with the individual or most capable of 
making the decision at issue; 
11. In rare circumstances, if none of the persons listed above are reasonably 
available, the patient’s attending physician shall have the discretion to provide 
or perform any surgical or medical treatment or procedures, including, but not 
limited to, an autopsy. 
a. Prior to taking such action, the attending physician shall document in 
the patient’s medical record the facts that establish what medical 
decisions need to be made and why those decisions are needed without 
undue delay, as well as the steps taken to obtain consent from the 
patient or another person authorized by law to give consent and then 
obtain confirmation from another physician, preferably the patient’s 
primary care physician if he/she is not the attending physician, of the 
patient’s condition and needed treatment that cannot be omitted 
without adversely affecting the patient’s condition or the quality of 
medical care rendered. 
b. The confirming physician shall personally examine the patient and 
document his/her assessment, findings, and recommendations in the 
patient’s medical record prior to the proposed treatment 
 
NOTE: If there is more than one (1) person who qualifies as capable of giving  
Consent within a particular category (i.e., multiple children), consent shall  
be given by a majority of those persons available for consultation. 
 
 