  
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE: Code Yellow Response DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOLM-SOP#51 
AUTHOR: Shantelle Graves 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 2/19/2019 Last REVIEW DATE: 12/22/2020 
 
                                                                                                                                                                         
No: OLOLM-SOP#51 
 Page 1 of 2 
 
Purpose:  The purpose of this plan is to define the Respiratory therapy response to a mass casualty incident. 
 
Procedure:   
A. Code Yellow is called 
B. Supervisor/Charge RT will text all team members the following message: “For all available, report to the 
Trauma ED blood gas lab in response to the Code Yellow.  Please bring a transport ventilator with circuit 
and a quick connect. 
C. The Director, Manager, Supervisor, or Charge RT will assume the “leader” role.  This will be determined by 
the highest level of hierarchy within the department. 
D. The Leader will contact the Command Center at 765-3429 and let them know of the staffing level/needs, 
supply needs, and/or need for oxygen tanks for the respiratory therapy department.  This will include the 
emergency ventilators stored in the Emergency closet.  If the Director or Manager is not present, the 
Leader will call the Director and then the Manager to notify them of the code yellow.  
E. The Leader will then assign a supervisor, or other leader, to “man” the rest of the house for all other 
patient care/therapist calls. This supervisor/charge therapist will then take the charge phone 225-202-
4578 and pager until the Code Yellow has ended. 
F. The Leader will then report to the blood gas lab. 
G. In the Trauma Blood Gas Lab, a large Post It sign will be placed on the wall, and the following locations 
will be listed:  
i. Trauma 1: will take care of all patients that come into this room 
ii. Trauma 2: will take care of all patients that come into this room 
iii. Trauma 3: will take care of all patients that come into this room 
iv. Trauma 4: will take care of all patients that come into this room 
v. CC1: will take care of all patients that come into this room 
vi. CC2: will take care of all patients that come into this room 
vii. Main ED to assist with current patient transport/movement out of the ED and other ED therapy 
that is ordered on existing patients 
viii. Runner: to assist with transports to the CT/Surgery/ICU 
ix. Trauma ED ABG room attendant: This team member will run all ABGs that are brought to the lab 
and manage the Work List. 
H. A therapist will be assigned to each area listed on the Post It sign 
I. The Leader will get the radio, turn it to the “ER” channel, and listen for incoming patients and conditions.  
The role of the Leader is to notify each RT as to what is coming in and provide resources as needed.  
J. The Leader will assign the 3rd-floor HVI RT to “man” the HVI during the Code Yellow for any emergency 
that may arise in the HVI ICUs   
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE: Code Yellow Response DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOLM-SOP#51 
AUTHOR: Shantelle Graves 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 2/19/2019 Last REVIEW DATE: 12/22/2020 
 
                                                                                                                                                                         
No: OLOLM-SOP#51 
 Page 2 of 2 
 
K. The Leader will assign the PCU RT to “man” the Main building and Tower during the Code Yellow for any 
emergency that may arise. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 