OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
 
SUBJECT:  Transporting patients on Advanced Oxygen 
Devices 
PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care  
                                (Nursing and Imaging impacted) 
Effective 
10/18/2018 
APPROVED BY:  Shantelle Graves, Director Respiratory Care       
Crystal Barkemeyer, Manager Respiratory Care  
Last review 
1/31/2022 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
The purpose of this procedure is to outline the process for transporting patients on advanced oxygen 
devices such as heated high flow nasal cannula and invasive or non-invasive positive pressure ventilation 
devices. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A. Process for transporting patients from nursing unit to nursing unit. This 
process includes all inpatient nursing units (ICU, PCU and acute floors).  
1. The physician places the transfer order. 
2. The unit staff receives the order and begins the process for transfer. 
3. The unit staff will notify the respiratory therapist (RT) assigned to the unit, 
and inform them of the transfer.  The communication from the unit staff to 
the RT should include the following: 
a. Name and location of patient 
b. Type of device the patient is on (ventilator, BiPAP, VPT, etc) 
c. Device settings  
d. Patient overall condition/reason for transfer 
e. Urgency of transfer/time expectation 
f.  The location of where the patient is transporting to 
 
4. Transport of patient on Bipap, ventilator or Vapotherm (VPT):  
a. Patients in the ICU will follow the transport policy NCA-015 and be 
accompanied by a nurse.  
b. Patients on the progressive care unit or acute care floors - The nurse 
and RT will discuss who will be going and needed on the transport 
(nurse, transporter, other).   
c. Patients on Vapotherm (VPT) devices will be transported on the VPT 
device when the flow rate is greater than or equal to 20 lpm or at the 
discretion of the respiratory therapists for flow rates less than 20 lpm.   
1. RT will let the nurse know if the patient does not meet criteria 
for the transport device.   
d. Patients receiving mechanical ventilation will be transported on a 
transport ventilator.   
e. Patients receiving non-invasive ventilation will be transported on the 
Bipap. 
5. Handoff of the patient will be given to each receiving clinician.  Nurse to 
nurse and RT to RT.  6. Gathering of equipment for transport: 
a. The unit staff will gather any nursing equipment needed for the 
transfer such as IV pumps, monitors (if needed per nursing policy), 
other medical devices at bedside.  
b. The respiratory therapists will gather all respiratory equipment needed 
for the transfer such as transport device, full oxygen cylinders, nebs or 
other respiratory equipment needed to travel with the patient.  
7. The patient will be transported and handed off to the receiving nurse and RT 
in the new location. Full report should be given between these team members 
for continuity of care.  
 
B. Process for transporting patients from nursing unit to imaging or procedural area.  
1. In Critical Care area: the ICU nurse will notify the assigned respiratory therapist to coordinate 
a time for transfer of the patient to imaging for the procedure. The nurse will then call 
imaging to schedule the time of the procedure as discussed with the RT. 
2. In Progressive care area – ventilated patients: The unit staff will notify the respiratory 
therapist in the morning to decide if the transport device is needed for the transport.   
a. Ventilator - Patients transported from the Progressive care unit will be transported to 
and from the unit with a nurse and therapist. 
3. In the acute care areas, Emergency Department and Progressive care area: The unit staff will 
notify the respiratory therapist to decide if the transport device is needed for the transport.    
a. Bipap – all patients on continuous Bipap will be transported on the Bipap. 
b. Vapotherm –  
1. If the patient does not need to transport with the device and/or flow is less than 
20 lpm, then treat as routine transport, nothing else to do. Upon the patient’s 
return to the unit, the respiratory therapist should be contacted to connect the 
patient back to the HFNC device.  
2. If the transport device is needed for the Vapotherm transport, then the 
following should occur:  
a. The unit staff will call the procedural area to notify them that the 
patient is a “respiratory patient”.  The imaging team will identify the 
order requisition as such.   
b. Prior to transport, the transporter will call the unit to notify the clinical 
team that a transporter will be on the unit in about 30 minutes to take 
the patient to the procedure.  
c. The unit staff will then call the RT to notify him/her of the transport 
and the approximate timeline.   
3. Vapotherm transport from the Emergency Department: the ED staff will 
notify the procedural area that the patient is a “respiratory patient” and verify 
with the imaging team that the area is ready to accept the patient. 
4. In the event that the procedural area becomes occupied by a higher priority 
(ex: trauma, etc) then the imaging department should call the ED staff back to 
notify them of the delay, and the transport will be held until the procedural 
area is available.  
4.  For all areas, all pediatric patients will be transported on the device, and adults that are on 
continuous non-invasive ventilation devices or high flow devices with a flow of 20 lpm or 
greater will require a transport device for the transfer.  
5.   For each transport, the unit staff and respiratory therapist will collect the equipment needed 
as described in section A.6 of this procedure.  
 C. Process in the Imaging Department for “respiratory patient” transported from Progressive 
Care units and Acute care units 
1. The transporter will identify the patient as a “respiratory patient” by the order requisition.  
2. The transporter will call the unit before leaving the imaging department to notify them of the 
time frame before the transport (usually 30-45 minutes). 
3. The transporter will take the patient and call the radiology department before leaving the 
nursing unit.  The radiology team will get the room ready for the patient to go directly into the 
procedure room without wait time.  
4. When the patient arrives in imaging, the patient is placed in the procedure room. 
5. The respiratory therapist will transition oxygen supply from portable tanks to piped oxygen 
supply on the wall.  
6. Either the respiratory therapist, transporter or rad tech will swap out the empty/partially 
empty tanks and get two full tanks to prepare for the transport back to the unit.  
7. For CT procedures or other short procedures, the transporter will remain in the radiology 
department for a round trip to take the patient back with the RT to the unit. The rad tech will 
direct the transporter on this for each patient.  
8. The patient will be transported back to the unit on the transport device and the clinical team 
on the unit will be notified of the patient’s return.  
9. The respiratory therapist will connect the patient back to the wall oxygen and conduct a 
complete patient assessment.   
 
D. Respiratory Care Department’s process for transporting patients on Heated high flow nasal 
cannula 
1. There will be three locations for the heated high flow transfer unit.  At the time the therapist 
is notified or aware of the transport, the therapist will obtain a transfer unit from the nearest 
available location.   
2. Therapist will identify unit is available, ensure unit has two oxygen tanks with > or = 1500 
PSI present on the unit; MUST have TWO oxygen tanks. 
3. Hook up high pressure O2 hoses to each tank. 
4. Complete log with date, time and location of transport 
5. Take transfer unit to the location of the patient transport. 
6. Once therapist completes the patient transport, the transfer unit should be cleaned with 
appropriate disinfectant per manufacturer guidelines. 
7. Unit should be returned to the proper location where unit is housed immediately after the 
patient transport is completed. 
8. Plug transfer unit into outlet to keep battery charging.   
9. Ensure empty tanks are removed from the transfer unit and placed into the “empty” oxygen 
rack 
10. Place two “full” oxygen tanks onto the transfer unit, then cover unit with a bag to indicate 
unit is “clean and ready for use” 
11. Complete the log for the transfer unit – write the time unit brought back to lab and indicate 
that oxygen tanks were replaced.   
 
 
 
 
 