  
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE:  Process for Self-Scheduling DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOL-SOP 
AUTHOR:  Sandra Winfrey 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  1/14/2024 REVIEW DATE: 1/10/2023 
 
PURPOSE: To establish a standard operating procedure for respiratory therapists to Self-scheduled, 
improve understanding, and increase team member satisfaction. 
PROCEDURE: Self Scheduling  
A. Method of Self Scheduling: 
1.  Staff will be divided into four groups according to seniority. Group D will be PRN 
Team members. 
2. The groups are as follows: Group A, Group B, Group C, and Group D. A team member 
may find his or her group in the mobile app or shiftwizard by clicking on the “Staff 
“icon. 
3. The start dates and deadlines for each group to schedule will be posted in the 
Respiratory Care Department. Each schedule will be for a six-week period. 
4. Requesting PTO and swapping will be determined as described in the PTO SOP. The 
scheduling supervisor will schedule holidays to be worked.  
5. The maximum number of team members per shift will be pre-set by the scheduling 
supervisor. This par will be determined by workload and minimum staffing levels set 
by the manager. 
6. The scheduling supervisor will preschedule weekend shifts. Weekend shifts include 
Friday, Saturday, and Sunday for the night shift and Saturday and Sunday for the day 
shift. 
7. Team members can only schedule shifts up to their FTE. Additional shifts will be open 
to all team members after group D schedules. Therefore, 1.0 full-time employees can 
schedule 3 shifts one week, and 4 shifts the second week. 0.9 Full-time employees 
can schedule 3shifts/wk., PT 2 shifts/week. and PRN 1shifts/wk. 
8. During the balancing of the schedule, the scheduling supervisor will only move an 
individual team member to a maximum of three shifts.    
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE:  Process for Self-Scheduling DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOL-SOP 
AUTHOR:  Sandra Winfrey 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  1/14/2024 REVIEW DATE: 1/10/2023 
 
9. During the balancing decisions to move a team member's self-scheduled shift, 
adequate staffing and coverage across all shifts will be provided, and skill level will be 
considered. 
B. Timeliness of Self Schedule: 
1. Each group will open at Midnight to begin self-scheduling and close at 23:45 the day 
before the next group begins to schedule.   
2 Each group will have 4 days to self-schedule.    
3. If a team member misses his self-scheduling time frame, please notify the 
Scheduling Supervisor for further instructions.   
C.  Responsibility of the Scheduling Supervisor  
1.   Monitor Self Scheduling and answer any questions staff may have. 
            2.   Post dates and deadlines for groups to schedule. 
           3.  If a team member -schedules shifts that are not in accordance with this SOP, the 
scheduling supervisor will remove that team member’s schedule, and they will be 
able to schedule with the last group.   
The shift wizard platform can be accessed through your mobile app or on your computer at 
fmolhs.myshiftwizard.com 