  
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE: Nitric Oxide Setup and Delivery DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOLRC-SOP# 
AUTHOR: Tim Cordes 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 5/1/2024 Last REVIEW DATE:  
 
                                                                                                                                                                         
No: OLOLRC-SOP# 
 Page 1 of 4 
 
Purpose:   
The purpose of this Standard Operating Procedure is to outline the systematic process for setting up, 
operating, and transitioning between consoles for Genosyl DS Delivery System designed to deliver Nitric 
Oxide (NO) therapy. By following this SOP, respiratory therapists ensure the safe and effective 
administration of NO therapy while maintaining equipment integrity and adherence to institutional 
protocols. 
 
1. The Genosyl DS delivery system consists of two consoles that are identical in operation. The components of each 
delivery module are: 
• Silver on-off power button 
• Nitric oxide delivery port.  
• Adaptive sensor port  
• nitric oxide manual ventilation port  
• Calibration port  
• Water trap with gas sample port. 
• Interactive touchscreen user interface.  
• Cassette access door 
• Two cassette bays  
2.  Genosyl DS Cassette 
       The cassette contains the material that will be converted to nitric oxide once activated. 
• Confirmed the cassette state window is blue.  
• The plastic perforation below the cassette state window has not been punctured. 
• The expiration date has not passed. 
•  If the cassette state window is not blue or the plastic perforation has been punctured. The 
material within the cassette has been inert and cannot dose nitric oxide gas.  
 
3. Ventilator Circuit Components and System Setup and Connections 
The components and accessories that make up the Genosyl DS delivery system circuit. 
1. Adaptive Sensor 
2. NO Gas Injection Adapter x 2 
3. Adapter 22mm ID 
4. Inline Breathing Circuit Filter 
5. GENOSYL DS Gas Lines: NO Injection Line (red) Sample Line (blue); Manual Ventilation Line (clear) 
6. Water Trap x 2 
7. Injection Line Filter  
8. GENOSYL DS Manual Ventilation Bag NO Adapter 
9. 6-inch corrugated tubing    
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE: Nitric Oxide Setup and Delivery DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOLRC-SOP# 
AUTHOR: Tim Cordes 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 5/1/2024 Last REVIEW DATE:  
 
                                                                                                                                                                         
No: OLOLRC-SOP# 
 Page 2 of 4 
 
1. We will establish connections to the console and a standard ventilator circuit. Push and twist. Clockwise, 
the short Y end of the red NO injection line to the red NO delivery port on the front panel of the top 
console. 
2. Push and twist. Clockwise, the short Y end of the blue sample line to the gas sample port on the front of 
the water trap that is attached to the top console. 
3. Repeat connections for the red NO injection line and the blue sample line on the bottom console.  
4. Connect the adaptive sensor cable to the adaptive sensor port on the console that will be used to dose 
genocidal.  
5. Connect the adaptive sensor to the adaptive sensor cable by aligning the gold tabs and snapping the 
connector in place.  
6. Connect the adaptive sensor to the injection adapter. 
7. Connect the red NO injection line to the injection adapter.  
8. Connect the inline breathing circuit filter to the distal end of the injection adapter.  
9. Place the injection assembly on the dry side of the circuit before the heater humidifier.  
10. Push and twist clockwise. The lure lock collar of the sample line onto the sample port of the gas sample 
tee. Place the gas sample T in the inspiratory limb of the patient's circuit. Gas sample T should be placed 
six to 12 inches from the patient circuit Y.  
11. Ensure the blue stopcock valve is in the open position. 
12. To set up the manual ventilation connection, push and twist the clear line to the end of the manual 
ventilation line clockwise to the manual ventilation port on the front panel of the top and bottom console. 
Connect the manual ventilation line to the. NO injection port of the manual. Ventilation bag and NO 
adapter 
 
 
Ventilator 
    Heater   
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE: Nitric Oxide Setup and Delivery DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOLRC-SOP# 
AUTHOR: Tim Cordes 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 5/1/2024 Last REVIEW DATE:  
 
                                                                                                                                                                         
No: OLOLRC-SOP# 
 Page 3 of 4 
 
 
4. System Startup 
• Ensure the power cord is firmly seated in the power supply and connected to the back of each console.  
• Ensure the black rocker power switch is pushed downward towards the power connector.  
• Press the silver power buttons on both consoles. 
• The display screens will illuminate, and the consoles will beep. Indicating the power is on. 
 
5. Cassette Insertion & Water Trap/Sample Line Leak Test 
• You will need two cassettes for the dosing console and at least one for the backup console. 
Confirmed the cassette state window on each cassette is blue and the plastic perforation below the 
cassette state window has not been punctured. Check the expiration date for each cassette to 
ensure it is not expired.  
• Open the cassette, access doors, and insert two cassettes into the dosing console and at least one 
cassette into the backup console by pushing the middle of each cassette until it clicks, indicating 
proper seating.  
• The consoles will acknowledge that a cassette has been inserted.  
• A sample line leak test will automatically appear on both consoles. Follow the on-screen prompts to 
complete the water trap sample line leak test. First, close the blue stopcock located at the end of 
the blue sample line. Once the test is complete. Reopen the stopcock to the same position as 
pictured on the screen and press accept.   
 
6. Cassette Activation/ Nitric Oxide Dosing 
• Entering the prescribed dose of nitric oxide is the next step.  
• Press the set button on the primary console, which has the adaptive sensor connected. You will 
notice that 20 PPM is pre-populated. You may use the numeric keypad to change the dose by simply 
typing over it and pressing OK. The console will activate one of the two cassettes and begin dosing 
NO at the enter dose. 
•  If the set button is not present on the screen. Ensure there is flow through the patient's respiratory 
device and the adaptive sensor icon is green with an arrow.  
• When there isn't an adaptive sensor connected. Press the set button. Select the total flow range on 
the user interface that matches the flow of the patient's gas delivery system bias flow and minute 
ventilation. Enter the prescribed dose of nitric oxide and press OK.   
7. Manual Ventilation & Dosing 
• Press the button and switch to manual on the dosing console. Follow the onscreen prompts, which ask 
you to ensure the clear NO manual ventilation line is attached to the manual ventilation port on the 
front panel. Then press confirm.    
  
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
TITLE: Nitric Oxide Setup and Delivery DEPARTMENT:  Respiratory Care 
SOP No:  OLOLRC-SOP# 
AUTHOR: Tim Cordes 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 5/1/2024 Last REVIEW DATE:  
 
                                                                                                                                                                         
No: OLOLRC-SOP# 
 Page 4 of 4 
 
• Manual nitric oxide dosing will default to the set dose in primary mode. The dilution flow rate will 
default to 10 liters per minute. Ensure this matches the flow through your manual ventilation system. If 
an adjustment of the nitric oxide concentration is required. Press the green up or down arrows. If an 
adjustment to the dilution flow rate is required. Press the LPM value, and a drop-down menu will 
expand. 
•  To return to primary mode once manual ventilation is complete. Select switch to primary. Follow the 
on-screen prompts and then press confirm. If the adaptive sensor is not connected, select switch to 
primary and select the total flow range on the user interface that correlates with the flow of the 
patient's gas delivery system. Press OK and then press confirm. The NO dose that was used during 
manual ventilation will automatically carry over to the primary. 
 
8. Cassette Transition 
• When a cassette approaches depletion, the console will automatically transition from the actively dosing 
cassette to the secondary cassette. This is shown by a moving arrow that indicates which cassette the 
console is transitioning. Once the transition is complete, the console will alert you to which cassette 
needs to be replaced with a new one.   
 
9. Console Use as a Backup 
• The backup console should be used to maintain Genosyl DS delivery of NO in the unlikely event of 
abrupt discontinuation. Press the set button on the backup console. Enter the dose, select the 
appropriate total flow range, and press OK. The console will activate one of the two cassettes and begin 
dosing Genosyl DS delivery at the entered dose. if the adaptive sensor was connected, unplug the 
adaptive sensor cable and move it to the newly activated backup console, which is now your dosing 
console. 
10. GENOSYL Delivery System- Console Shutdown  
• When you are finished using the system, follow these steps for shutdown. Ensure the target dose is set 
to 0. If the Settings tab is not displayed, press the menu tab to access the sub-level tabs. Press the 
settings tab on the display menu.  
• Press the red system Shutdown icon. Press confirm to shut down. The consoles will eject the cassettes 
during the system shutdown. Wait until the console shuts down and the display screen appears blank 
prior to proceeding. Repeat the steps for the other console.  
• Open the cassette access door and remove the cassettes by pulling them straight out. Verify the color of 
each cassette state window. The ones that are no longer blue have been used and can be discarded. The 
blue ones can still be used. Close the cassette access door. 
 
 