OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER

Finance

Policy Manual: | Organizational Section:

Policy Reference #:
Supersedes #:
Last Date Reviewed:

OrgOps/FN/002
August 1, 2011

Title:" Vendor Selection/Formal Bid

Date of Origination: | June 28, 1996

Last Date Revised: | November 4, 2011

APPLIES TO:
Our Lady of the Lake, Regional Medical Center and its wholly owned subsidiaries.

PURPOSE:
To ensure good stewardship of resources through a systematic vendor selection process for the purpose of
obtaining fair and reasonable pricing for goods and services through a competitive marketplace.

DEFINITIONS:
1. Requesting Department: the Department Director or Project Owner seeking to make a purchase that

meets the criteria as outlined in this policy.

2. Non-purchase Order Purchase: acquisition of goods or services payable through a contractual
agreement or payment voucher.

3. Identified Expert: a person identified by Materials Management and/or Senior Management as an
“expert” in a specific area regarding the vendor selection for a particular purchase. Some examples,
but not limited to, are an area physician, nurse or other clinician, accountant, architect, engineer,
college administrator, procurement/contract specialist, etc. This designated Identified Expert would
become part of the team for the vendor selection/formal bid process.

POLICY:

Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center and its wholly owned subsidiaries shall use a vendor
selection process for the purchase of goods and services in accordance with guidelines outlined in this
policy. As part of the vendor selection process, purchases of goods and services, capital expenditures, or
construction/renovation projects, meeting the criteria outlined in this policy must follow the formal bid
process.

PROCEDURES:
1. Information Systems/Technology purchases are processed through FMOLHS Information Systems

and are not covered in this policy. Refer to FMOLHS Information Systems for the applicable policy
and procedures.

2. Goods or services that qualify as a non-purchase order purchase, capital equipment, or construction
projects with an aggregate cost of less than $50,000 are not required to use the formal bid process.
The Requesting Department/Project Owner should refer to the specific policy for Corporate

Policy Reference Number
Page 1 of 4

Purchasing OrgOps/GN/002, Capital Equipment OrgOps/FN/001, or Construction/Renovation
Policy OrgOps/GN/0037, for the applicable procedures. Also refer to the Levels of Authorization
Policy OrgOps/GN/009 for approvals and authorization to purchase.

Goods or services or capital equipment with an aggregate cost equal to $50,000 but less than
$250,000, will require a minimum of three (3) documented price quotes from qualified vendors.
Documented price quotes must be attached to the respective purchase request form. Any exception
to this procedure requires written documentation approved by the Chief Executive Officer (CEO),
Chief Financial Officer (CFO), or Chief Operating Officer (COO).

In the case of a single source vendor, documentation and approval is required by respective
Vice President (VP) or VP Finance. Single source vendors should occur under exceptional and
limited circumstances.

For construction/renovation projects the vendor selection/formal bid process must be followed
as stated in the Construction/Renovation Policy OrgOps/GN/0037, below:

Contracting and Bids

a.

L

OLOL will solicit individual contractors for bids on an invitational basis. OLOLRMC
continually monitors its existing contractor pool for performance characteristics, and
evaluates new contractors who indicate interest in construction.

The contracts process at OLOL is designed to ensure that the best-qualified contractors
perform construction work. This means that contractors who have successfully completed
OLOLRMC projects will have preferred bidding status so long as an active degree of bid
participation and high quality work continues. Maintaining an active bid policy allows new
contractors to establish same consideration for bid work as a contractor who has worked at
OLOL before. Conversely, the process ensures that both “old” and “new” contractors must
continue to perform well and offer reasonably priced construction services in order to
maintain their bidding status.

Those contractors who participate in a high percentage of bids to which invited, and who
continually submit viable, competitive bids, will receive continued consideration, pending
the execution of quality work, coordination, and other factors. Contractors not actively
participating in the bid process may be eliminated from future competitive bids.

4. Major Groups and Specialty Construction Groups:

a. Contractors wishing to be considered for work in a particular specialty area must
request for the classification, in writing, to the Assistant Vice President (AVP) of
Facilities and Construction.

b. Major Construction Groups:

= General Contractors
= Electrical
= Mechanical

c. All construction disciplines not listed in the Major Groups are considered to be
“specialized” types of construction work. At OLOL, these construction specialties
are required less frequently than the major groups are used.

d. From time to time, projects may arise within the Major groups wherein specialized
expertise and/or adequate contractor resources are required for a successful project
outcome. In addition, the project may present special circumstances such as: time
constraints, a combination of licenses and/or construction skills, specialized

Policy Reference Number
Page 2 of 4

construction techniques, relevant prior experience, or other relevant considerations.
In such cases and in the best interest of OLOL, the CEO reserves the right to directly
solicit contractors and/or vendors possessing these specialized qualifications.
5. The Vendor Selection/Formal Bid Policy (OrgOps/FN/002) is expected to be followed to
request and approve a formal bid and negotiate contracts for construction projects.
6. The selected bid will be forwarded to the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) for approval and
the appropriate documentation will be prepared for FMOLHS Legal.

For additional requirements applicable to the specific purchase refer to the respective policy, i.e.,
Corporate  Purchasing ~ OrgOps/GN/002; ~ Capital ~ Equipment  OrgOps/FN/00I,  or
Construction/Renovation Policy OrgOps/GN/0037. For approvals and authorization to purchase,
refer to the Levels of Authorization Policy OrgOps/GN/009.

4. Criteria for a Formal Bid:

A Formal Bid will be required if any of the following criteria are met:

a. Any purchase involving an identified conflict of interest as defined in OLOLRMC Conflict of
Interest Policy, OrgOps/ET/002, for goods or services, capital equipment, or construction
project;

b. If, in the discretion of the Identified Expert, as defined in this policy, Project Manager, or VP, the
purchase warrants a formal bid;

c. Any purchase of goods or services, capital equipment, or construction project with an aggregate
cost equal to or greater than $250,000; unless an exception is documented and approved by the
CEO;

d. All contractual relationships at their termination involving the purchase of goods or services that
have a term of three years or greater.

5. Procedure for initiating a Formal Bid:
a. Approvals must be obtained in accordance with the Levels of Authorization Policy

OrgOps/GN/009.

b. The approved request (i.e., requisition, Capital Expense Requisition Form, PURI17, or
Construction Project Request Form) is submitted by the Requesting Department/Project Owner
to FMOLHS Materials Management to initiate the Formal Bid process. The request will include
a detailed specification of the goods or services and any potential vendors known who may
provide the goods or services requested.

c. FMOLHS Materials Management, or the Identified Expert, will conduct and manage the vendor
selection and Formal Bid process in partnership with the respective Project Owner, VP, and
other designated management representatives.

d. FMOLHS Materials Management shall maintain all documentation related to the Vendor
selection and/or Formal Bid process in accordance with the Records Retention policy. The
Requesting Department/Project Manager shall maintain all other documentation relating to the
project.

Policy Reference Number
Page 3 of 4

e. A minimum of three (3) qualified vendors will be invited to submit bids. The only exception to
this guideline would be when sufficient qualified vendors who could meet the defined
specifications and requirements cannot be identified. Insufficient qualified vendors must be
documented and approved by VP Finance.

f. A written request for Formal Bid outlining the specifications and requirements will be sent to
selected qualified vendors. FMOLHS and entity standard terms and conditions will be included
in the request as well as a specific deadline for receiving responses. FMOLHS Materials
Management, or the Identified Expert, will receive and hold the sealed responses until the
formal opening session. Each sealed response will be date and time stamped upon receipt. Any
formal bids received past the deadline, will not be considered.

g. Materials Management, the Identified Expert, the Requesting Department/Project Owner,
respective VP, VP Finance, and other designated management shall be present for the opening
session.

h. The responses will be evaluated by Materials Management, the Identified Expert, Project
Owner, respective VP, VP Finance, and other designated management. Materials Management
shall be responsible for notification of final decision to the participating vendors.

In order to ensure costs are fair and reasonable, evaluations may be performed at the discretion of FMOLHS
Materials Management.

REFERENCES:

Levels of Authorization Policy, OrgOps/GN/009
Capital Acquisition Policy, OrgOps/FN/001

Corporate Purchasing Policy, OrgOps/GN/002
Construction and Renovation Policy, OrgOps/GN0037
Conflict of Interest Policy, OrgOps/ET/002

FMOLHS IS Policy, IS001; IS002; 1IS003

SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS
Documented Price Quotes Form

Approved by:

K. Scott Wester, Chief Executive Officer

Policy Reference Number
Page 4 of 4

