 OO-GN-019 
Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: General 
Title: Safety Event (Incident or Variance) 
Reporting 
Policy Reference #: OrgOps/GN/019 
Supersedes #: ECSF007 
Date of Origination: May 1980 Last Review Date: December 26, 2024 
Last Revision Date: November 13, 2023 
 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to establish a systematic and consistent approach for reporting safety events 
that occur within Our Lady of the Lake Health. The aim is to ensure that all safety events are reported, 
analyzed, and addressed in a timely manner to prevent recurrence and improve patient safety. 
 
SCOPE 
This policy applies to all employees, medical staff, and contractors, who work within Our Lady of the 
Lake Health. 
 
DEFINITIONS 
A. First Aid - care which is provided in the Emergency Care Unit and does not include any services for 
follow up care or hospital admission. 
B. Safety event (variance or incident) – any occurrence, which deviates from policy or procedure of the 
hospital, interrupts orderly routine care, or exposes the hospital to risk. 
a. Near Miss Safety Event – refers to an event that could have resulted in harm to a patient 
but did not. 
b. Actual Safety Event – a safety event which reaches a patient and may result in no harm, 
temporary harm, severe harm, or death. Refers to an event which impacts the patient in 
such a way that the patient may require additional treatment or monitoring, prolonged 
hospitalization, or where the patient has experienced serious physical or emotional harm 
or death. 
E. Safety Event Reporter: Any employee, medical staff member or contract worker who enters a safety 
event in the safety event reporting system.  
F. Root Cause Analysis (RCA): a systematic process used to identify the underlying or fundamental 
causes of an issue, problem, or event. The goal of RCA is to determine what happened, why it 
happened, and how to prevent it from happening again in the future. It is a structured approach that 
helps organizations and individuals investigate and understand the root causes of problems rather 
than just addressing the symptoms. 
G. Visitor – A non-employee and may include students, volunteers, medical staff members, and 
contract workers. 
 
POLICY: 
Safety events are opportunities for learning and improvement through a transparent and non-punitive 
approach to reporting and to use the data to evaluate the culture of safety and quality of care. 
 
A. A high priority is placed upon extending assistance to patients, visitors, medical staff and employees.  
If injury is involved, arrangements for providing first aid should be initiated without delay. First aid 
should never be delayed.  If the injured individual experiences an actual safety event, see policies for  OO-GN-019 
Page 2 of 5 
Disclosure of Unanticipated Outcome, Medical Errors, (OC-007) and/or Sentinel Events and Root 
Cause Analysis  (OO-GN-018). 
 
B. Safety Event Reports are considered hospital documents and part of the quality review process.  
Copies, including screenshots, of the report should not be made nor given to the patient, visitor, 
employee, or any third-party outside of FMOLHS, unless directed by Risk Management.  Copies of 
the report should not be maintained. Notify Risk Management if a request is made for a copy. 
 
SEVERITY CATEGORY: The initial severity category is designated by the safety event reporter. 
Severity category may be upgraded or downgraded after review.  A Root Cause Analysis should be 
considered for any error in categories F, G, H, and I or for any identified trends or patterns regardless of 
severity.  See policy on Sentinel Events and Root Cause Analysis (OO-GN-018). 
 
Category Description 
A Circumstances exist with capacity to cause an event/error or variance in care (A Good Catch) 
B Event/error and/or an omission occurred BUT DID NOT reach the patient/resident. 
C Event/error reached the patient/resident BUT caused NO harm. 
 
D Event/error increased the need for monitoring/intervention BUT caused NO harm. 
*E Event/error increased the need for treatment/intervention AND caused TEMPORARY harm. 
*F Event/error that contributed to or resulted in TEMPORARY harm AND required initial or 
prolonged hospitalization. 
 
*G Event/error that contributed to or resulted in PERMANENT harm AND required initial or 
prolonged hospitalization. 
*H Event/error that required intervention necessary to sustain life. 
 
*I Event/error that contributed to or resulted in DEATH (UNEXPECTED DEATH) 
X Death not related to an 
event
 
Not 
Known 
There is not enough information available to assign a Severity Category for this event.  
 
*Assign follow-up to appropriate leader 
  OO-GN-019 
Page 3 of 5 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Patient Safety Event 
Reporting Process: 
1. A safety event report should be completed and submitted through Our Lady of the Lake Health's 
electronic reporting system within 24 hours of the event occurrence. This application is located 
on OLOL’s intranet, TeamLink.   
2. The report will include details about the event, including the date, time, location, individuals 
involved, and a description of what happened. 
3. If equipment was involved in the event, tag the equipment, and remove it from service.  List the 
serial number, model number and other identifiers on the Safety Event Report. Notify the 
Biomedical Department and provide the safety event report number. 
4. Safety event reports are reviewed by quality outcomes analyst or other designated personnel and 
assigned to an appropriate department for investigation and analysis. Appropriate supervisory 
and management personnel are notified of the event through the safety event reporting system. 
5. Investigation of the safety event is completed and documented by the appropriate leader, 
appointed delegate or subject matter expert within time frames as set forth by the safety event 
management workflow. All events Categories A-D are closed within 15 days of initial report and 
Categories E-X are closed within 30 days with exception of Root Cause analysis which is 45 
days.  
 
Feedback mechanisms and Data Reporting:  
1. Our Lady of the Lake Health leaders are expected to provide feedback to employees who report 
safety events, including near misses, on the status of the investigation and any actions taken to 
address the event. 
2. Our Lady of the Lake Health will also provide feedback to employees on the impact of their 
reporting on patient safety and encourage continued reporting. 
3. Data on safety events, including near misses, incidents, and adverse events, will be collected, 
and analyzed regularly to identify trends, prioritize improvements, and monitor progress. 
4. Our Lady of the Lake Health will provide regular reports on safety events and their outcomes to 
relevant stakeholders, including leadership, departments, and regulatory agencies. 
 
Near Miss Reporting:  
1. All near miss safety events should be reported and analyzed to identify potential risks and 
prevent future harm. 
2. The reporting process for near misses is the same as reporting for all safety events. 
3. The investigating department will evaluate the near miss, determine any root causes to 
implement corrective actions to mitigate recurrence. 
 
Patient Harm and Potential for Patient Harm: 
1. If a safety event results in harm to a patient, the investigating department must report the event to 
Our Lady of the Lake Health's quality department and follow Our Lady of the Lake Health's adverse 
event reporting policy.  OO-GN-019 
Page 4 of 5 
2. Notify Risk Management immediately if there is a serious injury, a clinically significant medical 
error, unanticipated outcome, or sentinel event. If the event occurs after hours, notify the House 
Manager who will contact the Administrator-On-Call. 
3. If a safety event has the potential to harm a patient, the investigating department must report the 
event to Our Lady of the Lake Health's quality department and implement appropriate corrective 
actions to prevent harm.  
4. It is appropriate to notify the patient's physician of all variances. If the physician was notified, 
indicate this on the safety event report and include the physician's name.  Document in the medical 
record if the physician was notified, the physician response, and the patient’s response to any 
interventions provided.   
5. If the physician requests a Safety Event Report, the employee shall indicate in the report that it was 
requested by a physician and indicate the name of the requesting physician. 
6. Facts concerning the patient event are to be documented in the medical record. Do not reference the 
Safety Event in the medical record. 
7. Employees and medical staff should refrain from making statements or conjectures regarding 
possible liability, fault or financial responsibility to the patient or family and should not report such 
conjectures or opinions in the safety event report or medical record. Contact Risk Management for 
guidance and questions about appropriate communication with the patient and family.  See 
Disclosure of Unanticipated Outcome, Medical Errors, (OC-007).  
 
Visitor Safety Event 
1. Any safety event involving a visitor will be reported through the safety event reporting system. The 
report should include visitor identification and telephone number or contact information, details 
about the event including date, time, location, environmental conditions, individuals involved and 
any witnesses. 
2. The visitor may be offered first aid, if appropriate, which he/she has the right to refuse. If the visitor 
wishes to receive treatment, escort the visitor to the ECU and advise the ECU of the event.  Do not 
give a copy of the Safety Event Report to the ECU or to the patient.  
3. While first aid is offered to anyone needing medical attention, courtesy first aid is not routinely 
extended to visitors fainting or becoming ill on the premises. A sincere effort to extend assistance 
and exhibit professionalism will be a priority. The visitor should be the guarantor of payment for 
services. 
4. Employees and medical staff should refrain from making statements or conjectures regarding 
possible liability, fault or financial responsibility to the patient or family and should not report such 
conjectures or opinions in the safety event report or medical record.  
 
Employee Event 
1. Any safety event involving an employee will be reported in the safety event reporting system 
regardless of injury.  For safety events involving multiple employees, a safety event report should be 
entered for each employee involved.  For questions about reporting employee safety events, contact 
Risk Management office.    
2. The employee should notify the Employee Health Department of any injury requiring first aid.  
3. If the employee requires emergent medical care, the supervisor of the employee should notify the 
ECU that said employee is coming to the Emergency Department for treatment, when applicable.   
4. Blood and Body Fluid exposures are managed by a nurse navigator in Lakeline Direct and Employee 
Health.  When exposures occur, the employees will call 225-765-5253 and follow instructions for  OO-GN-019 
Page 5 of 5 
testing and source patient assessment.  See policy EH1006 “Employee Health Blood and Body Fluid 
Exposures”. 
5. If further medical follow-up is required, the employee will notify the Employee Health Department 
for approval.  
 
 
 