Classifications of Changes 
 
Construction Contract Change Order Types 
Note: In some cases a Change Order will logically fit into more than one of the following categories; in which case, the 
primary category (that in which the CO most clearly belongs) will be listed first. 
CC Contractor Convenience: CO originates at request of the Contractor, will facilitate his operations, and would most 
usually result in a credit to Owner unless the change concurrently falls in another category resulting in "value added" to 
the finished job. 
CE Contractor Error: CO originates to correct error or blunder by Contractor (for example, if K demolishes a stairway 
which wasn't specified to be removed and replaced). Change should result in no cost to Owner. 
DE Design Error: CO originates from defective plans or specifications (by Owner or Consultant) including spatial conflicts 
or contradictions between or among Contract drawings, but not design omissions (which see). 
DO Design Omission: CO originates because plans and specifications do not call for a necessary component which 
cannot be reasonably construed as implied work. 
DS Differing Site Conditions: CO originates because actual site conditions (usually underground or otherwise hidden 
from view at the time of bidding) differ significantly from those shown or stipulated in the Contract plans and 
specifications, and require extra work to achieve the intended end product.  Differing site condition would most usually 
arise from DE (which see) as opposed to LS (which see) which would commonly be the result of DO (which see). 
GC General Conditions: CO originates from administrative causes (e.g., delay, suspension or termination of the work) 
and could result in time extension with or without added cost to OWNER depending upon the degree of Contractor's 
responsibility for the cause. 
LP Labor Problems: CO originates from labor strikes, lockouts, etc. which may involve or affect the Contractor's 
operations, and would most usually result in a GC change (which see).   
LS Latent Site Conditions: CO originates from encounter with conditions (usually underground) which were unknown 
and not reasonably foreseeable to Owner or the Contractor at time of bidding. Not the same as DS (which see). 
MR Multiple Resolution: CO originates as a resolution of several relatively minor changes, claims, or credits which are 
analyzed individually and resolved collectively. Individual components may belong to any category. 
OR Owner Requested: CO originates at request of Owner (may be requested or suggested by any party) and is most 
usually aimed at improving operational efficiency or maintenance of the facility. This category includes almost all of the 
relatively few truly optional COs, which deserve and receive considerable scrutiny as to reasonableness and cost 
efficiency before moving into processing. 
QA Quantity Adjustment: CO originates to reconcile differences between planned and as-built quantities of work on 
specific items for which units of measure and unit prices have been established (liquidated) in the Contract Proposal.  A 
semi-automatic, non-optional, adjustment to the Contract Amount. 
RM Regulatory Mandated: CO originates to bring project into compliance with regulatory agency requirements (e.g., 
asbestos removal) which were nonexistent, unknown or overlooked at the time of bidding. 
SR Safety Requirement: CO originates to correct obvious or potential safety hazard not addressed in Contract plans and 
specifications.  May be result of DE, DO or RM (which see). 
 