OO-HR-E-008 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Human Resources / 
Employment Practices 
Title: Employee Competence Validation Policy Reference #: OrgOps/HR/E/008 
Supersedes #: HR/B/001 
Date of Origination: July 8, 1985 Last Review Date: 01/15/2016 
Last Revision Date:  December 7, 2020 
 
PURPOSE 
Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) strives to provide the highest quality services in a safe, effective manner. 
 
 
POLICY 
1. OLOL assesses the competence of each staff member through a variety of mechanisms on an 
ongoing basis.  
2. An employee is deemed competent if he or she demonstrates the necessary knowledge, skills and 
behaviors to meet the standards of his/her thejob.  
3. At a minimum, cCompetency will be evaluated upon completion of orientation and annually. 
4. Competencies not validated require a documented action plan with follow up.  
 
 
PROCEDURES 
 
Employment 
Human Resources verifies references and licensure if applicable for all new employees as referenced in 
the Employment Selection Process policy, OrgOps/HR/E/012.  
 
Orientation 
1. All OLOL employees are required to participate in an orientation process (General Orientation and 
Multidisciplinary Orientation (MDO) for clinical employees) beginning on the first day of 
employment.  
2. General orientation is facilitated by Human Resources and includes information and training 
regarding the mission, values, performance improvement, confidentiality, legal issues, corporate 
compliance, workplace policies, employee benefits and environment of care safety issues. 
Completion of general orientation is documented in the Learning Management System (LMS).  
3. Multidisciplinary Orientation is facilitated by Clinical Education and includes information and 
training related to job roles and responsibilities in regard toregarding patient care, patient safety, 
communication, and the Culture of Always. Completion of MDO is documented in the LMS. 
4. If a new employee is resuming employment with OLOL within a six-month period or less, he or she 
may notwill not be required to repeat general orientation and MDO, if all orientation and education 
completed in previous employment. 
5. The supervisor/manager or his/her designee conducts departmental orientation and verifies initial 
competency.  
6.  This orientation includes appropriate orientation and training for all job competencies and 
responsibilities, including technical skills, equipment use, policies and procedures.  Departmental 
orientation and initial competency assessment may include tests that assess knowledge, 
Commented [TMP1]: TJC uses the language ongoing and does 
not specify annually. Number one covers assessing competencies 
ongoing OO-HR-E-008 
Page 2 of 3 
demonstration of skills, and supervisor/preceptor observation validating application to the clinical 
setting.   
7. The initial competency/skills checklist and departmental orientation checklist are documented.  
8. Each supervisor/manager or designee is charged with the development and implementation of 
departmental orientation and comprehensive competency assessment for his/her work area, including 
age-specific competencies if appropriate.  
 
Performance Assessment & Annual Competency 
1. The performance evaluation represents a summation of employee competence (OrgOps/HR/P/009).   
2. Return demonstration, simulation, direct observation in the clinical or work setting, and review of 
documentation are methods of competence assessment that are used by supervisors/managers.   
3. The method and verification of competence are documented in departmental records.   
4. Competence assessment of clerical and support staff may be conducted by observation of 
performance in the work setting and summarized in the performance evaluation.  
5. Patterns and trends in departmental competence assessment results are used by supervisors/managers 
or educators to identify needed departmental training. 
6. Patterns and trends in performance improvement, infection control and risk management data 
provide information regarding staff competence that is used in assessing and improving staff 
competence. 
 
Annual Ongoing Competency Assessment 
7. Annual Ongoing competency assessment, including age specific competency, if appropriate, is based 
on the needs identified through data sources described above.   
7.   
8. Age-specific competency evaluation is included as well. Training and competency validation are 
also provided with regard to new technologies and equipment and for skills that are used 
infrequently or involve high risk.  
9. Simulation or skills lab may be utilized when warranted by lack of clinical opportunity or for 
remediation. 
 
Remediation 
1. When deficiencies are identified in knowledge, skill or behavior, a corrective action plan is 
developed to bring the deficiency to a competent level within a specific timeframe by the 
supervisor/manager or educator.  
2. This plan and the resulting outcome are documented by the supervising manager in departmental 
records. 
 
Additional Required Training 
All employees receive annual training regarding corporate compliance and environment of care issues, 
including safety, security, emergency preparedness, hazardous materials, medical equipment, infection 
control, life safety and utility systems.  
 
Responsibility 
1. The responsibility for training, competency validation, and corrective action lies with the 
supervisor/manager and employee. 
2. Human Resources regularly audits personnel files to ensure compliance. OO-HR-E-008 
Page 3 of 3 
Reporting 
1. Reports regarding staff competence are reported to the governing board at least annually. 
2. Failure by an employee to successfully complete all required competencies and education will result 
in disciplinary action up to suspension and including termination. 
 
RELATED POLICIES: 
1. OrgOps/HR/E/012  “Employment Selection Process” 
2. OrgOps/HR/P/009  “Performance Evaluations” 
 
 
 