OO-HR-S-005 
Page 1 of 2 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Human Resources / 
Schedules & Pay 
Title: Pay System Policy Reference #: OrgOps/HR/S/005 
Supersedes #: HR/C/004 
Date of Origination: October 1, 1982 Last Review Date: April 9, 2009 
Last Revision Date: September 15, 2011 
 
 
PURPOSE 
This policy is intended to establish guidelines for the payment of wages to all employees.  The pay 
system of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) follows the Federal Wage and Hour 
laws as well as the Fair Labor Standards Act at all times.  Provisions of this policy will establish 
uniformity in time recording (ATM system) and payroll procedures. 
 
POLICY 
1. The payroll system for OLOL is on a bi-weekly cycle.   
2. All time is paid based on an hourly rate calculated for the bi-weekly period. 
 
 
PROCEDURES 
1. The payroll period will begin at 12 midnight Saturday and end the second following Saturday, 14 
days later, at 11:59 p.m.  
2. Employees are paid for the full shift worked before the Saturday stop date (11:59 p.m.) if their 
starting time is prior to 11:59 p.m.   
3. All other time is paid on the next pay period.   
4. Employees are paid on the Friday following the stop date. 
5. All Team Members are required to establish and maintain a Direct Deposit account.  
 
Computation of Overtime 
1. OLOL pays overtime as governed by the Fair Labor Standards Act.   
2. All overtime pay is based on the number of hours worked and when they were worked.  
3. Employees may not work overtime without approval in advance from their respective supervisor. 
4. Payment for overtime hours is one and one-half times the average hourly rate of pay for the 
employee during the pay period in which the overtime occurred.   
5. An employee's overtime pay will be computed by one of two methods, dependent on which method 
is applicable to the job. 
a. Eight and Eighty Option: Overtime premiums will be paid after an employee has worked 80 
hours in a payroll period or over eight hours in one day.  (This method considers the whole 
14 day period as a work week).   
b. Forty Hour Work Week Option: Overtime premiums will be paid after an employee has 
worked over 40 hours in a work week.  A work week will be seven days and will start at 12 
midnight on Saturday and end at 11:59 p.m. the next Saturday.  This method considers the 
payroll period to be comprised of two seven day periods or work weeks.  
6. Overtime will be based on time worked, not on time paid.  Benefit days, which are credited to the 
employee's payroll, are not applicable toward the calculation of overtime pay.   OO-HR-S-005 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Differentials 
1. Shift Differentials are included in calculating an employee's pay and overtime compensation.   
2. When an employee works overtime, the appropriate shift differential will be paid.  
3. Weekend differentials are paid to approved job classes for hours worked between 11:00 p.m. Friday 
and 7:00 a.m. Monday with a minimum requirement of two hours worked to qualify for the 
differential. 
 
Error In Pay 
A discrepancy in a paycheck should be reported to the employee’s manager as soon as possible.  Any 
necessary corrections will be reflected in the employee’s next check. 
 
 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO 