OO-HR-E-027 
Page 1 of 3 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Human Resources / 
Employment Practices 
Title: Electronic Devices Policy Reference #: OrgOps/HR/E/027 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 28, 2004 Last Review Date: April 20, 2012 
Last Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE 
To establish guidelines for the appropriate use of: 
▪ Our Lady of the Lake RMC (OLOL) telephone equipment 
▪ personal cell phones, pagers and text messaging devices at work in an “on-stage” area 
▪ OLOL-provided or OLOL-paid cell phones 
▪ cell phones by employees while driving 
▪ cellular phones equipped with digital photo capability 
▪ all other communications devices 
 
 
POLICY 
OLOL telephone equipment 
1. OLOL recognizes that employees will occasionally need to place and receive personal phone calls 
during the workday. However, personal phone calls during working hours distract employees from 
their job responsibilities and may be disruptive to coworkers. 
 
2. Personal calls should be placed/received in a non-public or non-patient care area while the employee 
is either on a scheduled break or lunch. 
 
Use of personal cell phones, pagers and text messaging devices at work 
1. While at work, employees are expected to exercise the same discretion in using personal cellular 
phones, pagers and text messaging devices as is expected for the use of company phones. 
 
2. If a personal cellular call must be made or received while the employee is on OLOL premises, the 
call is to be made/received in a non-public or non-patient care area. For example, break rooms are 
appropriate; hallways, lobbies, and nursing unit stations are not. 
 
3. All personal cell phones, pagers and text messaging devices are to be kept in silent mode while 
employees are on duty.  Sending or receiving personal text messages should never be allowed to 
interrupt or interfere with the employee’s work at hand. 
 
4. OLOL will not be liable for the loss of personal cellular phones brought into the workplace. 
 
OLOL-provided or OLOL-paid cell phones 
1. Where job or business needs demand immediate access to an employee, OLOL may issue a business 
cell phone to an employee for work-related communications. Inappropriate usage of OLOL issued 
cell phone devices will result in appropriate disciplinary actions. 
 
2. Employees in possession of OLOL cellular phones are expected to protect the equipment from loss, 
damage or theft. 
 OO-HR-E-027 
Page 2 of 3 
3. Upon resignation or termination of employment, or at any time upon request, the employee may be 
asked to produce the phone for return or inspection. Employees unable to present the phone in good 
working condition within the time period requested (for example, 24 hours) may be expected to bear 
the cost of a replacement.  
 
Safe use of cell phones by employees while driving 
1. Employees whose job responsibilities include regular or occasional driving and who are issued a cell 
phone for business use are expected to refrain from using their phone while driving. Safety must 
come before all other concerns. 
a. Regardless of the circumstances, including slow or stopped traffic, employees are strongly 
encouraged to pull off to the side of the road and safely stop the vehicle before placing or 
accepting a call.  
 
2. If acceptance of a call is unavoidable and pulling over is not an option, employees are expected to 
keep the call short, use hands-free options if available, refrain from discussion of complicated or 
emotional discussions and keep their eyes on the road.  
 
3. Special care should be taken in situations where there is traffic, inclement weather or the employee 
is driving in an unfamiliar area.  
 
4. Under no circumstances are employees allowed to place themselves at risk to fulfill business needs.  
 
5. Employees who are charged with traffic violations resulting from the use of their phone while 
driving will be solely responsible for all liabilities that result from such actions. 
 
All photo equipment 
1. In addition to the above guidelines, cellular phones equipped with digital photo capability are subject 
to the provisions of OLOL policy OrgClin/023 - Photographing Patients.   
 
2. Under no circumstances is it appropriate to photograph without consent. 
 
Enforcement 
1. Employees are expected to inform friends and family members of this policy and will be held 
accountable for their actions under OLOL disciplinary procedure. 
 
2. Appropriate disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment, may be taken against 
any OLOL employee who violates this policy.   
 
3. Agency workers will be reported to the employer and not allowed to work at OLOL.   
 
4. Students participating in clinical rotations will be reported to the appropriate educational institution. 
 
 
RELATED POLICIES 
1. OrgOps/HR/E/024 – “Workplace Violence” (regarding monitoring of telephone calls) 
2. OrgClin/023 “Photographing, Patients” 
 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 OO-HR-E-027 
Page 3 of 3 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO 