OO-HR-E-017 
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Human Resources / 
Employment Practices 
Title: Licensure Policy Reference #: OrgOps/HR/E/017 
Supersedes #: HR/B/002 
Date of Origination: October 1, 1980 Last Review Date: 3/16/2023 
Last Revision Date: January 15, 2016 
 
PURPOSE 
This policy defines the process for ensuring that any employee at Our Lady of the Lake, RMC (OLOL) 
in a position that requires a license, certification or temporary work permit does possess a current 
license, certification or temporary work permit. 
 
POLICY 
1. The job description for the position will indicate the required license, certification or temporary 
work permit required.   
2. The job description will also indicate whether the licensure, certification or temporary work permit 
must be granted specifically by a State of Louisiana licensing board. 
 
PROCEDURE 
1. Human Resources will complete a primary source verification, prior to hire or to the delivery of 
patient care, the appropriate licensure, certification, or temporary work permit of all new hires whose 
job description indicates that requirement. 
 
2. Human Resources will verify or re-verify through a primary source verification, the appropriate 
licensure, certification or temporary work permit of any employee changing positions prior to 
transfer. 
 
3. Human Resources will verify the renewal of appropriate licensure or certification for all employees 
whose job description indicates that requirement through a primary source verification. 
  
4. Any employee with a temporary work permit, whose job description requires a license, is required to 
provide notice of an appropriate license directly to Human Resources prior to the expiration of the 
temporary work permit. 
 
5. Human Resources will suspend, without pay, any employee whose license, certification or 
temporary work permit has expired until primary source verification of renewal is available. 
 
  
Approved by: 
 
 
 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO 