 OO-HR-E-029 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Human Resources/Employment 
Title: Transitional Duty  Policy Reference #: OrgOp/HR/E-029 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: August 30, 2004 Last Review Date: December 30, 2013 
Last Revision Date: January 16, 2008 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to bring employees who sustain work-related injuries back to full duty 
expeditiously and safely.  Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) considers 
appropriate return to work as a meaningful component in the workers’ compensation process.  The goal 
is to maintain the health and productivity of all employees and maximize opportunities for employees to 
return to work in temporary assignments while recovering. 
 
POLICY: 
A. It is the policy of OLOLRMC to provide transitional duty assignments, when medically indicated, 
while an employee is recovering from a work-related injury.  Transitional Duty is preferably 
completed in the employee’s home department.  If no modified duty is available in the employee’s 
home department, an assignment will be made to another department within the hospital or its 
affiliates.  In this case, the home department will still be charged the payroll for the employee. 
  
B. A Transitional Duty assignment will be a temporary assignment only, with anticipation that the 
employee will return to his/her full duties by the end of 30-90 days.  Transitional Duty assignments 
and progress will be monitored on a monthly basis by the Transitional Duty Committee which is 
made up of representatives of the following departments: 
a. Workers’ Compensation 
b. Human Resources 
c. Hospital Department Managers (rotated on a semi-annual or annual basis) 
 
C. The duration of Transitional Duty assignments may be extended by the Transitional Duty 
Committee, but only if the employees’ full duty release is expected in a reasonable time period. 
 
D. Approval for an employee to enter the Transitional Duty Program will be decided by the Workers’ 
Compensation Department.  Employees will be monitored by the Workers’ Compensation 
Department, in conjunction with the department supervisors, to assess performance within 
transitional duty duties and overall employee performance.  Employees who are offered this 
assignment are to be held to the same performance standards and expectations as any other 
employee. 
 
E. Failure to accept a transitional duty assignment for which an employee has been medically released 
will result in the loss of Workers’ Compensation indemnity benefits and be interpreted as a 
voluntary resignation resulting in the termination of employment with OLOLRMC. 
 
F. ELIGIBILITY:  Except in circumstances where otherwise provided by law, an employee who is 
medically certified as being unable to work in their regular assignment as the result of an on-the-job 
injury or illness will be considered for the Transitional Duty Program.  Authorization to enter the  OO-HR-E-029 
Page 2 of 2 
Program will be made based on the employee’s physician-imposed work restrictions in conjunction 
with work that is currently available within OLOLRMC. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITIES 
1. Employees must obtain work restrictions from the physician who is treating their work-related 
injury.   This information shall be brought to Employee Health and forwarded to the Workers’ 
Compensation Department for review.  The employee should also notify their immediate supervisor 
of these restrictions. 
 
2. The employee must also contact Human Resources to see if they qualify for Family Medical Leave 
(FMLA).  Human Resources will then contact the Workers’ Compensation Department to notify 
them of FMLA status.  A notice will also be sent to the employee’s direct supervisor. 
  
EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILILTIES 
1. The Workers’ Compensation Department will confer with the employee’s supervisor to see if 
transitional work is available within the department.  If such work is not available, the Workers’ 
Compensation Department will then locate transitional work somewhere else within the hospital 
and/or its affiliate organizations.  The employee’s home department will continue to be charged 
salary dollars for this employee while they are in the Transitional Duty Department. 
 
2. The Transitional Duty Committee will review all cases of Transitional Duty on a monthly basis and 
make decisions based on the employee’s progress and performance in the Program.  Transitional 
Duty Programs will be for duration of 1 week to 90 days.  Extension of the work modifications will 
be decided by the Committee if it is anticipated that the employee may return to full duty work 
within a very short time frame (usually less than 25% of the time already spent on modified duty).  
Decisions to grant an extension will be made by the committee based upon the duration of the 
extension, likelihood that the team member will return to work, and availability of modified duty.  It 
is ultimately the responsibility of the team member needing the extension to submit a written request 
to the committee. 
 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO  
 