 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Environment of Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Health  Chapter:  Social Environment 
Subject:  Electrical Equipment Section:   
Date of Origination:  July 1, 1978 Supersedes: AD/A/037 
Date Last Revised:  May 13, 2004 Serial Code:  OrgOps/EC/002 
Date Last Reviewed: 8/18/2021 
  
PURPOSE: 
This policy provides for the control and safe use of personal electrical equipment and extension cords and 
adapters. 
POLICY: 
Because of safety and insurance regulations, it is necessary to manage the use of personally owned electrical 
equipment from being brought into Our Lady of the Lake Health and Affiliates. 
(See OrgClin015 for patient-owned or vendor medical equipment.)  
PROCEDURE: 
1. The use of extension cords is prohibited and will be used only during emergency situations with approval 
of the Biomedical Engineering Department. 
2. All electrical and/or electronic equipment brought into OLOLRMC not purchased by OLOLRMC for 
personal and/or professional use, must be approved for use by the department manager.  Department 
heads are responsible to check equipment periodically and to consult Biomedical Engineering if 
necessary. 
3. Each department is responsible to identify types of non-patient care equipment that may pose an electrical 
hazard during intended use.  If there is any question as to the safety of the equipment, Biomedical 
Engineering should be consulted. 
4. Patients are permitted to use no more devices than can be accommodated by existing power outlets; multi-
outlet adapters are not permitted. Electric blankets, space heaters, portable hair dryers, and similar heat 
generating devices present an inherent risk of fire and are not permitted. 
5. It is the responsibility of each department to ensure that all electrical equipment in their department is safe 
for use. 
6. Portable space heating devices are allowed in non-sleeping staff and employee areas only if there are no 
exposed heating elements and exposed surfaces are limited to 212 °F (100 °C). All other safety policies 
must be followed. 
 