OO-EC-006 
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Environment of Care/Safety 
Title: Tobacco Free Environment 
Policy 
Reference #: OrgOps-EC-006 
Supersedes #: AD/A/006 
Date of Origination: March, 1987 Review Date: 8/18/2021 
Revision Date: 7/2/2013 
 
POLICY: 
To promote the good health of our patients, visitors, and employees, all buildings, properties, grounds and vehicles 
owned, leased or operated by Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) are tobacco free. Individuals 
covered by this policy include, but are not limited to, all employees, patients, volunteers, visitors, physicians, residents, 
students, emergency medical staff, contract staff and vendors.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Tobacco Free: Refraining from all use of tobacco products including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe smoking 
and chewing tobacco. Electronic cigarettes (E-cigarettes) and similar products are also prohibited. 
PROCEDURES: 
1. The use of tobacco products is prohibited in the following settings owned, leased or operated by OLOLRMC. 
• All buildings 
• All property and grounds, including parking lots and garages; and 
• All hospital vehicles. 
 
2. Patients and families will be informed that the location is tobacco-free through signage and, for inpatients, the Patient 
Handbook. Employees will be informed through hospital publications and orientation.  
 
3. Patients and guests are expected to comply with this policy. In situations where a patient or guest does not comply, 
team members are expected to approach the guest to ask him/her to stop using the tobacco product while on premises. 
Should the patient or guest refuse to comply, refer to policy ECSE021, Disruptive Behavior Plan for Patients and/or 
Guests.  
 
4. All employees and members of the medical staff are expected to honor the intent of this policy, to maintain our 
commitment to a professional image, and to use the programs and services available to avoid smoking while at work 
and avoid exposing patients, visitors, and their co-workers to second hand smoke.   
 
5. OLOLRMC will follow the usual progressive discipline policy for employees who fail to comply with this policy.  
 
6. Refer to MSPHY009, Disruptive Behavior for concerns regarding members of the Medical Staff.  
 
 