OO-ET-005 
Page 1 of 2 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Ethics 
Title: Ethics Case Consultation Service Policy Reference #: OrpOps/ET/005 
Supersedes #: AD/C/005; OO/ET/013 
Date of Origination: May 7, 1987 Last Review Date: June 1, 2017 
Last Revision Date:  June 10, 2024 
 
Purpose 
 The Clinical Ethics Case Consultation Service is available to assist physicians, staff, patients and 
families, and other involved parties in clarifying moral and ethical issues cases in a manner that is in 
keeping with Catholic Social teachings, the Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care 
Services, 6th Ed., 2018. (ERD’s) and with other faith-based, secular, professional, and legal ethical 
standards which do not conflict with OLOLRMC’s Catholic identity. 
 
Policy 
The provision of quality healthcare requires a moral and ethical foundation that is as important as the 
scientific foundation of healthcare.   
 
The Ethics Case Consultation Service is a resource for preserving the  integrity, rights, interests and 
welfare of patients, families, clinicians and the organization when there are moral and ethical 
uncertainties or conflicts in providing and receiving care.  
 
OLOLRMC’s ethical standards across the continuum of care include the following general priorities. 
The healthcare team, patients and families act interdependently. All involved parties participate in 
communication.  The healthcare team has knowledge and experience to pursue the goals of care. 
Patients and families have rights to make decisions regarding care, to the extent permitted by Catholic 
teaching and secular law.  Ethics case consultation is a part of such communication.  It is intended to 
enhance ongoing communication between parties involved in challenging cases. (Overview, Rights and 
Responsibilities of the Individual, Hospital Accreditation Standards, 2009.) 
 
Patients, family members, surrogates, physicians and other clinicians, and hospital administrators may 
request the assistance of the Ethics Case Consultation Service.  The Ethics Case Consultation Service 
should be requested when:  
 
• A patient, family member, surrogate, physician or other clinician wants help in addressing moral 
choices and ethical issues. 
• Efforts by these parties to resolve an ethical problem have reached an impasse, and there are 
conflicts between the parties.  
• An ethical issue is unusual, unprecedented, complex, or complicated. 
• There is conflict or uncertainty as to morally permitted actions in a case, or about the correct 
locus of decision making.  
• There is moral distress for staff. 
• There are competing ethical principles and values or there is conflict or uncertainty related to 
right and wrong. 
 OO-ET-005 
Page 2 of 2 
Process 
•  Physicians can request Ethics Case Consultation in EPIC. They and other involved parties can call 
the Ethics Hotline (225-765-7052) to request it. 
• The Ethics team member consultant(s) initiates the assessment. 
 
• The Consultant discusses specific issues with involved parties and writes an initial Assessment.   
• If the consult requires additional assistance the consultant will then discuss the issues(s) with other 
subject matter experts. The Consultant may request additional information, suggest additional 
follow-up, or decide to meet in person. The Consultant approves a written Assessment or 
Recommendation and documents into the patient’s medical record and follows up with involved 
parties. 
 
• Alternatively, the Team may request consultation by the Ethics Committee—a review of the case by 
a quorum of the OLOLRMC Ethics Committee.  The Bioethicist (or consultation team member) 
informs involved parties of this request and enters it into the patient’s medical record.  He/she also 
activates the Committee Consultation Process. The Ethics Committee may make a written 
Recommendation, authored by the Chair or his/her delegate.  The Bioethicist (or consultation team 
member) enters the Recommendation into the patient’s medical record and follows up in person with 
involved parties. 
 
• Ethics Recommendations include analysis and suggested plans of care which address relevant issues, 
principles, prospects, and possibilities of the cases.  They are advisory in nature, not mandatory.  All 
involved parties retain their prior rights and responsibilities. 
 
• Ethics Recommendations can be multidisciplinary.  The Bioethicist, the Ethics Case Consultation 
Team and the Ethics Committee may request assistance from Mission Services, Pastoral Care, 
Palliative Care, Medical Management, Medical Staff, Nursing Service, Risk Management, Legal 
Services and/or other departments and disciplines as needed.   
 
Ethics committee will annually evaluate and/or review the process and procedures regarding ethics 
consultation.  
 
References: 
1. The Joint Commission 2009 Hospital Accreditation Standards.   
2. United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, (2018), Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic 
Health Care Services (Sixth Edition). 