 OO/ET/015 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKEREGIONALMEDICALCENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Ethics 
Title: Community Benefit:  Charitable Donations 
and Sponsorships 
Policy Reference #: OrgOps/ET/015 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: January 9, 2012 Last Date Reviewed: 5/1/2012 
Last Date Revised: 9/17/2015 
 
APPLIES TO: 
This procedure applies to Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC)  and its wholly 
owned subsidiaries (OLOL). 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this procedure is primarily to provide adequate tracking and reporting of charitable 
donations and/or sponsorships through a centralized process. Additionally,  it provides compliance with 
Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System (FMOLHS) Community Benefit Policy. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Charitable Gifts – a financial donation. 
 
Charitable Sponsorships – a financial donation/gift which may require participation by staff or 
volunteers, supplies, use of property, etc. 
 
Community Benefits Council –The OLOL Community Benefits Council provides oversight for 
charitable donations/ sponsorships based on appropriateness to our mission, organizational strategic 
goals, community need, and availability of discretionary funds. To be comprised of the President of the 
OLOL Foundation, OLOL Vice President of Mission, and other senior executives as determined by 
OLOL CEO. 
 
Community Benefit Workgroup  - As appointed by the OLOL Community Benefits Council to support 
and recommend alignment of mission  with community benefits , review organizational processes for 
reporting of community benefits, tracking and monitoring of community benefit, facilitate the 
development of budgets for community benefit, and other community benefit purposes as identified. 
 
 
PROCEDURES: 
Budget: 
1. Charitable Donations/Sponsorships (if know and/or on -going activities) should be included in the 
annual fiscal year financial budget process and accounted for under the following account codes  
only: 
a. Account code 741746 for Charitable Sponsorship   
b. Account code 741740 for Charitable Donations  
c. Account code 741742 for Community Benefits Programs as defined by CHA 
d. Account code 740322 for Marketing purposes  OO/ET/015 
Page 2 of 3 
If unsure which account code to use, consult with your respective VP or the VP of Mission. 
 
2. Budgeted activities must be clearly identified and will be approved as part of the financial budget 
process.  Although these expenditures may be approved in the budget, this does not automatically 
provide for authorization of payment.  Approval for participation in the activity  must be obtained 
prior to any commitment of funds.  
Expenditures 
 
Budgeted Activities: 
Approval for activities must be obtained from Community Benefits Council prior to any commitment of 
funds even if approved in the fiscal year financial budget.   
 
Requests for donations and sponsorships must meet the following requirements: 
1. A Charitable Donation/Sponsorship Request Form must be completed for all donations or sponsored 
activities. The completed Charitable Donation/Sponsorship Request Form is attached to the 
requestor’s formal letterhead, brochure, or other form of request that is in a format to include all 
required details, i.e., purpose /benefit to community , amount requested, place, date and time, other 
non-monetary requests, etc. 
2. The Charitable Donation/Sponsorship Request Form and supporting documentation is presented to 
the Community Benefits Council for approval even though the Donation/Sponsorship may have been 
budgeted and approved .  Activities may be denied due to the availability of funds  or if the activity 
does not meet the requirements for C ommunity Benefit Program or the activity  does not fit our 
organizational mission, etc. 
3. Approval for  Charitable Donation  or Sponsorship will follow the Levels of Authorization , as 
stated below:  
 
 
≤  $ 2,500.00 OLOLRMC VP or Wholly owned s ubsidiary 
VP 
>$ 2,500.00 ≤ 5,000.00 Council Member 
>  $ 5,000.00 10, 000.00 OLOL CFO, COO or President of wholly 
owned subsidiary  
>$ 10, 000.00 CEO of OLOL 
 
4. All approved Charitable Donation/Sponsorship Request  forms are submitted to the office of VP of 
Mission or  the VP Planning and Business Development, for entry into the Charitable 
Donations/Sponsorship Log. 
 
5. The approved Charitable Donations/Sponsorship Request form with supporting documentation and 
payment authorization voucher is submitted to the OLOLRMC Accounting Department for payment. 
  OO/ET/015 
Page 3 of 3 
Non-Budgeted Activities: 
1. Non-budgeted activities for Charitable Donations/Sponsorships should follow the same approval 
process as Budgeted Expenditures if time permits.    
 
2. Non-budgeted activities will require the approval of the OLOLRMC CEO, or CFO, or COO and 
must follow the Levels of Authorization Policy.  
 
3. Non-budgeted approved activities for Charitable Donations/Sponsorship must be submitted to the 
office of VP Mission or VP Planning and Business Development, for entry into the Charitable 
Donations/Sponsorship Log. 
 
4. The non -budgeted approved expenditure for Charitable Donations/Sponsorship with supporting 
documentation and payment authorization voucher  is submitted to the OLOLRMC Accounting 
Department for payment. 
 
 
Monitoring and Reconciliation: 
1. The OLOLRMC Accounts Payable staff will monitor the Charitable Donations/Sponsorship Request 
forms and non-budgeted activities to ensure appropriate approval, consistent coding, and accuracy. 
 
2. On a quarterly b asis, OLOLRMC Accounting Department will provide a reconciliation of all 
expenditures in each o f the three (3 ) account codes  (741746, 741740, 740322 and 741742) to the 
Charitable Donations/Sponsorship Log.   Any expenditure not listed on the Charitable 
Donations/Sponsorship Log will be reported to OLOLRMC VP Mission for resolution.  If through 
the reconciliation and/or monitoring process, patterns of persistent non-compliance are determined, 
such will be reported to the OLOLRMC VP Mission, and the OLOLRMC CFO. 
 
3. The VP of Mission is responsible for collecting and maintaining event details and logistics,  for 
example, financial data provided by event beneficiary, event brochure, feedback for participation, 
ROI where applicable, etc., to evaluate for need to intended purposes as required for reporting. 
 
4. As part of the Community Benefits Program requirements , the Community Benefits Council will 
perform an annual review (based on a calendar year) of all Charitable Donations and Sponsorships. 