 
OrgOps/ET/007 Philosophy and General Guidelines for Making Decisions Concerning Life Sustaining Procedures  
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational / Ethics  
SUBJECT:  
Philosophy & General Guidelines for Making 
Decisions Concerning Life-Sustaining Procedures 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY: 
OO/ET/010 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
May 1985 
REVIEW DATE: 
April 10, 2023 
REVISED DATE: 
March 29, 2024 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OrgOps/ET/007 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
As a Catholic healthcare facility, we uphold the sanctity of human life and the essential dignity of each individual. 
We are committed to the preservation and restoration of health, in its broadest sense, to the greatest potential 
possible for each patient in our care. While we maintain a presumption in favor of providing life-sustaining 
procedures, we believe there are instances when certain prescribed medical treatments and modalities will have no 
curative effect, would not contribute to the patient's comfort and would merely artificially prolong the dying 
process.  (Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, Sixth Edition - # 57) 
 
POLICY: 
A. Patients (and those legally representing them) have the inherent right to accept or reject medical treatment 
recommendations related to their health care and in continuing, limiting, declining or discontinuing treatment, 
whether life-sustaining or general in nature.  (Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care 
Services, Sixth Edition - #56, #57, #59)   
B. “Medically assisted nutrition and hydration become morally optional when they cannot reasonably be 
expected to prolong life or when they would be ‘excessively burdensome for the patient or [would] cause 
significant physical discomfort, for example resulting from complications in the use of the means 
employed’.” (Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, Sixth Edition - #58.) 
C. Patients who elect to forego specific life-sustaining therapies shall have their dignity preserved and necessary 
measures to assure the highest level of comfort possible shall be maintained at all times by the provision of 
appropriate nursing and spiritual care and the offering of analgesics for pain and suffering.  (Ethical and 
Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, Sixth Edition - Part 5 – Issues in Care for the Dying) 
D. Decisions regarding goals of care and life-sustaining treatments that are reasonably possible should be made 
between the patient (or surrogate) and the physician or allied health professional after a thorough discussion.  
The patient, surrogate, and/or physician and/or allied health professional are always encouraged to seek  
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
OrgOps/ET/007 Philosophy and General Guidelines for Making Decisions Concerning Life Sustaining Procedures  
2 
advice/consultation/support from others as needed in a collaborative manner. (See FMOLHS Advance 
Directive policy.) Where there is a conflict of opinion or a decision cannot be made, treatment should be 
continued during the resolution process.  The individual patient and or surrogate decision-maker has the right 
to accept or reject medical treatment recommendations and be informed of the medical consequences. 
E. A decision to limit, decline, discontinue or otherwise forego a particular treatment or procedure, is specific to 
that treatment or procedure and does not necessarily imply that any others are to be foregone unless a specific 
decision is also made with respect to them (i.e.: a decision to exclude CPR does not necessarily exclude 
surgical procedures to increase the quality of the remaining life span.). Refusal of individual treatments does 
not mean no CPR.  If the patient does not want CPR, then a DNR “Do Not Resuscitate” order needs to be 
written. 
F. Individual physicians have the right to decline to participate in the limitation or withdrawal of therapy.  
However, no physician may abandon his or her patient until care by another physician has been secured. 
G. "Do Not Resuscitate" (DNR, No Code) orders by a physician are required to negate the obligation of Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) to initiate resuscitation measures (See policy OO-ET-
003). 
H. In the absence of DNR Orders, a Code Blue will be called, and personnel will continue resuscitation efforts 
until the arrival of a physician and/or a physician's order to modify or cease efforts is obtained.  (See policy 
OC-003). 
I. Physicians, as well as non-physician employees with documented training and a physician order may remove 
life support systems.   
J. The health care team has an ethical duty (a) to discuss options for palliative therapy with the patient or, if 
the patient is not competent, with the patient's representatives (family, guardian, advocate); (b) to relieve a 
patient's pain and suffering at the end of life; and (c) to provide psychosocial and spiritual support for the 
loved ones of a dying patient. 
K. Medical treatment not ordered or not renewed is not to be given. For example, it is not necessary to provide 
transfusion, or antibiotics, or intravenous fluids for terminally ill patients, or for those without cognitive 
function, unless specifically ordered to relieve unnecessary pain. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
DNR: Do Not Resuscitate 
PROCEDURE: 
GUIDELINES FOR MAKING DECISIONS CONCERNING LIFE SUSTAINING PROCEDURES: 
Some appropriate avenues for addressing guidance, assistance, and conflicts are: 
1. Continued consultation with other Health Care Providers (physician, nurses, social workers, and/or chaplains).   
2. Counseling/clarification for the family. 
3.   Consult Palliative Care Services. 
4.   Request a clinical ethics consult. 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and OLOL reserves the right to deviate from, 
revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion.  
OrgOps/ET/007 Philosophy and General Guidelines for Making Decisions Concerning Life Sustaining Procedures  
3 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Advance Directives (FMOLHS policy) 
• OrgClin/051 “LaPOST (Louisiana Physician Orders for Scope of Treatment)” 
• OO-ET-003 “Do Not Resuscitate Order (DNR)” 
• OC-003 “ Code Blue” 
• OrgOps/ET/005 “Ethics Case Consultation Service” 
• United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, (2018) Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health 
Care Services (Sixth Edition). 
ATTACHMENTS:  
• N/A 
 
 