 
NPC152 Transition to Inpatient Hospice 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational/ Ethics 
SUBJECT:  
Confidentiality 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
N/A 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
August 4, 1991 
REVISION DATE: 
7/14/2017 
REVIEW DATE: 
November 13, 2023 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OOET001 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (“OLOL”) and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively 
referred to herein as “Entity”) that propose and adopt Facility wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To set forth the hospital’s policy on confidentiality of 1) patient medical information, 2) employee information 
and 3) hospital business information. 
 
POLICY: 
PATIENT INFORMATION 
 
Confidentiality: All medical information, whether verbal, written or electronically stored, concerning a patient 
is confidential and shall be disclosed only for treatment, payment or operational (TPO) purposes as permitted 
in HIPAA Privacy regulations.  This information is to be restricted to a minimum necessary and need to know 
basis for the person or persons to carry out these functions.  For more information on TPO, refer to this link:  
Guidance: Treatment, Payment, and Health Care Operations | HHS.gov.  See also FMOLHS policy HIPAA 
Program Policy PRI.08.001 
 
Disclosure of Patient Medical Information: A patient’s medical record(s) can be disclosed without consent for 
the purposes of treatment, payment and operations, as well as the exceptions listed in the HIPAA Privacy 
regulations.  For disclosures other than for TPO and these exceptions, the written consent of the patient or the 
patient’s authorized designee is required for any other disclosures.  For more information on these exceptions, 
refer to this link:  Summary of the HIPAA Privacy Rule | HHS.gov.  See also FMOLHS policy Authorization 
for Uses and Disclosure of PHI Policy # PRI.08.011. 
 
“Health care providers are to respect each person’s privacy and confidentiality regarding information related to 
the person’s diagnosis, treatment and care.”  (Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care 
Services, Directive #34.) 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
NPC152 Transition to Inpatient Hospice 
2 
Departments Authorized to Release Medical Records: The only departments or individuals that can authorize 
the release of written medical records are 1) Health Information Systems, 2) Laboratory Department (lab 
results only) 3) Corporate Legal Services, 4) Chief Executive Officer or Chief Operating Officer or 5) 
Administrator-on-Call.  Medical records utilized for patient transfers may be released to accompany the patient 
but must be reviewed with the Unit Charge Nurse prior to releasing.  
 
EMPLOYEE INFORMATION 
An employee’s job-related information, including but not limited to home address and telephone number, shift 
schedule, salary, dates of leave of absences, or performance evaluations, may not be given out to a third party 
without the consent of the employee or as required or permitted by law. 
However, that information may be given to other employees within the organization with a legitimate need-to-
know who must handle such information as confidential. 
 
HOSPITAL BUSINESS INFORMATION 
Information relating to the business of the Medical Center may not be disclosed to any unauthorized person 
(e.g., outside vendor, general public, etc.) and employees may not disclose or discuss such information with 
other employees who do not have a work-related need-to-know.  Examples of such hospital-related 
information include but are not limited to: the financial condition of the Medical Center, when a new 
department will open or an existing department will close, which companies the Medical Center buys supplies 
from and how much is paid for those supplies. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
No discussions of confidential information shall take place in the elevators, cafeteria or other areas which are 
accessible to visitors, patients and/or other employees not authorized to have such information.  
Each new hire, at the time of hospital orientation, shall be informed of this policy and shall sign a statement 
confirming that they have received and read the policy. 
Annually employees will review confidentiality and patient privacy requirements are part of annual education.  
As part of annual education employees will attest to agreeing to abide by OLOLRMC’s privacy policies. 
Managers share the responsibility and accountability for education, implementation and enforcement of this 
policy. 
A violation of this policy will be cause for immediate disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
DEFINITIONS: N/A 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
 United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, (2018), Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care 
Services (Sixth Edition). 
 
1. FMOLHS Policies: PRI.08.001 and PRI.08.011 
 