OO-FN-003 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Finance 
Title: Cash Control Guidelines Policy Reference #: OrgOps/FN/003 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: August 5, 2004 Last Review Date: June 13, 2016 
Last Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE 
To provide guidelines for establishing an appropriate control environment over the collection, custody, 
and deposit of cash receipts.  
 
POLICY 
1. Cash transactions involving Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL), its departments 
and/or units are subject to all applicable state laws and hospital policies.  
 
2. OLOL employees are responsible for handling cash transactions accordingly. Failure to comply with 
all hospital policies regarding cash handling procedures will result in disciplinary action. 
 
3. The following guidelines, as a model for establishing an appropriate control environment, provide 
opportunities to enhance control procedures over the collection, custody, and deposit of cash 
receipts.  
 
4. All accountholders in each department and/or unit are encouraged to use these guidelines to assist in 
fulfilling their responsibilities. 
 
PROCEDURES 
 
Cash Receipts 
1. Petty cash, demand deposits, working funds, bank accounts and new accounts must be established 
with the permission of the VP Finance/Controller or the Chief Financial Officer. 
 
2. Return of petty cash funds, working funds or closing out of a demand deposit account must be done 
through Accounting.  
 
3. All OLOL departments and/or units collecting cash (currency/coin, personal checks, bank drafts, 
money orders, traveler's checks, cashier's checks, and credit/debit card transactions) should establish 
a procedure to document all such receipts. Examples include a pre-numbered receipt book or a 
computer generated receipt. All receipts issued must be approved by the VP Finance/Controller as to 
form. 
 
4. It is highly recommended that separate cash receipt logs be maintained for walk-in transactions and 
mail transactions. 
 
5. Documentation should minimally include the following information:  
▪ Payer's Name  
▪ Form of payment (if check, check # should be included) 
▪ Amount paid 
▪ Date of payment OO-FN-003 
Page 2 of 3 
▪ Initials of person(s) collecting cash receipts 
 
6. Departments receiving checks as payments should require that all checks be made payable to "Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center." Under no circumstances should a check be made 
payable to “cash”, an individual, or left blank. 
 
7. All checks should be restrictively endorsed (stamped) immediately upon receipt. The recommended 
endorsement is:  
For Deposit Only Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center 
Employer ID# / Department # 
 
8. Each check should be inspected to ensure the following: 
▪ Current date (post or stale dated checks should not be accepted) 
▪ Proper signature 
▪ No alterations 
▪ Bank name and routing numbers are printed on check 
▪ If temporary check, payer's name and address should be written on check 
▪ Written amount matches numeric amount 
 
9. Obtain picture identification and write identification number on check when feasible. 
 
10. Under no circumstances should disbursements be made from cash receipts (i.e., to cash personal 
checks, make purchases, etc.). Cash receipts should be deposited in total. 
 
Custody of Funds 
1. It is the responsibility of the account holder of petty cash or change funds to notify Accounting if 
there is any change in the custodian of the funds.  
 
2. Provide adequate and proper storage for the securing of funds until such funds are deposited.  
 
3. Avoid storing cash receipts in the office overnight. Where feasible, deposits should be made daily. 
 
4. Lock combinations and custody of keys should be maintained by one person. Combinations and keys 
should never be stored in an unlocked desk drawer or unsupervised area.  
 
5. For emergencies or in the absence of the fund custodian, copies of combinations and/or keys should 
be secured and stored by the department head or their designee.  
▪ Access to combinations and keys should be limited to a minimum number of people.  
▪ Safe combinations and keys should be changed periodically and always when permanent 
custody changes (employee turnover or reassignment of duties, etc.). 
 
6. Maintain and safeguard cash receipts, deposit and reconciliation documents.  
 
7. Such documents should be readily available for an audit. 
 
8. Records should provide clear documentation of cash receipts from the time of collection to the time 
of deposit. 
 
Separation of Duties 
1. To the extent staffing levels permit, the duties of collecting, recording, depositing, and reconciling 
cash receipts should be separated among different individuals.  OO-FN-003 
Page 3 of 3 
 
2. Where staffing levels do not permit separation of duties, compensating controls such as strict 
individual accountability and thorough management review and supervision should exist.  
 
Overages and Shortages 
1. It is the responsibility of the account holder to ensure cash on hand and cash deposited equals actual 
receipts at all times.  
 
2. Significant shortages and overages should be reported immediately to the Controller and Internal 
Audit. 
 
3. Cash overages and shortages, as well as any known circumstances surrounding the overage/shortage 
should be recorded and kept on file.  
 
4. If evidence of fraud, theft, or a serious breach of fiduciary duty is suspected, the Controller and 
Internal Audit should be immediately notified.  
 
Refunds 
1. All refunds should be processed through Accounts Payable.  
 
2. No refunds should be issued directly from cash receipts or petty cash unless the fund is approved by 
the Controller or Chief Financial Officer to do that function (ie: petty cash to refund vending 
machine losses).  
 
Reconciliation 
1. At a minimum, the manager/department head should exercise their oversight responsibilities related 
to cash controls. This should involve reviewing the Departmental Monthly Expense Statements 
monthly to ensure actual deposits agree with departmental cash receipt records.  
 
2. Optimally, the manager/department head should assign someone (other than the person(s) who 
prepares the deposit) to review the Daily Cashier Receipts with departmental cash records.  
 
Written Procedures 
1. It is strongly recommended that written procedures be developed and maintained by each 
department/unit associated with OLOL that manage significant amounts of cash.  
 
2. Written procedures should minimally include, authorization of person(s) to collect cash; off-site cash 
collection procedures; maintenance of cash receipt logs; security and reconciliation of cash; 
preparation, approval, and transmittal of cash to the Cashier’s Office; over/short procedures; and a 
procedure to notify the VP Finance/Controller and Internal Audit in event of loss. 
 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO 