Reviewed: 6/00; 6/1/06;  OO-FN-002 
Revised:  Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Finance 
Title: Competitive Bidding 
Policy 
Reference #: OrgOps/FN/002 
Supersedes #: AD/A/024 
Date of Origination: June 28, 1996 Review Date: June 1, 2006 
Revision Date:  
 
POLICY:   
To ensure that Our Lady of the Lake RMC (OLOL) receives competitive pricing on purchased supplies 
and services. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
1. Project Architect: an independent contractor engaged by the hospital to oversee the logistics of 
construction projects, including the review of General Contractor and sub-contractor invoices.   
2. Installment Agreements: an agreement/purchase which requires two or more payments, is 
represented by a written binding agreement, and covers a specified period of time. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Construction Projects 
1. For construction projects greater than $50,000, three written General Contractor bids should be 
obtained and reviewed by the Assistant Administrator of Plant Management, Senior Vice President 
and President and the "Project Architect".   
2. If the lowest bidder is not selected or three bids are not obtained, the reason must be documented and 
retained with the bids by the Assistant Administrator of Plant Management.   
3. Construction bids must be retained on file by the Assistant Administrator of Plant Services for at 
least one year following the completion of the project.   
4. The selection of the "Project Architect" must be approved by the Assistant Administrator of Plant 
Management and the Senior Vice President or President. 
 
Capital Expenditures and Non-Stock Requisitions 
 
A. Requisitions less than $1,000: 
1. The requisitioning department must complete the appropriate requisition forms (see 
Corporate Purchasing Policy), obtain the appropriate approval (see Level of Authorization 
for Purchases Policy) and submit the approved forms to the Purchasing Department for 
ordering.   
2. If considered necessary, the Purchasing agent may obtain additional competitive pricing.  
3. The Purchasing agent in Materials Management is the only person authorized to place the 
order with the vendor. 
 
B. Requisitions $1,000 - $9,999.99: 
1. A minimum of three price quotes from qualified vendors must be obtained.   
2. A properly trained and authorized employee of the requisitioning department may obtain the 
quotes but must submit the quotes to the Purchasing Department for ordering.   Reviewed: 6/00; 6/1/06;  OO-FN-002 
Revised:  Page 2 of 3 
3. The Purchasing agent must either 1) verify quotes obtained by the department; 2) 
independently obtain price quotes, or 3) combination of 1) and 2).  Regardless, the 
Purchasing agent must obtain or verify a minimum of three price quotes prior to ordering.   
4. The Purchasing agent in Materials Management is the only person authorized to place the 
order with the vendor. 
 
C. Requisitions $10,000 and over: 
1. A minimum of three written price quotes from qualified vendors must be obtained.   
2. A properly trained and authorized employee of the requisitioning department may obtain the 
quotes but must submit the quotes to the Purchasing Department for ordering.  
3. The Purchasing agent must either 1) verify quotes obtained by the department; 2) 
independently obtain written price quotes, or 3) combination of 1) and 2).  Regardless, the 
Purchasing agent must obtain or verify a minimum of three written price quotes prior to 
ordering.   
4. The Purchasing agent in Materials Management is the only person authorized to place the 
order with the vendor. 
 
Installment Agreements  
 
A. Agreements less than $10,000 annually: 
1. The requisitioning department must complete the appropriate requisition forms (see 
Corporate Purchasing Policy), obtain the appropriate approval (see Level of Authorization 
for Purchases Policy) and submit the approved forms to the Purchasing Department for 
contracting.   
2. If considered necessary, a Purchasing agent may obtain additional competitive pricing.   
3. The Director of Purchasing must execute the agreement with the vendor. 
 
B. Agreements $10,000 and over: 
1. A minimum of three written price quotes from qualified vendors must be obtained.  If three 
price quotes are not obtained, the reason must be documented and maintained by the Director 
of Purchasing.   
2. The requisitioning department may obtain the quotes but must submit the quotes to the 
Purchasing Department for contracting.   
3. The Purchasing agent must either 1) verify quotes obtained by the department; 2) 
independently obtain written price quotes, or 3) combination of 1) and 2).  Regardless, the 
Purchasing agent must obtain or verify a minimum of three written price quotes prior to 
contracting.   
4. The Director of Purchasing must execute the agreement with the vendor. 
5. All renewable installment agreements (i.e., housekeeping, dietary, equipment leases, 
maintenance, etc.) must be reviewed for efficiency annually and bid on by a minimum of 
three qualified vendors at least once every three years. 
 
Any deviations from the above policy and the reasons must be clearly documented and submitted to 
both the requisitioning department's Division Head and the Director of Purchasing. 
 
Stock Supplies and Pharmaceuticals 
 
1. All departmental stock supply requisitions are handled exclusively by Purchasing.   
2. All pharmaceuticals are handled exclusively by Pharmacy.  Reviewed: 6/00; 6/1/06;  OO-FN-002 
Revised:  Page 3 of 3 
3. However, supplier/vendor contracts for stock supplies and pharmaceuticals must be bid on by a 
minimum of three qualified vendors at least once every three years.   
4. Contracts with purchase groups (e.g., VHA) are not subject to the above policy, however, such 
contracts should be monitored for efficiency on an annual basis. 
 
REFERENCES: 
Please refer to the following policies for further purchasing requirements and instructions. 
1. Corporate Purchasing Policy (OrgOps/GN/002) 
2. Levels of Authorization for Purchases Policy (OrgOps/GN/009) 