 Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: General 
Title: Social Media Policy for General Public Policy Reference #: OOGN041 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: May 4, 2015 Last Review Date: January 8, 2024 
Last Revision Date: June 11, 2018 
 
PURPOSE: 
This policy is intended for those who wish to interact with Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health 
System (FMOLHS) or any of its entities through social media. These social media sites include but are 
not limited to various blogs, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, LinkedIn, YouTube, Vimeo or other user 
generated content sites. By accessing, viewing or posting any content related directly or indirectly to 
FMOLHS or any of its entities on FMOLHS’s social media sites, users accept, without limitation or 
qualification, the following terms of use.  If users do not agree to the terms of this Policy, users may not 
view or post any content to any of these social media sites.  Use of these social media sites constitutes 
the acceptance of this Policy and has the same effect as if users had actually physically signed an 
agreement. 
FMOLHS recommends that users of social media sites read the Social Media Standards & 
Recommendations for the General Public for guidelines on safe and appropriate social media use. 
FMOLHS employees must adhere to the Our Lady of the Lake Social Media Policy for Team Members. 
 
POLICY: 
a. Users must be at least 18 years or older to post any content to any of FMOLHS’s social media 
sites. 
b. Users are prohibited from posting any content that is personal health information (PHI) including 
any patient images on any FMOLHS social media sites. 
c. Users are prohibited from using the social media sites to provide medical advice or medical 
commentary by non- FMOLHS physicians or providers or to use the social media sites to make, 
recommend or increase referrals to physicians or providers who are not employed by FMOLHS . 
d. Users assume all responsibility related to the security, privacy and confidentiality risks inherent 
in sending any content over the internet.   
e. Users may not post any content that contains any product or service endorsements or that may be 
construed as political lobbying or solicitations of political contributions.  Users also may not use 
these social media sites to link to any sites of political candidates or parties or use these sites to 
discuss political campaigns or issues or to take a position on any legislation or law. 
 
 
  Page 2 of 3 
PROCEDURES: 
Within the terms of use, users agree that they will not: 
a. Violate any local, state, federal or international laws and regulations, including but not 
limited to copyright and intellectual property rights.  
b. Transmit any material (by uploading, posting, e-mail or otherwise) that is unlawful, 
disruptive, threatening, profane, abusive, harassing, embarrassing, tortious, defamatory, 
obscene, or is an invasion of another’s privacy, is hateful or racially, ethnically or 
otherwise objectionable, as solely determined at FMOLHS’s or any of its entities’ 
discretion. 
c. Impersonate any person or entity or falsely state or otherwise misrepresent an affiliation 
with a person or entity.  
d. Transmit any material (by uploading, posting, e-mail or otherwise) that users do not have 
a right to make available under any law or under contractual or fiduciary relationships. 
e. Take photos or videos of FMOLHS staff without verbal consent and transmit that 
material through social media sites. 
f. Transmit any material (by uploading, posting, e-mail or otherwise) that infringes any 
patent, trademark, trade secret, copyright or other proprietary rights of any party.  
g. Transmit (by uploading, posting, e-mail or otherwise) any unsolicited or unauthorized 
advertising (including advertising of services or products not belonging to FMOLHS or 
any of its entities), promotional materials, “junk mail,” “spam,” “chain letters,” “pyramid 
schemes” or any other similar form of solicitation.  
h. Transmit any material (by uploading, posting, e-mail or otherwise) that contains software 
viruses, worms, disabling code or any other computer code, files or programs designed to 
interrupt, destroy or limit the functionality of any computer software or hardware or 
telecommunications equipment.  
i. Harass or cyberbully any users of FMOLHS social media or any of its entities’ users. 
j. Collect or store, or attempt to collect or store, personal data about third parties without 
their knowledge or written authorization.  
k. Share confidential pricing information of any party. 
l. Share confidential information including but not limited to PHI or other confidential 
organizational information obtained at FMOLHS. 
m. Speak, post or create social media accounts on behalf of FMOLHS. 
 
Users agree that any claim or dispute relating to posting of any content on a social media site shall be 
construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Louisiana without regard to its conflict of laws or 
provisions, and users are bound and shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the local, state or 
federal courts located in Louisiana.  Page 3 of 3 
Users shall defend, indemnify and hold FMOLHS or any of its entities and its corporate affiliates and their 
respective officers, directors, trustees, employees, contractors, agents, successors and assigns harmless 
from and against, and shall promptly reimburse them for: any and all losses, claims, damages, settlements, 
costs and liabilities of any nature whatsoever (including reasonable attorneys’ fees) to which any of them 
may become subject arising out of, based upon, as a result of or in any way connected with their posting of 
any content to FMOLHS or any of its entities’ social media sites, any third party claims of infringement or 
any breach of this Policy.  
DISCLAIMER: 
FMOLHS or any of its entities does not control the third party sites and the internet over which users 
may choose to send confidential personal or health information or other content and, therefore, 
FMOLHS does not warrant any safeguard against any such interceptions or compromises to user 
information. Neither FMOLHS or any of its entities nor its content or service providers guarantee or 
warrant FMOLHS’s or any of its entities’ social media sites against errors, defects, delays, omissions, 
interruptions or losses, including losses of data, nor are any files downloaded from FMOLHS’s or any of 
its entities’ sites warranted or guaranteed to be free of viruses, bugs, worms or other such destructive 
elements.  
As new forms of social media emerge, FMOLHS will periodically update this Policy.  FMOLHS 
suggests that users review the Policy at regular intervals.  By continuing to post any content after such 
new terms are posted, users accept and agree to any and all such modifications to this Policy.   
This policy may be updated at any time without notice, and each time a user accesses a social media site, 
the new policy will govern usage, effective upon posting.  
 
 