OO-GN-024 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Operational 
Title: 
Correcting Patient Medical Record 
Number When Existing Patient Medical 
Record Number has been Inadvertently 
Assigned 
Policy 
Reference #: OrgOps-GN-024 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: March 29, 2004 Review Date: May 1, 2024 
Revision Date: December 28, 2017 
 
PURPOSE: 
To outline the procedures for correcting the medical record and billing when an existing medical record 
number is inadvertently assigned to another patient 
 
POLICY:  
It is the policy of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC), to assign an appropriate 
medical record number to a patient at the time of admissions.  If a n existing patient’s medical record 
number is inadvertently assigned to another patient, OLOLRMC will promptly notify appropriate 
personnel and will correct the medical record and billing information as outlined below. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
1. When a Patient Access Representative identifies or is notified that a patient has been admitted using 
another person’s medical record number, the Patient Access Representative will immediately notify 
the Nurse Manager of the appropriate unit and the Patient Access Supervisor/Manager. 
 
2. The Patient Access Representative will correctly register the patient and print new face sheets.  The 
new face sheets will be delivered to the patient care unit .  The old face sheet and all copies will be 
destroyed by the Patient Access staff. 
 
3. The Patient Access Representatives will correct the system by utilizing the Dismiss Function in the 
electronic medical record for the incorrect account. 
 
4. The Patient Access Supervisor/Manager will immediately notify the following departments of the 
situation in order for each area to make any necessary corrections: Radiology, Lab, Respiratory 
Therapy, Nuclear Medicine; Physical Medicine, HIM, Pharmacy, Business Office, Patient Care 
Services, and Emergency Department. 
 
5. The Patient Access Supervisor will complete a Safety Event Report within 1 hour and forward to 
the Director of Patient Access who will forward to Risk Management. 
 
6. The Director of Risk Management and  the Director of Patient Access  will determine if patient 
notification is necessary 
 OO-GN-024 
Page 2 of 3 
7. The Director  of Patient Access will notify all appropriate physicians (including hospital -based 
physicians, attending and consulting physicians) of the situation. 
 
If the patient is currently receiving treatment or has not been discharged f rom the hospital when 
the error is found, the following will occur: 
 
1.  The nursing unit will print “Current Order Summary” from the incorrect medical record and use 
it to enter orders on the correct medical record. 
 
2. Once the “Current Order Summary” has been printed from the incorrect medical record, nursing 
will discontinue orders on the incorrect medical record. 
 
3. The nursing unit will p rint “P atient Care N otes” from the incorrect medical record, from the 
admit date to present and place in correct medical record. 
 
4. The Patient Access Representative will submit a “Chart Correct Request” within EPIC. 
 
5. The Patient Access Representative  will be responsible  for placing correct labels on the 
manual/printed documentation. 
 
6. The nursing unit will unchart  electronic documentation from  the incorrect medical record 
including I&O and Allergy .  Allergy, height and weight will be charted on the correct medical 
record. If unable to unchart electronically, contact the Help Desk and request that the CIS analyst 
on call unlock the record.  This will occur if the standard time frame for adding data to a record 
has been exceeded. 
 
7.  Each area will be notified to electronically unchart from the incorrect medical record into the 
correct medical record. If electronic uncharting is not accessible  contact the Help Desk and 
request the CIS analyst on call to unlock the record.  This will occur if the standard time frame 
for adding data has been exceeded. 
 
8. The Business Office will move all charges to the correct record. 
 
9. The Director of Patient Access will follow-up with the Nurse Manager of the unit on which the 
patient is currently located. 
 
10. When each area has completed their responsibilities they will e -mail the Director of Patient 
Access and advise that the records are complete. 
 
If patient has been discharged from the hospital when error is found the same steps 1 -6 will be 
followed: 
  
1. The Director of Patient Access  will notify Radiology, Lab, Respiratory Therapy, Nuclear 
Medicine, Physical Medicine, HIM, Pharmacy, Business Office, Patient Care Service, and 
Emergency Department, to have them unchart on the incorrect medical record and chart of the 
correct medical record, as stated above. OO-GN-024 
Page 3 of 3 
 
2. The Patient Access Representative  will contact HIM f or a hard copy of the incorrect medical 
record and place correct labels on all documentation. 
 
3. The Patient Access Representative will return the file to HIM to re-scan the information. 
 
4. All areas will notify the Director of Patient Access when completed. 
 
The notification list will be as follows:  
▪ Radiology/Nuclear Medicine 
▪ Lab 
▪ Pharmacy 
▪ Respiratory Therapy 
▪ Physical Medicine 
▪ HIM 
▪ Business Office 
▪ Patient Care Services 
▪ Nurse Manager of unit patient is located 
▪ Emergency Room 
▪ Wound Care 
 
 
 
 
 
 