 1 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational – General 
SUBJECT:  
Volunteer and Observer Program  
PAGES: 
6 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
6/26/2023 
REVISION DATE: 
 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OrgGen 043 
 
SCOPE: 
The policies and procedures associated with Volunteer and Observer Program  apply to facilities located within 
the Baton Rouge Market of the Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System (FMOLHS) which includes: 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Our Lady of the Lake Ascension, Our Lady of the Lake Assumption 
Community Hospital, Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital, Our Lady of the Lake Livingston, and Our Lady of 
the Lake North Baton Rouge (FMOLHS BR Market)   
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish a policy regarding the volunteer and observer program in the FMOLHS BR Market.  
 
POLICY: 
Volunteers and Observers must be at least 18 years and older, except for those who are participating in a 
workforce development program. Volunteers must commit to a minimum of 80 hours of service per calendar 
year. Observers do not have minimum hours of service requirement.  
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL  2 
Definitions 
Observer – An observer is a temporary, unpaid person who wishes to shadow an employee or clinician for 
purposes of enhancing the observer’s knowledge. Observers are not assigned official duties/tasks and cannot 
participate in, provide or interfere with patient care, including patient experience volunteer responsibilities.  
 
Observers generally include the following: 
• Physicians not affiliated with FMOLHS BR Market  
• Allied health professional not affiliated with FMOLHS BR Market  
• APRN students, PA students, physical therapy and radiology students wishing to gain observer hours at 
FMOLHS but not under the auspices of affiliation or college agreement (does not qualify for school 
credit)  
• College students that are interested in the medical field wishing to gain observer hours at FMOLHS but 
not under the auspices of affiliation or college agreement (does not qualify for school credit)  
• Nursing students that are interested in observing a particular nursing specialty gain observer hour at 
FMOLHS but not under the auspices of affiliation or college agreement (does not qualify for school 
credit)  
• High school students that have completed their sophomore year (Talent Acquisition Workforce 
Development Program) 
Volunteer - A volunteer is an individual who works voluntarily without pay with a facility department, faculty, 
or staff member in a healthcare setting lasting more than 80 hours per calendar year. The volunteering 
experience does not constitute medical education, academic credit, graduate medical education, continuing 
medical education, or training leading to licensure or board certification. The volunteer is not a resident, 
medical staff member, or FMOLHS BR Market employee and must not represent themselves as such.  
Volunteers generally include the following: 
• Research Externs: An individual who conducts voluntary work with a faculty or staff member in a 
research setting. Research Volunteers are not allowed to provide patient care, even under supervision, 
but to provide support services to the division or department with which they work.  
• On-site Research Externs will perform voluntary work at a FMOLHS BR Market campus facility and 
will follow the volunteer onboarding guidelines below. 
• Remote Research Externs will perform volunteer work off campus and will follow the observer 
onboarding guidelines. Orientation to the electronic health record may still be required.   
• Patient Experience Volunteer: An individual who conducts voluntary work with a faculty or staff 
member in a patient experience, guest services, or volunteer services setting. Patient experience 
volunteers are permitted to volunteer in patient care areas but are not allowed to provide or interfere 
with patient medical care. They can provide departmental support under direct supervision. 
• Pastoral Care Volunteer or Eucharistic Minister: An individual who conducts voluntary work with a 
faculty or staff member in pastoral care. Is a parishioner selected by the pastor and mandated by the 
bishop, who serves, distributes, and administers the body and blood of Jesus Christ during the Holy  3 
Communion. Pastoral care volunteers are not allowed to provide patient care, even under supervision, 
but support services to the division or department with which they work. 
PROCEDURE: 
 
Volunteer & Observer guidelines  
As members of the FMOLHS BR Market, volunteers/observers must abide by the same regulations 
as the employed team members and follow similar hospital regulations. All onsite volunteers/ 
observers must adhere to the following: 
• Volunteers/observers must hold patient and hospital information confidential and must 
sign a statement of confidentiality.  
• Volunteers/observers are required to dress professionally. In patient areas, no shorts, 
sandals (flip flops, open toed shoes) or clogs may be worn. Heavy perfume and bulk jewelry 
should be avoided. Khakis and/or jeans can be worn in appropriate assignments.  Clothes 
must be neat, clean and appropriate for a business environment. In some cases, you will be 
given surgical scrubs to wear. 
• Volunteers/observers must wear an official identification badge issued by an FMOLHS BR 
Market security department. A $5 fee will be charged to observers to obtain their badge. 
Volunteers will not incur a cost for their badge.  
• Observers are required to complete the Observation Acknowledgement Agreement and a 
HIPAA Confidentiality Agreement.  
• Observers under 18 must submit a signed parental consent form.  
             Volunteers/Observers must not: 
o Accept or ask for money or gifts from patients. 
o Solicit medical staff for professional advice. 
o Attempt to sell items to patients, hospital staff or a patient’s family members. 
o Visit friends or relatives in the hospital while on duty. 
o Visit other hospital areas except during their service. 
o Have friends or relatives (including children) visiting with them while on duty. 
Application:  
Prospective volunteers/observers must complete an application via the volunteer management 
online application system.  Volunteers will be responsible by the Director of Patient Experience 
and/or team members designated by them. Observers will be vetted and managed by Academic 
Affairs.  All research volunteers will be managed by the Office of Clinical Research, and Pastoral 
Care volunteers will be vetted, onboarded, and managed by the Pastoral Care Office.  
In addition, an observer must complete the OLOL Health Observation Status Request Form at least two 
weeks prior to beginning observation. An observer must also have an FMOLHS BR Market team member  4 
sponsor their observer status. The sponsoring team member is required to sign the OLOL Health  
Observation Status Request Form prior to the observer onboarding.  
 
Interview(s):   
After completing the application process, a screening interview is scheduled with and by the 
department responsible for onboarding the volunteer/observer. Applicants are reviewed and 
considered based on assessed skills, interests, level of demonstrated commitment and the 
availability of volunteer/observer positions.  
Health Related Documentation:  
• Volunteers  
Volunteers must complete the required health related documentation prior to beginning 
their volunteer hours. FMOLHS BR Market employee health department can help complete 
the required documentation. 
o Health Related Documentation Includes (Employee health can assist with this 
process) 
• Covid-19 vaccination or exemption record  
• Flu vaccination or exemption (if during flu season) record  
• TB Skin Test/Attestation form  
  
▪ FMOLHS Children’s Hospital Volunteers additionally require vaccination 
(addition to ones listed above) or proof of immunity to 
• MMR 
• TDAP 
• Hepatitis B  
• Observers 
Observers must complete and provide the required health documentation before starting 
their observation hours in the FMOLHS BR Market.  
o Health Related Documentation Includes (Observer must provide documentation, 
organization will not process)  
• Covid-19 vaccination or exemption record  
• Flu vaccination or exemption (if during flu season) record  
• TB attestation form 
• Health Records Management  
Formatted: Font: Bold, Complex Script Font: Bold 5 
o Health records from a primary care physician can be submitted to the 
volunteer/observer’s onboarding department.  
o Health related documentation will be managed by each volunteer/observer’s 
onboarding department. The volunteer/observer’s health record must include the 
following information: name, date of birth, and school/employer.  
o The health-related documentation must be stored by each department leader using 
Sharepoint. One file for each observer must include all health-related 
documentation.  
o Volunteer/observer health related documentation is subject to review/audit by 
FMOLHS BR Market Employee Health, Compliance, and Regulatory Departments.  
o All volunteers/observers must have a background check which will be completed by 
the onboarding department.  
Orientation and Training:  
• The volunteer/observer must complete the online orientation process prior to their start 
date.  
• Volunteer/observer orientation includes HIPAA training, confidentiality agreement and 
emergency preparedness training.   
• Volunteer/observer should also be properly trained by their departmental supervisor or 
designated staff to successfully complete assigned tasks.  
 
Volunteer Hours Tracking  
All volunteers must schedule and track their own hours using the electronic volunteer management 
portal.  
 
Confidentiality & Ethics  
• Volunteers/observers are bound by hospital policy to regard all patient information 
(including identity, diagnosis and condition, etc.) as strictly confidential. Divulging 
confidential information will result in termination of volunteer service. All volunteers and 
observers are asked to sign a Confidentiality Agreement and complete HIPAA (Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act) training during their initial orientation. 
Resignation 
• Volunteers wishing to resign from their assignment must provide notice to their supervisor. The 
hospital identification (ID) must be returned. 
 
 
Disciplinary action & Termination of services  
• If, at any time, a volunteer/observer’s performance or conduct needs improvement, they may 
need to discuss with an immediate supervisor. Depending on the situation, specific  6 
improvements may be agreed upon; additional training may be necessary; reassignment, or 
time off pending reassignment, may be appropriate; or if the problem can’t be resolved 
satisfactorily for all involved, the volunteer/observer may be terminated. 
• FMOLHS BR Market reserves the right to terminate service as a volunteer/observer if the action 
is in the best interest of both parties. Infraction of FMOLHS BR Market policies cannot be 
allowed, and a warning will be issued as needed. Any breach of patient confidentiality, 
harassment, theft and any other standing hospital policy will be grounds for immediate and 
permanent dismissal from the program. 
 
• Medical staff office will follow MS/PHY/018 Observation Status policy 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• MS/PHY/018 Observation Status  
ATTACHMENTS:  
• Observation Status Request Form  
• Observer Acknowledgment Agreement  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 