 1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Organizational  
SUBJECT:  
Crisis Response Team  
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
5/11/2005 
REVISION DATE: 
02/13/2023                                
REVIEW DATE: 
2/12/2024 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
OrgOps-GN-028 
 
SCOPE: 
The policies and procedures associated with the Crisis Response Team apply to facilities located within the 
Baton Rouge Market of the Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System (FMOLHS) which includes: 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Our Lady of the Lake Ascension, Our Lady of the Lake 
Assumption Community Hospital, Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital, Our Lady of the Lake 
Livingston, Our Lady of the Lake North Baton Rouge and Our Lady of the Lake Physician Group (FMOLHS 
BR Market)  
PURPOSE: 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Our Lady of the Lake Ascension, Our Lady of the Lake 
Assumption Community Hospital, Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital, Our Lady of the Lake 
Livingston, Our Lady of the Lake North Baton Rouge and Our Lady of the Lake Physician Group has 
established a Crisis Response Team (CR) team. In response to a crisis event, the CR Team can provide 
psychological debriefing or defusing services to employees of a department of the hospital impacted by the 
incident. The intervention allows the department to process the incident as a group to return employees to 
normal functioning as quickly as possible and to avoid staff burnout. 
 
The CR team may also be employed, when necessary, in the hospital’s community disaster response.  
POLICY: 
 The CR Team may be utilized in a crisis event to support team members.  
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 2 
DEFINITIONS: 
1. Crisis: response to an event wherein 1) an individual’s psychological homeostasis is disrupted, 2) one’s 
usual coping mechanisms have failed, and 3) there is evidence of distress and significant functional 
impairment.  
 
2. Critical Incident: the event which has the potential to engender a crisis response.  
 
3. Critical Incident Stress Management: a comprehensive, integrated multi-component crisis intervention 
system.  
 
4. Critical Incident Stress Management (CISM) Interventions: Crisis Management Briefing, Demobilization, 
Defusing, Critical Incident Stress Debriefing, Post-Incident Education, Follow-up Services, Referrals  
 
5. CR Team: Hospital staff certified in CISM Group Crisis Intervention  
 
6. Employee Assistance Program (EAP): services for employees and family members to help the employee 
resolve personal and work-related problems which may adversely affect job performance and personal well-
being.  
 
7. Demobilization: quick informational and rest session applied when workers have been released from 
service at a major incident that requires over 100 personnel. Ten-minute information followed by 20 
minutes for food and rest.  
 
8. Crisis Management Debriefing: a large group crisis intervention technique designed for use with large 
groups of primary victims (maximum 300 at a time). May be implemented after mass disasters or work-
related crises.  
 
9. Defusing: a shortened version of the debriefing that must be provided within 8 hours of the incident, 
preferably immediately after the incident (6-8 people).  
 
10. Critical Incident Stress Debriefing (CISD): group meetings or discussions about a traumatic event or series 
of traumatic events. The processes are solidly based in crisis intervention theory and educational 
intervention theory. The CISD and defusing processes are designed to mitigate the psychological impact of 
a traumatic event, prevent the subsequent development of a post-traumatic stress syndrome, and serve as an 
early identification mechanism for individuals who will require professional mental health follow-up after a 
traumatic event.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
 The following procedure will be used when one of the following occurs: A Code is called that requires activation 
of the Incident Command Center, the event is multi-departmental, there is the potential for high media involvement, 
or more than thirty people are involved in the incident and activated by the Incident Commander.  
 
1. The Department Leader whose employees are impacted by a crisis event will contact the Administrator-on-
Call (AOC) to access the CR Team. After regular business hours and the House Manager/Supervisor will be 
contacted to facilitate with the AOC. The CR Team will respond to requests from hospital departments. 
Response to requests from offsite departments will be made on a case-by-case basis.  
  3 
2. The AOC and/or the House Manager/Supervisor will determine if the CR Team will be activated.  
 
3. On approval of the AOC, the House Manager/Supervisor or Department Leader will direct the Page 
Operator to contact the CR Team Leader on call.  
 
4. The CR Team Leader is responsible to respond to the Department Leader within eight (8) hours to 
acknowledge the request.  
 
5. The CR Team Leader and Department Leader will coordinate an action plan within twenty-four (24) hours 
of the request.  
 
6. The action plan will be individualized to the identified need or situation.  
 
7. Implementation of the action plan will occur at a time that is most beneficial for staff involved as 
determined by the CR Team Leader and Department Leader.  
 
8.  Department Leader of impacted area determines if the event warrants EAP or CR Team involvement or 
both (see below).  
 
9. If the Department Leader determines CR Team involvement is needed, he or she notifies the AOC and/or 
the House Manager/Supervisor and contacts the Page Operator to contact the CR Team Leader on call. 
 
When an event or series of events occur that impact only one department, less than thirty people, does not require 
activation of the Incident Command Center, nor has the likelihood of high media involvement, the following 
procedure is used. 
 
1. Page the on-call CR Team Leader.  
2. CR Team leader responds within one hour to Department Leader.  
3. CR Team Leader and Department Leader develop plan and timetable.  
4. CR Team Leader assigns persons on team to conduct diffusing or CISD as appropriate to the situation.  
 
Examples: Events for CR Team Involvement  Events for EAP Referral  
Traumatic death of an infant or child.  Domestic violence incident outside facility.  
Traumatic death of a co-worker.  Death of a family member, including a child.  
Attempted or successful murder/suicide in workplace.  Historical event causing distress.  
Serious line of duty/workplace injury.  Event distressful to an individual.  
Disaster/multi-casualty incident.  Marital or family discord.  
Event with extreme threat to participants.  Conflict between coworkers.  
Prolonged incidents especially with loss.  Substance abuse.  
Events with excessive media coverage.  Suicidal employee.  
Any significant event capable of causing considerable 
emotional distress in those who are exposed to it.  
Situations without a critical incident where a worker 
is experiencing considerable emotional distress.  
 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
•   4 
ATTACHMENTS:  
• CR Team Lead  
• CR Team Names  
 
 
 