OO-GN-004 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: General 
Title: Forms Management Policy Reference #: OrgOps/GN/004 
Supersedes #: AD/A/034 
Date of Origination: January 2000 Last Review Date: April 8, 2019 
Last Revision Date: April 8, 2019 
 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to assure that hospital forms development and usage is evaluated for 
efficient design including appropriate methodology for computerization, cost effectiveness, medical 
records standards and redundancy prior to implementation. 
 
POLICY 
A. The production and revision of all patient record forms used interdepartmentally must be approved 
by the Integrated Documentation Committee prior to use at Our Lady of the Lake Hospital. 
B. Forms are classified as any printed material to which information is added and includes both patient 
record forms and non-patient record forms. Brochures and pamphlets are not considered to be forms. 
C. Non patient record forms do not require committee review. Revision of forms and their 
implementation should be coordinated with the existing supply of that form. 
D. Departments may delete forms from inventory that are obsolete by notifying the Integrated 
Documentation Committee 
 
PROCEDURE 
New Patient Record Forms and Revised Patient Record Forms 
1. Obtain a "Standards Guide for Form Approval" from Lake Link/Department/Forms 
Management. 
2. Requestor must complete the "Standards Guide for Form Approval" and submit the form 
electronically to the chairperson of the Integrated Documentation Committee.  
3. The chairperson of the Integrated Documentation Committee or designee will review the form(s) 
and give feedback to the requestor.  If the form is appropriate, the item will be placed on the 
agenda for the next Integrated Documentation Committee meeting. The date of the meeting will 
be communicated to the requestor to present the form.  
4. Upon approval at the Integrated Documentation Committee meeting, HIM will provide the 
barcode (if necessary) based  on approval by the HIM Management Team.  
5. The tab number under which the form will be filed in the medical record must be identified.  The 
final draft must have the form number typed at the bottom left of each page above the origination 
date, i.e. Orig. 08/03; the item number and tab number at the bottom right with the item number 
above the tab number listed as Item # _____. All fonts and size must be the same for the items 
mentioned above.  OO-GN-004 
Page 2 of 2 
6. The requestor must incorporate committee recommendations. The final form must have the form 
number typed at the bottom left of each page above the origination date, i.e. Orig. 08/03; the item 
number and tab number at the bottom right with the item number above the tab number listed as 
Item # _____. All fonts and size must be the same for the items mentioned above. 
7. The requestor will forward the final revised copy of the document to the chairperson or designee. 
The chairperson or designee will email the document, along with the barcode to be placed at the 
bottom of the document, to the printing company. The requestor of the document will be carbon 
copied on the email. Once the printing company has added the barcode and completed the final 
version of the document, the printing company will email the chairperson or designee, along with 
the requestor, a copy of the final version of the document. The requestor of the document will 
review and approve the final copy via email. Once, the printing company receives the approval 
via email, the document can be ordered for use.  
 