 OO-HR-E-031 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: General 
Title: Marketing and Communications Social 
Media Policy 
Policy Reference #: OOGN040 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: May 4, 2015 Last Review Date: January 8, 2024 
Last Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines the standards the Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System (FMOLHS) 
abides by on social media pages and forums and when conducting interaction with the public online. 
These social media sites include but are not limited to its blog, Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Instagram, 
Vimeo and YouTube pages. The terms and conditions listed below state FMOLHS’s protocols and legal 
policies in the use of its own pages. Users who interact with FMOLHS on social media should read and 
abide by the Social Media Policy for the General Public. Team members should read and abide by the 
Social Media Policy for Team Members. 
 
POLICY: 
All social media actions, interactions and activities made on behalf of FMOLHS are to be managed by 
the Marketing and Communications department or other approved social media contributors. The 
Marketing and Communications Department owns all FMOLHS social media accounts, unless otherwise 
determined by the Vice President of Communications or his/her designee. Team members and/or public 
users are not authorized to speak, post or create a social media account on behalf of FMOLHS. 
 
FMOLHS will conduct its social media practices in accordance to all hospital policies in particular, 
those pertaining to patient privacy, Electronic Communications, Confidential Information, Standards of 
Behavior, Outside Contacts (Media, Law Enforcement and Regulators), Use of Hospital Name by 
External Organizations, Web Authoring, and Intellectual Property.  
 
FMOLHS or any of its entities may suspend, change or discontinue any social media aspect of 
FMOLHS. FMOLHS owns the rights to its name and brand and reserves the right to delete or report any 
social media pages that are using the name or brand of FMOLHS.  
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
1. Patient Privacy and Personal Health Information 
FMOLHS protects the privacy and confidentiality of all our patients. All posting and information shared 
by FMOLHS via social channels will comply with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA). All patients mentioned or included in social content will give written authorization before 
any photos or personal health information (PHI) is posted by FMOLHS. PHI includes any information 
relating to the physical and mental health or condition of a person and/or treatment payment and health 
care operations of the patient. PHI used in social media channels may include:  OO-HR-E-031 
Page 2 of 4 
• Patient name 
• City/town 
• State 
• Date of birth 
• Full face photograph 
• Date of admission/ discharge date 
• Health condition 
• Patient relationship with FMOLHS  
 
FMOLHS strongly discourages users from posting the PHI of their own or other’s on its social channels, 
but FMOLHS is not responsible for any PHI posted by another user.  
 
FMOLHS team members are prohibited from posting any information from and/or on their personal 
social media accounts that includes PHI without written authorization from the patient. Team members 
are not to comment or supply information online that speaks to an individual’s care or treatment. 
 
FMOLHS does encourage team members to be brand ambassadors by sharing official FMOLHS social 
media posts via social media, but cannot post original content or speak on behalf of the organization in 
the post without coordination with the Marketing and Communications Department. 
 
2. Patient/User Interaction 
FMOLHS or any of its entities does not offer medical advice, diagnosis or treatment via the public 
internet. If a user describes symptoms of an illness, FMOLHS will not provide any medical advice or 
diagnosis and will remind the user when appropriate to contact his or her doctor or other qualified health 
care professional for professional medical advice. 
 
FMOLHS reserves the right to exchange personal contact information in cases deemed necessary 
through private messaging. FMOLHS does not offer medical advice, diagnosis or treatment through 
private messaging. 
 
FMOLHS may route applicable comments and concerns to the Guest Services Department or other 
responsible parties for follow-up or resolution. However, FMOLHS will not and should not be expected 
to address all issues or concerns expressed on a social media site.  If a user needs assistance, he or she 
should contact Guest Services.  
 
While FMOLHS makes reasonable efforts to monitor and/or moderate content posted on its social media 
platforms, FMOLHS is not responsible for moderating or responding to all comments. FMOLHS will try 
to respond in a timely manner to appropriate online requests for information.  
 
3. Content Monitoring and Removal  OO-HR-E-031 
Page 3 of 4 
FMOLHS or any of its entities reserves the right to monitor, prohibit, restrict, block, suspend, terminate, 
delete or discontinue user access to any of these social media site pages, at any time, without notice and 
for any reason and in its sole discretion.  FMOLHS or any of its entities may remove, delete, block, filter 
or restrict by any other means any materials at FMOLHS’s or any of its entities’ sole discretion.   
 
FMOLHS closely monitors content on all online social channels and reserves the sole right to review, 
edit, and/or delete any comments posted on its hosted pages that it deems inappropriate.  FMOLHS will 
determine what is inappropriate for our social media site and will certainly consider inappropriate any 
posts that contain: 
o Vulgar or abusive language; 
o Obscene or personal attacks of any kind including offensive terms targeting individuals or 
groups; 
o Threats or defamatory statements; 
o Suggestions or encouragement of illegal activity; 
o Multiple successive off-topic posts by a single user or repetitive posts copied and pasted by 
multiple users, or spam; 
o Unsolicited proposals or other business ideas or inquiries; or 
o Promotion or endorsement of commercial services, products, or entities. (Note that non-
commercial links that are relevant to the topic or another comment are acceptable.) 
 
FMOLHS encourages the exchange of opinions and ideas. Disagreements and feedback/criticism are 
welcome, but abusive language will not be tolerated.  FMOLHS reserves the right to terminate the use of 
social media channels by banning or blocking users who violate these terms and conditions. Factual 
errors may be corrected or removed. 
 
4. Repurposing and Distributing Content 
Any information or content posted to FMOLHS’s media channels is deemed public information; 
therefore FMOLHS may use this information for internal and external promotional purposes and 
fundraising purposes. FMOLHS reserves the irrevocable right to reproduce, distribute, publish and 
display such content and reserves the right to create derivative works from user content, edit or modify 
such content, and use such content for any purpose FMOLHS deems appropriate.  
 
FMOLHS or any of its entities may disclose your communications and activities on our social media 
platforms to third parties at its discretion.  In the event that FMOLHS or any of its entities discloses any 
communications or activities to any third party, FMOLHS or any of its entities will have no liability to 
users. 
 
5. Endorsement 
FMOLHS or any of its entities does not endorse any product, service, views or content displayed on 
FMOLHS’s social media sites. The opinions and or views expressed on FMOLHS’s social media 
platforms, including, but not limited to, our blog, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, LinkedIn, Vimeo and  OO-HR-E-031 
Page 4 of 4 
YouTube pages, represent the thoughts of individual bloggers and online communities, and not those 
necessarily of FMOLHS or any of its corporate affiliates or any of their respective directors, officers, 
employees, research staff, medical staff or members of its respective board of directors. The opinions 
and views expressed on these pages do not in any way reflect the views of the site they are posted on, 
other sites affiliated with the site, the staff involved with maintaining the site or any members of the site. 
 
FMOLHS or any of its entities does not control the third party sites and the Internet over which users 
may choose to send confidential personal or health information or other content and, therefore, 
FMOLHS does not warrant any safeguard against any such interceptions or compromises to user 
information. Neither FMOLHS or any of its entities nor its content or service providers guarantee or 
warrant any social media sites against errors, defects, delays, omissions, interruptions or losses, 
including losses of data, nor are any files downloaded from FMOLHS’s or any of its entities’ sites 
warranted or guaranteed to be free of viruses, bugs, worms or other such destructive elements. 
 
 