OO/GN/023 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: General 
Title: Hospital Vehicle (Fleet) Policy Reference #: OrgOps/GN/023 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 9, 2004 Last Review Date:  December 14, 2020 
Last Revision Date: April 2, 2013 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to outline procedures to be followed for all employees who drive company 
vehicles and those employees who drive their personal vehicles on hospital business. 
 
POLICY: 
Hospital owned vehicles are provided to support business activities and are to be used only by approved 
drivers. Approved drivers are responsible for obeying all motor vehicles laws, maintaining the vehicle properly 
at all times and following procedures outlined below. This policy applies to all drivers who drive hospital -
owned vehicles and those who drive their personal vehicles on hospital -related business more than three 
times per week, each and every week. 
 
DEFINITIONS 
Approved Driver:  An employee driver who meets driver qualifications defined in this policy.  
 
Preventable Accident: Any accident involving a company vehicle or any vehicle being used on company 
business that results in property damage and/or personal injury in which the driver in question failed to 
exercise every reasonable precaution to prevent the accident.  
 
Major Violations :  Major violations for the purposes of this policy includes the following: Driving while 
intoxicated or impaired or under the influence of drugs, and Criminal conviction (e.g., felony, negligent 
homicide, manslaughter, hit and run, etc.) 
 
PROCEDURE: 
Approved Drivers 
A. All persons who are hired specifically as drivers will be screened by the Human Resources Department for 
driving credentials prior to employment.  The applicant's driving record will be examined by FMOLHS Risk 
Management and/or their designee who will determine whether or not the applicant is eligible to drive for 
the hospital. 
1. The State Motor Vehicle Records (MVRs) will be used as the source for verifying driver history. MVRs 
will be obtained and reviewed for each approved driver at least annually.  
2. Driving privileges will be withdrawn or suspended and/or company vehicle removed for any authorized 
driver not meeting the following requirements. In addition, disciplinary action may be taken.  
 
B. All approved drivers must meet the following qualifications. 
1. Be an authorized employee of the hospital. 
2. Be at least 21 years of age. 
3. Meet all licensing requirements. 
 
C. Drivers who have had any of the following will not be approved for a company vehicle. 
1. One or more major violations within the past five (5) years. Major violations include  OO/GN/023 
Page 2 of 4 
a. Driving while intoxicated or impaired or under the influence of drugs.  
b. Criminal conviction (e.g., felony, negligent homicide, manslaughter, hit and run, etc.) 
2. Speed in excess of 25 MPH over the speed limit. 
3. Three or more at-fault accidents and/or other moving violations in the past 3 years 
4. Two or more at fault accidents and/or other moving violations in the past year.  
5. Driving with a revoked license in the past three (3) years. 
6. Reckless driving in the past three (3) years. 
 
D. Employees are responsible for notifying their supervisor immediately if infractions occur, whether they 
occur while driving on hospital business, or if they occur during personal use of their own vehicle. 
 
E. Employees who are observed to demonstrate carelessness or disregard for the safe operation of a motor 
vehicle will face disciplinary action  and may be excluded from driving a hospital -owned vehicle .  The 
hospital reserves the right to conduct a road test of any driver at any time. 
 
F. Employees who are asked to drive on hospital business must be cleared through FMOLHS Risk 
Management prior to driving.  Supervisors who have employees who routinely drive on hospital business 
(more than three times each and every week) must submit a list of approved employees to FMOLHS Risk 
Management by January 15 of each year and whenever a new driver must be added. 
 
G. Employees shall not use hospital -owned vehicles to transport patients unless the vehicle has been 
deemed to be a "Patient Transport Vehicle."  At no time, shall any employee use their personal vehicle to 
transport patients.  
 
H. Personal use of hospital -owned vehicles is expressly prohibited, except by written consent from FMOLHS 
Risk Management. 
 
Driver Education and Training 
A. The hospital will provide all drivers with a vehicle safety training program.  Refresher courses may be given 
when changes occur to the employee’s driving record. 
 
B. Managers are responsible for ensuring the approved driver has completed initial training prior to 
assignment and use of a hospital-owned vehicle. 
 
C. Approved drivers are responsible for completing an annual review of safe driving information.  
 
D. Training records will be maintained in each employee’s file.  
 
Operation of Vehicles 
A. All drivers of hospital-owned vehicles shall drive in a courteous manner and observe the following Vehicle 
Fleet Safety rules and regulations.  
1. Drivers shall remain knowledgeable of and comply with all hospital rules and State laws and 
regulations.  
2. Each employee must maintain a current drivers and/or chauffeur’s license. 
3. Drivers will report any vehicle damage, malfunctio n, maintenance or operation problem to their 
manager and notify Plant Services. OO/GN/023 
Page 3 of 4 
4. Hospital-owned vehicles which are not in good mechanical condition shall not be driven. If an 
employee feels that the vehicle is in such condition, he/she is responsible to report the concern to 
their manager and notify Plant Services. 
5. Drivers will complete the Daily Vehicle Inspection Checklist prior to and immediately following each 
trip in the vehicle. See Appendix A: Daily Vehicle Inspection Checklist. 
a. The Daily Vehicle Inspection Checklist will be submitted to Plant Services when keys are 
returned.  
6. Drivers shall always wear seat belts while driving. Drivers are responsible to ensure all passengers also 
wear a seat belt while the vehicle is in operation. 
7. Drivers shall not operate a hospital -owned vehicle after having consumed alcohol and/or drugs, 
including prescription and over the counter drugs which may impair their ability to drive a vehicle. Any 
driver who feels he/she is taking a medication which may affect job performance must report to 
Employee Health. A determination will then be made whether the employee should drive a hospital 
vehicle. 
8. Cellular telephones and other electronic communication devices may not be used while driving , unless 
a hands -free device is used . The hands-free device must be in place prior to starting the vehicle. 
Texting while driving is expressly prohibited. 
9. Unsecured items shall not be placed on the dashboard of the vehicle. 
10. Low beam headlines shall be turned on during daylight hours anytime the windshield wipers are in 
operation. 
11. Vehicles should not be left unattended while the engine is running. 
12. All vehicles when parked during non -business hours will have the ignition key removed and all 
passenger and compartment doors locked.  
13. Smoking is prohibited in all hospital-owned vehicles.  
 
B. Failure to comply with any of these responsibilities may result in disciplinary action. 
 
Traffic Violations and Vehicle Accidents 
A. Fines for parking or moving violations are the personal responsibility of the assigned operator. 
1. Drivers are responsible to report all moving violations to FMOLHS Risk Management within 24 hours  or 
the following business day  when the violation involves a hospital -owned vehicle or personal vehicle 
used while on company business. 
2. Failure to report violations shall result in disciplinary action. 
 
B. Accidents  
1. In the event of any accident while driving on hospital -related business, the vehicle should be stopped 
in place and the employee should remain at the scene until law enforcement arrives.  Any employee 
who requires hospital care should be transported to the nearest hospital. 
2. Safety Event Report should be completed  in the Safety Event Reporting  system as soon as possible 
following the accident.  
 
C. Approved drivers are responsible to report traffic violations or vehicle accidents incurred during non -
business (personal use) hours.  
 
Vehicle Maintenance 
A. Authorized drivers are responsible to ensure proper maintenance of hospital-owned vehicles is completed. 
Drivers should notify their manager as maintenance problems arise with hospital-owned vehicles.  
 OO/GN/023 
Page 4 of 4 
B. Plant Services is responsible for monitoring hospital-owned vehicles and scheduling routine (preventive) 
maintenance according to the owner’s manual. 
 
C. The employee is responsible for ensuring that their personal vehicles are kept in proper maintenance. 
 
Insurance 
A. FMOLHS Risk Management  will maintain appropriate insurance policies and vehicle registration for 
hospital-owned vehicles.   
 
B. If personal vehicles are used for hospital -related business, the employee is responsible for providing proof 
of insurance and maintaining a current vehicle registration. The employee's personal automobile insurance 
is the primary coverage if they are involved in an accident while driving their personal vehicles on hospital 
business.  The hospital is not responsible for any deductibles the employee may have in regards to the 
insurance on their personal vehicles. 
 
  
 