Our Lady of the Lake
Surgical Services Protocol for Sales Representative
1. All Level One & Level Two Sales Representatives visiting OR staff or being present during a surgical 
procedure must be credentialed with Vendor Clear.
2. The representative must comply with OLOL OR dress code standards.  Company and Vendor Clear badges 
must be worn and visible at all times. 
    
3.   Representatives will be permitted in the OR area during a surgical procedure only when requested by the          
      Surgeon or to provide training/education to the OR Staff.  
4.  The Sales Representative should notify the appropriate OR Manager or Supervisor, in advance, of the MDs 
request for his/her presence in the OR.  
5. Upon arrival the Sales Representative must check in with the OR control desk staff, identify self, the 
Surgeon and the case to attend.
6.  OR staff will confirm with the surgeon whether the representative is needed in the room or  to be   
available outside of room.
7. The Sales Representative is not permitted in the OR until the patient is prepped and draped or at the 
appropriate time in the procedures.  
8. Once he/she enters room he/she must remain until the completion of the procedure or until released by the 
surgeon.  
9. The representative may not scrub in the procedure or not open sterile items directly to the surgical field.
10. Any supply item to be used in a case must be approved for use.  If approval is not received from an OLOL 
representative prior to use, OLOL will not reimburse the vendor.
11. All biological products will comply with FDA requirements.  See Biological Policy
12.  Any loaner/trail equipment brought in for use during a procedure must bring brought by the Sales 
Representative to OLOL Bio Medical Department for safety evaluation.  The representative must allow 
adequate time before the procedure for the safety check and set up time in the OR.  Once the equipment 
leaves OLOL, it must be re-evaluated upon return.
13.  In consideration of patient privacy and compliance with AORN & infection control standards, only the 
representative who is providing assistance/education or training will be permitted in a case.  A Sales 
Representative who is only an observer will not be permitted in the OR.
14. Sales representatives are not permitted to lounge or wait in the MD or staff lounges.  If  the representative if 
not required to be in the OR but the Surgeon or Staff have asked him/her to be available,  the sales 
representative should leave a contact number and wait outside of the OR suite.
15. The Operating Room or Suite is not an arena for “sale of product”.Our Lady of the Lake
Operating Room Protocol - Surgical Attire 
1. OLOLRMC scrub clothes may not be worn to and from or taken outside of the hospital.
2. A short sleeve T-shirt may be worn under the scrub shirt. Turtle neck shirts are not allowed under scrub 
shirts.
3. All persons who enter the semi-restricted and restricted areas of the surgical suite will change into 
freshly laundered surgical attire provided by OLOL.
4. Scrub clothes should be changed whenever they become visibly soiled or wet.
5. In the semi and restricted area the attire is scrub suit and a long sleeve warm up jacket. 
6. Socks or hose are worn with shoes. Sandals and bare feet are not allowed.
7.  Hoods will be worn for a beard or sideburns.
8. Cloth hats are not permitted.  
9.  Shoe covers are required only in cases when exposure to blood or potentially infectious materials is 
reasonably anticipated. The shoe covers must be removed prior to leaving the OR. 
10. All persons entering the restricted area of the surgical suite will wear a mask, i.e., in the core areas and 
the operating room whenever sterile supplies or instruments are open.
11. The mask will cover both mouth and nose and be secured in a manner that prevents venting.
12.  Once the patient has left the operating room, the mask may be removed; however, during room clean 
up masks should be worn if there is a risk for a splash to the face.
13. Masks should be removed and discarded after use and not saved. Masks should be handled by the ties 
only when removing.
14. Masks and shoe covers are to be removed prior to leaving the O.R. Department.
15. Jewelry (watches, bracelets and neck chains) will be totally confined within the scrub attire or removed.
16. Earrings should be small or covered by the surgical hat or removed.
17. Nail polish and artificial nails may not be worn. 
18. Strong scented products (colognes and perfumes) should not be worn.
19. Depending on the risk of exposure Personal Protective Equipment (gloves and/or eye ware) is 
available.
20. Hands should be cleaned with waterless antimicrobial solution when entering and leaving the OR.