 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: General 
Title: Sentinel Events and Root Cause Analysis Policy Reference #: OrgOps/GN/018 
Supersedes #: AD/A/049 
Date of Origination: June, 2000 Last Review Date: July 1, 2015 
Last Revision Date: April 22, 2024 
 
GOALS OF THE SENTINEL EVENT POLICY:  
The policy has the following six goals: 
1. To establish a mechanism for identifying, investigating, and responding to sentinel events. 
 
2. To have a positive impact in improving patient care, treatment, and services and in preventing 
unintended harm. 
 
3. To focus the attention of a hospital that has experienced a sentinel event on understanding the 
factors that contributed to the event (such as underlying causes, latent conditions and active 
failures in defense systems, or hospital culture), and on changing the hospital’s culture, systems, 
and processes to reduce the probability of such an event in the future. 
 
4. To increase the general knowledge about patient safety events, their contributing factors, and 
strategies for prevention 
 
5. To maintain the confidence of the public, clinicians, and hospitals that patient safety is a priority. 
 
6. To ensure the completion of a thorough and credible Root Cause Analysis (RCA).  
  
DEFINITIONS:  
 
I. Sentinel Event:  
A sentinel event is a patient safety event (not primarily related to the natural course of the 
patient’s illness or underlying condition) that reaches a patient and results in any of the 
following: 
• Death 
• Severe harm (regardless of duration of harm) 
• Permanent harm (regardless of harm) 
 
 
An event is also considered sentinel if it is one of the following: 
• Death caused by self-inflicted injurious behavior if any of the following apply: (1) 
while in a healthcare setting, (2) within 7 days of discharge from inpatient services, (3) 
within 7 days of discharge from emergency department (ED), or (4) while receiving or 
within 7 days of discharge from the following behavioral health care services; Day 
Treatment/Partial Hospitalization Program (PHP)/Intensive Outpatient Program (IOP), 
Residential, Group home, and Transitional Supportive Living Unanticipated death of a 
full-term infant 
• Homicide of any patient while receiving care, treatment, and services while on site at  
the organization/facility or while under the supervision/care of the organization 
• Homicide of a staff member, licensed independent practitioner, visitor, or vendor while 
on site at the organization/facility or while providing care/supervision to patients/clients 
• Any intrapartum (related to the birth process) maternal death 
• Severe maternal morbidity (leading to permanent harm or severe harm) 1 
• Sexual abuse/ assault / forced observations / taking explicit audio, photo or video of 
any patient receiving care, treatment, and services while on site at the 
organization/facility or while under the supervision/care of the organization2 
• Sexual abuse/assault / forced observations / taking explicit audio, photo or video of a 
staff member, licensed independent practitioner, visitor, or vendor while on site at the 
organization/facility or while providing care/supervision to patients 
• Physical assault (leading to death, permanent harm, or severe harm) of any patient 
receiving care, treatment, and services while on site at the organization/facility or while 
under the supervision/care of the organization 
• Physical assault (leading to death, permanent harm, or severe harm) of a staff member, 
licensed independent practitioner, visitor, or vendor while on site at the 
organization/facility or while providing care/supervision to patients 
• Surgery or other invasive procedure performed at the wrong site, on the wrong patient, 
or that is the wrong (unintended) procedure for a patient regardless of the type of 
procedure or the magnitude of the outcome3 
• Discharge of an infant to the wrong family 
• Abduction of any patient receiving care, treatment, and services 
 
1 A patient safety event that occurs from the intrapartum through the immediate postpartum period (24 hours), requiring the 
transfusion of 4 or more units of packed red blood cells (PRBC) and/or admission to the intensive care unit (ICU). 
Admission to the ICU is defined as admission to a unit that provides 24- hour medical supervision and can provide 
mechanical ventilation or continuous vasoactive drug support. Sources: American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the Society of Maternal -Fetal Medicine 
 
2  Nonconsensual sexual contact of any type with an individual. Sexual abuse includes, but is not limited to, the following:  
• Unwanted intimate touching of any kind, especially of the breasts, buttocks, or perineal area  
• All types of sexual assault or battery, such as rape, sodomy, and coerced nudity (partial or complete)  
• Forced observation of masturbation and/or sexually explicit images, including pornography, texts, or social media  
• Taking sexually explicit photographs and/or audio/video recordings of an individual and maintaining and/or 
distributing them (for example, posting on social media); this would include, but is not limited to, nudity, fondling, and/or  
intercourse involving an individual  
 
Generally, sexual contact is nonconsensual in the following situations:  
• When the individual lacks the cognitive or legal ability to consent even though appearing to want the contact to 
occur  
• When the individual does not want the contact to occur 
3  Invasive procedure is defined as  
A procedure in which skin or mucous membranes and/or connective tissue are incised or punctured, an instrument is 
introduced through a natural body orifice, or foreign material is inserted into the body for diagnostic or treatment -related 
purposes. Examples of invasive procedures include central line and chest tube insertions, biopsies and excisions, and all 
percutaneous procedures (for example, cardiac, electrophysiology, interventional radiology). Exclusions include 
venipuncture, which is defined as a collection of blood from a vein. Note: This exclusion is still considered a patient safet y 
event and should be reviewed by the appropriate local quality and safety teams.  
 
  
• Any elopement (that is, unauthorized departure) of a patient from a staffed around-the-
clock care setting (including the ED), leading to death, permanent harm, or severe harm 
to the patient 
•  Administration of blood or blood products having unintended ABO and non-ABO (Rh, 
Duffy, Kell, Lewis, and other clinically important blood groups) incompatibilities, 
hemolytic transfusion reactions, or transfusions resulting in severe harm, permanent 
harm, or death.4  
• Unintended retention of a foreign object in a patient after an invasive procedure, 
including surgery5 
• Severe neonatal hyperbilirubinemia (bilirubin >30 milligrams/deciliter) 
• Fluoroscopy resulting in permanent tissue injury when clinical and technical 
optimization were not implemented and/or recognized practice parameters were not 
followed6 
• Any delivery of radiotherapy to the wrong patient, wrong body region, unintended 
procedure, or >25% above the planned radiotherapy dose 
• Fire, flame, or unanticipated smoke, heat, or flashes occurring during direct patient care 
caused by equipment operated and used by the organization. To be considered a 
sentinel event, equipment must be in use at the time of the event; staff do not need to be 
present.7  
•  Fall in a staffed-around-the-clock care setting or fall in a care setting not staffed 
around the clock during a time when staff are present resulting in any of the following:  
o Any fracture 
o Surgery, casting, or traction  
o Required consult/management or comfort care for a neurological (for 
example, skull fracture, subdural or intracranial hemorrhage) or internal (for 
example, rib fracture, small liver laceration) injury  
 
4  If a clinical determination warrants the use of Rho(D) positive blood to a Rho(D) negative recipient or uncrossmatched 
blood for emergent or lifesaving interventions, it would not be considered a reviewable sentinel event. §Administration of 
blood or blood products where safety, potency, or purity has been compromised while the blood product in question was in 
the laboratory’s control would be considered a sentinel event. Source: Food and Drug Administration, Center for Biologics 
Evaluation and Research. 21 CFR 606.171. 
5 The time period after an invasive procedure encompasses any time after the completion of final skin closure, even if the 
patient is still in the procedural area or in the operating room under anesthesia. A failure to identify and correct an 
unintended retention of a foreign object prior to that point in the procedure represents a system failure, which requires 
analysis and redesign. It also places the patient at additional risk by extending the surgical procedure and time under 
anesthesia. If a foreign object (for example, a needle tip or screw) is left in the patient because of a clinical determinati on 
that the relative risk to the patient of searching for and removing the object exceeds the benefit of removal, this would not  
be considered a reviewable sentinel event. However, in such cases, the organization shall (1) disclose to the patient the 
unintended retention and (2) keep a record of the retentions to identify trends and patterns (for example, by type of 
procedure, by type of retained item, by manufacturer, by practitioner) that may identify opportunities for improvement.  
6 Source: Adapted from National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP): Outline of Administrative 
Policies for Quality Assurance and Peer Review of Tissue Reactions Associated with Fluoroscopically Guided 
Interventions. (https://ncrponline.org/wp-content/themes/ncrp/PDFs/State ment_11.pdf) and the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA). Accessed July 20, 2021 
7 Key Terms; Fire:  A rapid oxidation process, which is a chemical reaction resulting in the evolution of light and heat in 
varying intensities. Source: National Fire Protection Association. NFPA 901: Standard Classifications for Incident 
Reporting and Fire Protection Data. Quincy, MA: NFPA, 2016. 
 
  
o A patient with coagulopathy who receives blood products as a result of the fall  
o Death or permanent harm as a result of injuries sustained from the fall (not 
from physiologic events causing the fall)  
 
 
In cases in which the hospital is uncertain that a patient safety event is a sentinel event as defined by 
The Joint Commission, the event will be presumed to be a sentinel event and the hospital’s response 
will be reviewed under the Sentinel Event Policy according to the prescribed procedures and time 
frames. 
 
Such events are considered “sentinel” because they signal a need for immediate investigation and 
response.  All sentinel events must be reviewed by the hospital and are subject to review by The Joint 
Commission if requested.  An appropriate response includes all of the following: 
• A formalized team response that stabilizes the patient, discloses the event to the patient and 
family, and provides support for the family as well as staff involved in the event 
• Notification of hospital leadership 
• Immediate investigation 
• Completion of a comprehensive systematic analysis for identifying the casual and contributory 
factors 
• Strong corrective actions derived from the identified casual and contributing factors that 
eliminate or control system hazards or vulnerabilities and result in sustainable improvement 
over time 
• Timeline for implementation of corrective actions 
• Systemic improvement 
 
All sentinel events will be identified and responded to appropriately as defined by the attached 
guidelines (Appendix A).  Appropriate response includes: 
a) Conducting a timely, thorough, and credible root cause analysis. 
b) Developing an action plan designed to implement improvements to reduce risks;  
c) Implementing the improvements; and 
d) Monitoring the effectiveness of those improvements when deemed necessary. 
 
II. Patient Safety Events that are Non-Sentinel Events 
 
Sentinel events are one category of patient safety events.  Patient safety events also include no-
harm events, close calls, and hazardous conditions, which are defined as follows: 
• An adverse event is a patient safety event that resulted in temporary (non-sentinel) 
harm to a patient 
• A no-harm event is a patient safety event that reaches the patient but does not cause 
harm. 
• A close call (or “near miss” or “good catch”) is a patient safety event that did not reach 
the patient. 
• A hazardous (or “unsafe condition(s) is a circumstance (other than a patient’s own 
disease process or condition) that increases the probability of an adverse event. 
The hospital determines how it will respond to patient safety events that do not meet the Joint 
Commission’s definition of sentinel event.  These types of events shall prompt notification of  
hospital leaders, investigation, and corrective actions, in accordance with the hospital’s process 
for responding to patient safety events that do not meet the definition of sentinel event.  (Refer 
to Safety Event (Incident or Variance) Reporting Policy OO/GN/019).  An adverse event may 
or may not result from an error. 
 
No-harm events, close calls, and hazardous conditions are tracked via Safety Event system and 
used as opportunities to prevent harm, in accordance with the hospital’s process for responding 
to patient safety events that do not meet the definition of sentinel event.  (The scope of the 
safety program includes the full range of safety issues, from potential or no-harm errors 
[sometimes referred to as near misses, close calls, or good catches] to hazardous conditions and 
sentinel events.) 
 
 
SUPPORT DOCUMENTS: 
Appendix A – Sentinel Event Guidelines 
Appendix B – Sentinel Event Determination Form 
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
"Sentinel Event Policy and Procedures | Joint Commission." The Joint Commission. January 2024 
 
OLOL Policy OO/GN/019 Safety Event (Incident or Variance) Reporting  
 
 
  
APPENDIX A 
 
SENTINEL EVENT GUIDELINES 
1. Any significant adverse event observed or discovered should be reported per policy 
immediately to the impacted department manager and House Manager.  The unit 
manager and/or House Manager will then contact Risk Management and the 
Administrator on Call (AOC).  The AOC will alert the CEO, COO and Senior 
Management Team responsible for the impact department/unit, and Corporate 
Communications to prepare for any necessary media responses.  Risk Management will 
notify Quality Management/Patient Safety by the next working day.  A patient safety 
report should be entered immediately. 
2. With the assistance of the Quality/Patient Safety Department, the department/unit 
leader will initiate the investigation which includes developing a timeline of events.  
Initial findings will be presented to the Medical Director, Patient Safety & Quality, 
Chief Medical Officer, Chief Nursing Officer or designee.  The Sentinel Event 
Determination form (Appendix B) will be used to determine if the event is sentinel.  
Once deemed sentinel, an RCA Team will be commissioned and must complete the 
RCA framework within 45 days of discovery of the event.  The team shall include but 
not be limited to:  
i. Those team members directly involved in the event; 
ii. Quality Management/Patient Safety; 
iii. Risk Management; 
iv. Regulatory Management 
v. Unit/Department Managers impacted by the event; and a  
vi. Senior Management Representative 
3. Once deemed sentinel, the CEO will determine if the event will be reported to The Joint 
Commission. 
4. The RCA and action plan will be presented to the leadership team.  The RCA and 
action plan shall include risk reduction strategies to be implemented by the team with 
measures of success, responsible parties, and timelines for implementation. 
5. If the RCA and action plan is not deemed thorough and credible by the leadership team, 
the RCA team will meet to modify the plan.  The plan is then re-presented for approval. 
6. The summary of the event with findings and risk reduction strategies will be presented 
to the leadership team in an effort to promote transparency and shared learnings within 
the organization. 
7. Discussion of the error with the patient and/or family members should occur when 
there is clear clinical significance or potential clinical significance to the error per 
policy. 
8. All analysis, changes, recommendations and measures related to the operational 
processes will be maintained by the Quality/Patient Safety Department. 
9. The Medical Staff’s Professional Practice Evaluation Committee will be responsible for 
reviewing the physician component of the review. 
    