OO-GN-010 
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: General 
Title: Lost and Found Policy Reference #: OrgOps/GN/010 
Supersedes #: AD/A/004 
Date of Origination: April 11, 1988 Last Review Date: October 8, 2024 
Last Revision Date: July 12, 2021   
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to outline the procedure for documenting, storing and disposal of Lost/ Found items 
belonging to patients, visitors, or staff of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL). 
 
POLICY 
The Security Department will serve as a control point for all Lost and Found items in OLOL. 
Lost Items are defined  as electronic devices, money, credit/banks cards, jewelry, purses backpacks, wallets,  hats 
and clothing  
Security Services will not retrieve Dentures, hearing aids, braces or  other bio -hazardous items or items 
maintained on the nursing units for 30 days or more. 
 
PROCEDURE 
1. Patients and Employees are instructed via the Patient Handbook and the Consent for Treatment Form that OLOL 
cannot be responsible for their personal property and any lost items should be reported to Security for follow -up.  
Owners of articles found will be notified by nursing/security if identification can be determined.  Notification attempts 
by Security should be noted on the Lost and Found Property Receipt. 
2. When items are found on nursing Units/ Clinical areas, the nurse/designee should make every attempt to contact the 
owner of the property if known. If staff is successful in contacting the owner of property, they should communicate to 
the owner the property has been found and advise them to pick the item(s) up from the Security Dispatch Center. 
Nursing staff should immediately bring all found items to Security Dispatch.   
3. A Lost /Found Property Receipt must be completed by Security.   
4. The Security Officer receiving the items from the unit/clinical area will complete the designated sections of the Lost 
and Found Property Receipt.    
5. Once the Lost and Found Property Receipt is completed, one copy will be attached to the item and one copy will be 
kept in security for record keeping purposes.  
6. Items received in Security Dispatch will be matched with recent inquiries for lost and found items and calls will be 
made to owners if identified.  
7. Lost and Found items will be stored for 30 days.  After 30 days, all remaining items will be distri buted to designated 
charitable organizations, turned over to OLOL Foundation or discarded. All disposed property will be documented and 
witnessed by 2 security staff persons. 
8. If items found are valuable (jewelry, money, and items used to gain monetary resources), they will be secured in the 
Drop Safe located in Security Dispatch Center according to policy. Non valuable items (clothing, books, or toiletries) 
will be stored in the Security Closet. Risk Management will be notified of any valuable items prior to disposition. All 
receipts will be retained by Security.   
 
 