Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: General 
Title: Principles and Standards for Team 
Member Behavior 
Policy Reference #: OrgOps/GN/034 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: March 23rd, 2009 Last Review Date: June 14, 2021 
Last Revision Date: June 27, 2012 
 
 
OBJECTIVE 
To provide Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) and associated subsidiaries with one 
document for easy reference, that provides behavioral guidance.  This policy and related guidelines were 
developed to clearly delineate those behaviors that are acceptable and capable of positively impacting 
quality and safety transformation from those inappropriate, disruptive and intolerable behaviors. 
 
 
DEFINTIONS 
1. Acceptable Behavior:  A behavior that is in alignment with OLOL’s Mission, Core Values, Service 
Standards, Principles of Organizational Ethics, and the Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic 
Health Care Services (ERD’s) that promotes mutual respect, quality, and safety. 
 
2. Inappropriate Behavior:  A behavior that is not in alignment with OLOL’s Mission, Core Values, 
Service Standards, Principles of Organizational Ethics, and ERD’s. Defined as a behavior that is not 
suitable for the situation and/or is less than desirable. Distracts and negatively impacts the quality 
and safety of all individuals in the healthcare environment. 
 
3. Disruptive and Intolerable Behavior:  Conduct by an individual that intimidates or threatens 
others and/or undermines the culture of safety. These behaviors may be verbal or non-verbal, may 
involve the use of rude language, may be threatening, or may involve physical contact. These 
behaviors may also distract and negatively impact the quality and safety of all individuals in the 
healthcare environment. 
 
4. Lateral Accountability: every team member is responsible for ensuring that not only themselves, 
but other team members also, abide by the Mission, Core Values, Service Standards, Principles of 
Organizational Ethics and ERD’s. 
 
 
POLICY 
1. As a team member, if we encounter any situation which we believe violates OLOL’s principles of 
service; it is our obligation and duty to appropriately address the situation and/or notify someone 
immediately. 
 
2. Team members may contact their supervisor/manager, House manager, a member of the Ethics 
Committee a member of senior management, the Compliance Hotline at 1-888-400-4517, and/or 
complete a safety event report. 
 Page 2 of 3 
3. Team members who observe or are aware of inappropriate behaviors should address the behavior 
by referring to the mission, core values, or service standards to stop the inappropriate behavior. 
 
4. Team members who observe or are aware of disruptive and/or intolerable behavior must report 
the behavior and/or situation to a member of management and complete a safety event report. 
 
5. No one will be penalized for asking questions, raising concerns about OLOL’s principles of 
service or for making an honest report of possible improper conduct.  
 
6. Failure to abide by these principles/standards of conduct may result in disciplinary action ranging 
from counseling to administrative review. 
 
7. The following tables include examples of acceptable, inappropriate, and disruptive/intolerable 
behaviors, but are not limited to what is listed. Other actions may be considered to fall in the below 
categories. 
 
Acceptable  Behavior** 
Completing a safety event report or medical staff disruptive behavior incident report to report 
non-compliance. 
Reinforcing positive behavior. 
Addressing problem behaviors in private. 
Embracing constructive feedback regarding work performance. 
Treating others with dignity and respect. 
Seeking resolution and/or collaborating with others to resolve issues. 
Talking positively about other healthcare systems/facilities. 
Approaching a physician regarding a patient care issue or family request. 
Accepting an unavoidable personal cell phone call in the break area. 
 
 
Inappropriate Behavior (lateral accountability)** 
Making degrading comments about the facility, policies/guidelines, patients or other 
healthcare partners. 
Failing to report non-compliance. 
Making unnecessary sarcastic comments. 
Talking about issues/problems and/or discussing/conducting personal business in “on stage” 
areas. 
Refusing to accept constructive feedback. 
Ignoring or discounting improper comments. 
Blaming others. 
Making comments, or gossiping, that undermines a patient’s trust of other team members or Page 3 of 3 
the facility. 
Purposely not acting as a liaison between physician, patient/family, and other departments. 
  
Disruptive & Intolerable Behavior (requires immediate attention)** 
Displaying threatening and/or intimidating verbal and/or physical behaviors. Bullying 
behavior. 
Willfully misrepresenting facts for personal gain and/or to protect a coworker. Falsifying 
records. 
Knowingly not following policies/guidelines and strongly encouraging others to do the same. 
Verbal and/or physical retaliation against others. 
Refusing to assist a fellow team member due to personal differences. 
Knowingly ignoring an adverse event or near miss. 
Willfully engaging in conflicts of interest and/or solicitation with a patient. 
Ignoring a serious and imminent patient and/or business situation. 
** Includes but not limited to 
 
RELATED POLICIES    
 
1. Disruptive and Disturbed Patients (NNA050) 
2. Work Place Violence (OrgOpsHRE024) 
3. Ethics and Professional Conduct (OrgOpsET004) 
4. Weapon (ECSE014) 
5. Conflict Management for Leadership (OrgOpsGN035) 
6. Discipline / Counseling Action System (OrgOpsHRP002) 
7. Disruptive Behavior (MSPHY009) 
 
 