OO-GN-026 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: General 
Title: Chain of Custody Policy Reference #: OrgOps/GN/026 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: May, 2004 Last Review Date: June 14, 2021 
Last Revision Date: June 26, 2007 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to outline procedures to assure that specimens and evidence are properly 
collected and preserved.  Chain of Custody is a legal procedure that documents the transfer or control of 
an object between persons so that its purity and condition are clearly documented for use in court.  
 
POLICY: 
A “Chain of Custody” form must be completed in order to maintain proper preservation or collection of 
evidence.  Evidence should be collected in many different situations, i.e. rape, law enforcement, surgical 
specimen issues, etc.  Refer to specific policies regarding those issues. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
Condition of Evidence 
1) The physical condition of any evidence should be kept as close as possible to its original state.  
 
2) The fewer people who handle specimens or evidence the less likely the chance of destroying the 
evidence. 
 
3) Any procedure or occurrence, medical or otherwise, which alters the original condition of the 
evidence, should be carefully documented.  Include the person who altered the condition, how the 
condition was altered and why the evidence was altered. 
 
4) If evidence is transferred to another person, such as another member of the surgical team or another 
team member, then the “Chain of Custody” form must be used to document each individual who has 
control of the evidence at any point. 
 
5) A copy of the “Chain of Custody” form can be found on TeamLink under the Risk Management 
Department webpage. 
Responsibility: 
1) Preservation of evidence is the duty of all staff members. 
 
2) Ascertaining that the “Chain of Custody” form is initiated when necessary is the obligation of all 
personnel in the hospital.  It becomes the duty of each person handling the specimen to see that the 
“Chain of Custody” is appropriately documented.  Upon completion, the evidence or specimen 
should be sent with the appropriate "Chain of Custody" to the Risk Management Department or 
other hospital department according to hospital policies. 
 OO-GN-026 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Related Policies 
1. ADM-24 “Workman's Compensation Injuries Drug Screen & Breath Alcohol Testing Procedures in 
the Emergency Department” 
2. CAR-01 “Alcohol & Drug Testing Requested By Law Enforcement” 
3. CAR-04 “Evidence: Disposition of Material Evidence” 
4. CAR-05 “Rape Protocol & Examination” 
5. SOP029 “Specimens, Operating Room” 
 
 
  