Policy: OrgOps/GN/037 Page 1 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: General 
Title: Construction and Renovation Policy 
Policy 
Reference #: OrgOps/GN/037 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: June 1, 2010 Last Date 
Reviewed: August 7, 2018 
Last Date Revised: May 5, 2017 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to ensure a uniform decision making process for construction and renovation projects, 
purchases, to ensure that each request receives equal treatment and to enhance long-range goals and objectives of Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL). 
POLICY: 
All construction and renovation projects will be processed using this procedure. Minor maintenance, repairs and 
painting projects should be requested via the work order system and follow plant service policy and procedures. 
 
Definitions: 
1.  Refurbishment - Repair, maintenance and painting associated with normal usage of facility or updating a part or all of 
a department. 
2.  Renovation - Replacing fixtures, floor, ceiling, wall coverings, and/or equipment whereas external parties may be 
needed to complete certain tasks of the project. 
3.  Construction - Physically adding, deleting, or changing the composition of a room or area. 
Low Voltage - Low voltage involves technology work performed by subcontractors that are selected using the OLOLRMC 
bidding procedure and partnered vendors.  Subcontractor’s responsibility may include but is not limited to the purchase 
and installation of network cabling, TV wiring, and overhead paging and work performed by partnered vendors.  
Examples include nurse call system, asset tracking, and interactive patient care.  All Low Voltage Systems improvements 
to be coordinated through OLOLRMC IS Department. 
Information Services - Information Services covers work performed by the FMOLHS IS team and includes but is not 
limited to the purchase and installation of devices (wireless points, racks, pc’s, laptops, carts, handhelds, printers, etc.), 
cabling (small projects), wireless setup and configuration. 
 Policy: OrgOps/GN/037 Page 2 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
I - Project Request 
• All projects will be requested using the Construction Project Request Form and evaluated to ensure alignment 
with the hospital’s Master Facility Plan, Strategic Plan and budget.  
• A construction project may only be requested by someone at the department head level or higher within the 
organization.  The requesting department head is the project owner unless otherwise specified and named by 
the respective Vice President. 
• An estimate will be coordinated by the Vice President of Facilities & Construction.  If there is a cost associated 
with the estimate, an Estimate Cost Approval Form should be completed.  Approval from the requestor’s Vice 
President is required to obtain an estimate when the work will involve the services of an architect, engineer, or 
other construction professionals.  
• All project requests and requests for estimate require the approval signature of either; the Chief Executive 
Officer, Chief Operating Officer, or the Chief Financial Officer.   The Vice President of Facilities & Construction 
must approve the proposed project prior to executive approval. 
• The Vice President of Facilities & Construction, in coordination with Accounting will assign a unique project 
number to each project. 
• Design fees will be charged to the department cost center if the project does not receive approval. 
 
II - Project Approval 
• The Vice President of Facilities & Construction will provide contacts for appropriate cost estimates and will work 
with the project owner to develop Total Construction Project Costs to be identified for the project, including but 
not limited to: 
o Architect and Engineering  
o Construction Estimate Cost 
o Furniture, Fixtures, and Equipment 
o Medical Equipment Estimate Cost 
o IS Equipment and Services Estimate Cost 
o Low Voltage Estimate Cost 
o Other Estimated Costs(Landscaping, surveys, studies, supplies, etc) 
• The Total Construction Project Cost estimate is returned to the project owner on the Total Project Cost Estimate 
and Final Approval Form. 
• If the project owner chooses to proceed, after review by the VP of Facilities & Construction  and the requesting 
Vice President approves, the project must be approved by either the CEO, COO, or CFO. 
• All project requests follow approval processes outlined in the Levels of Authorization policy (OrgOps/GN/009) 
which may include Hospital and Health System Board approvals.   
• VP of Facilities & Construction, in coordination with Accounting will assign a unique project number to each 
approved project. 
 
III - Design Programming, Schematic Design, Working Drawings 
• The VP of Facilities & Construction will serve as the project manager unless another OLOL leader is designated.  
Project estimates that do not require the services of an external architect or construction professional will be 
coordinated by the Construction office. 
• A qualified Architecture and Engineering service may be selected for a construction or renovation project. 
• The OLOL Project Manager will coordinate ongoing communication between the Architect and stakeholders  Policy: OrgOps/GN/037 Page 3 
 
o Working drawings will be reviewed and approved by the Project Manager, Project owner(s), and 
stakeholders 
o A review of the final drawings will be made by the Project Manager, Project Owner(s), stakeholders, and 
the Project Owner’s Vice President before they are considered approved. 
• Upon completion of drawings and specifications, and after the appropriate approvals are obtained, construction 
 will be submitted to appropriate regulatory agencies for permitting. Proper building permits are required.  
 
IV - Contracting and Bids 
• Four different methods may be utilized to provide construction services.  
For projects under $1,000,000 
o Projects may utilize the Manage Construction Internally process, managed by Facilities & Construction, 
engaging subcontractors for some services. 
o Projects for the attached main hospital buildings may utilize the Established Hospital Contractor process 
because of their unique experience and knowledge of the facility infrastructure. 
For projects estimated over $1,000,000:    
o The RFP/ Construction Management process may be utilized on projects with critical timing 
requirements or the need of a contractor for pre-design or early costing consultation. This action will be 
recommended by the VP of Facilities & Construction and/or the CEO for approval.  
o The Full BID Process will be utilized for larger projects when early contractor services are not critical to 
the project or project is located off site.  
• Contract Document / Legal  
o Construction projects, under $1,000,000 will utilize standard contract templates, previously approved by 
FMOL Legal Services.  
o Construction projects, over $1,000,000 or that require contract language changes in conflict with the 
approved templates, require addition Legal review.  
o OLOL will be protected from liability for sub-contractors in the general construction contract. 
o FMOL Risk Management will review all contracts for Insurance requirements.     
• Preapproved List  
o The Construction/ Facilities department maintains a list of Pre-approved Contractors and Sub-
contractors. Changes/updates to the Pre-approved Contractors and Sub-contractors document should 
be dated with effective dates for each entry. Entries no longer in effect will not be removed from the 
list.  
 
Manage Construction Internally  
 
• Plant Leadership or the Hospital Construction Manager manages project: 
• The Hospital representative actively negotiates with sub-contractors, the terms of the contract  
• Contract documents will be prepared. 
 
Established Hospital Contractor  
 
• Contractor is engaged for the construction project  
o Contractor’s fees are based on a pre-negotiated fee schedule, which will be renegotiated periodically.  
o All work associated with the project is obtained by soliciting BID pricing from subcontractors or 
individual trades. 
o Individual contracts are entered into separately with the Sub-contractors by the contractor or directly 
with the hospital. 
 
 Policy: OrgOps/GN/037 Page 4 
 
RFP/Construction Manager Request 
 
• In most cases, the contractors for the RFP are selected from the Preferred Contractor List. When time is 
an issue or when the project is deemed to be high risk such as work within the hospital campus, the CM 
can be selected by the VP of Facilities & Construction with approval of the CEO.  
• The RFP will determine the abilities of the Contractor to meet project requirements and to compare bids 
which include costs for Contractor fees and General Conditions. 
• After submission, the RFP bids are reviewed and Contractors meeting basic RFP requirements are scored 
with the use of an RFP Scoring Matrix. The Building Committee or CEO will recommend a Contractor 
based on matrix scoring results and low bid costs.  
• Contract negotiation will begin with the selected Contractor. 
o The Contractor and Hospital representative actively negotiate the terms of the contract per the RFP 
documents 
o Contract documents are prepared. 
• Sub-contractors will be Open BID with the Contractor and Hospital. 
 
Full Bid Process  
 
• Contractors will be invited to bid on the Project and submit their sealed bids based on the approved contract 
documents. 
o Bids will be accepted on the appointed day and time. 
• The BIDs represent the Total Contractors Contract Cost and should include Contractor, General Conditions and 
Sub-Contractors fees. 
• The Project team will review the bids submitted. Bids are qualified and the lowest cost qualified bids forwarded 
to the VP of Facilities & Construction with recommendations. 
 
 
 
 
CONSTRUCTION PROCESS 
 
• Pre-Construction Meeting is scheduled including the Architect, Contractor, Sub-Contractors, OLOL Stakeholders, 
Safety Officer, Infection Control, Project Manager, and any Department affected by the project (including IS, 
Furniture and Equipment procurement) to attend. 
o The Pre-Construction Risk Assessment Form (ICRA) is completed. 
• Construction Project is reviewed and discussed. 
• Contractor provides Project Schedule. 
o Project schedule to include projected construction completion and occupancy dates. 
• Contractor is given Notice to Proceed and develop the Official Start Date. 
• The OLOL Project Manager will provide Accounting with the following for each construction project: (a) Board 
approved amount (b) Budget amount (c) Contract amounts (d) Total cost of project  
 
 
VI - Change Orders 
• Change Orders may be initiated by the Architect, Contractor, upon request from Regulatory Agencies, or 
requests by the project owner.  The change will be evaluated for impact to the project cost and schedules. 
o Change Orders shall be recommended by the VP of Facilities & Construction. Policy: OrgOps/GN/037 Page 5 
 
▪ A completed and approved Change Order Justification Form is required for all change orders. 
▪ Change Orders involving a project credit, no cost or line item cost less than the signing authority 
level of the VP of Facilities & Construction may be approved by the VP of Facilities & 
Construction as long as the project budget is not exceeded 
▪ All other change orders will be approved/signed by either the; Chief Executive Officer, Chief 
Operating Officer, and/or the Chief Financial Officer. 
• Change order requests will be reviewed by the Project Owner, the Project Architect, Contractor and other 
construction professional as needed for resolution and assignment of responsibility. 
 
 
VII - Pay Request 
• Pay Request are submitted to the architect by the Contractor on AIA Document G702 on a monthly basis. 
• Payment applications shall include a schedule of values which include separate line items for ‘general 
conditions’, contractor’s fees and all allowances and contingencies.  
• Pay request referencing an approved PO number may go directly to Accounts Payable after approval from the 
OLOL Project Manager.  
• The payment request or PO requisition is signed by the VP of Facilities & Construction and/or COO/CEO in 
accordance with Levels of Authorization Policy(OrgOps/GN/009). 
• Pay Requests for construction and renovation will follow the Levels of Authorization Policy (OrgOps/GN/009) for 
approval. Pay request referencing an approved PO number may go directly to Accounts Payable after approval 
from the OLOL Project Manager. 
 
VIII - Close-Out Phase 
• All required inspections will be completed and documentation maintained in the project file. 
• Contractor/architect/construction manager’s punch list is developed and completed. 
• Project owner walk-through including the Project Manager, all key stakeholders, Safety & Infection Control – 
punch list is developed and completed. 
• Contractor submits a substantial completion form to the Architect. 
• A final walk-through will be done by the project owner and respective Vice President.  A final punch list is 
developed and completed and final occupancy date is determined. 
• Appropriate regulatory documents are prepared and final inspections are completed. 
• Upon acceptance of the project by the VP of Facilities & Construction and Project Owner, receipt of the 
Certificate of Occupancy, and clear lien certificate, the project will be considered complete. 
• Final project review 
o A financial review of the construction contract and project total costs will be due by the Project 
Manager.  
o Accounting and OLOL Project Manager will prepare a final reconciliation of the project. 
•  
• All project information shall be conveyed to Plant Operations upon completion of the project. This will include 
all AS-Built drawings, equipment shop drawings, equipment specifications and regulatory permits, certificates 
etc…  
 
 
 Policy: OrgOps/GN/037 Page 6 
 
 
IX - Project Tracking 
• All Project files including construction project costs will be tracked in the OLOL Electronic Project File System E-
Builder and maintained by the OLOL Project Manager.  OLOL Project manager will issue a monthly report 
comparing total costs to date and approved amounts, and projections of any cost overruns.    
• OLOL Project Manager will work directly with the Accounting department to reconcile each project to the 
general ledger through its associated CIP number.   
• Accounting will keep records of total project approved amounts and individual construction contract executed 
amounts, as multiple contracts/items are possibly contained in one approved project (i.e., contractor, 
equipment, architect fees, etc.). 
• Accounting will issue monthly reports of general ledger recorded costs versus approved amounts.  Some 
variances due to invoice process timing may exist between Accounting’s records and OLOL Project Manager’s 
records.  These variances will be reconciled monthly. 
• OLOL Project Manager will notify Accounting upon completion of a project for purposes of capitalization and 
payment of any retainage.   
 
REFERENCES: 
OrgOps/GN/009 – Levels of Authorization Policy 
OrgOps/FN/002 – Competitive Bidding Policy (Please review for accuracy. Last revision 11/4/2011) 
ECSF011 – Pre-Construction Infection Control Risk Assessment 
 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS/ATTACHMENTS 
Construction Project Request Form 
Estimate Cost Approval Form 
Total Project Cost Estimate and Final Approval Form 
Change Order Justification Form 
Contractor Evaluation Form 
 
 