Policy Writing Guidelines
12/19/2007 J.Perret
Regulatory Mgmt
What is a Policy?
POLICY
 Mandated by regulatory, licensing, or accreditation agencies to have “in writing or 
defined in writing”
 States the hospitals position on a certain subject matter
 Usually pertain to Administrative Matters
 Act as law/rules 
 Concentrate on more general principles
SOP’s 
(Standard 
Operating 
Procedures)
 Tell HOW the policy or other processes will be carried out
 Describe in detail the process or steps taken to accomplish a job/task
 Emphasize detail – specific guide to action
Synonyms:
 Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) - A written procedure or set of procedures that 
describes how to perform a given operation.
 Guidelines - descriptive tools or standardized specification for care of the typical patient in 
the typical situation, developed through a formal process that incorporates the best scientific 
evidence of effectiveness with expert opinion.
 Process Flow Charts
 Protocols 
***Every procedure must have a policy but not all policies have a procedure***
In other words, there may be MULTIPLE Procedures related to ONE Policy
Example: we have ONE (1) Organizational Fire Policy/Plan, but many Department specific 
procedures for a fire (OR, TAU, etc)
Policy Writing DO’S & DONT’S 
DO’S 
 Use & spell out “Our Lady of the Lake” the first time used and “(OLOL)” on the second and 
subsequent occasions.
 Use “May” to indicate something allowed or permitted but not required
 “Can” is not synonymous with “may”. “Can” indicates physical or mental ability 
rather than permission
 Use “Must” and “Shall” to indicate explicit obligations. Adding “not” to “may, “must” or 
“shall” creates a negative obligation.
DON’T’S
 Do not use the initials “OLOLRMC”
 Do not use “may” (indicative of permission) when “might” (possibility) is intended.
 “Should” is ambiguous and must be avoided whenever possible because it can be interpreted as 
either obligatory or advisory, depending on the context.
 “Will” is used in the procedures documents. To avoid ambiguity, “will” must not be used to 
indicate a requirement or command.
 Do not change fonts for emphasis. Do not use bold or CAPITALS or other techniques to add 
emphasis. All parts of a policy are important. 
EXAMPLES
 Department heads may permit exceptions to the dress code on a case-by-case basis if 
necessary for work-related reasons. VERSUS You can lift heavy objects by bending at the 
waist and using the back muscles. 
 Hurricanes might cause power outages or other service interruptions. 
 Team members must/shall comply with all legal standards applicable to their jobs. Team 
members may/must/shall not reveal confidential patient information to persons who do not 
have a legitimate need to know it.
 Consider: You should call and apologize. When spoken by a parent to a child, this is likely to 
be seen as a command. When spoken by one friend to another, it is more likely to be taken as 
advice that one can follow or not as s/he wishes.