  OrgOps/HIM/013 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Operational 
Subject:  Ongoing Records Review Section:  HIM 
Date of Origination:  July 17, 2003 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
August 9, 2012,  April 2018 
April 2023 
Serial Code:  OrgOps/HIM/013 
  
 
PURPOSE:  
 
The organization is committed to assessing, and correcting as needed, the documentation and timely 
completion of its medical records. 
 
POLICY: 
 
The scope of the ongoing records review program includes both inpatient and outpatient records and all 
clinical services within the organization. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. The HIM Department is responsible for establishing review criteria, establishing the annual review 
calendar, analyzing review findings, taking actions as appropriate and reporting monthly at the 
Regulatory Meeting. 
 
2. Departments, Nursing Units and HIM Department staff are responsible for reviewing medical 
records against established criteria and reporting findings. 
 
3. The HIM Director /Manager or his/her designee is responsible for coordinating the overall ongoing 
records review program.  This includes orientation and training and preparing reports f or the 
Regulatory Meeting. 
 
4. As a baseline, 100% of the TJC medical record review indicators will be reviewed for one quarter to 
determine the focused reviews for the coming year.  However, problem areas may be selected at any 
time for focused reviews. 
 
5. Appropriate criteria may be selected according to topic by Regulatory and by the team or department 
conducting the reviews.  The TJC  accreditation is a good source of criteria.  A statistical valid 
sample of records will be reviewed by the Health Information Management (HIM) department. 
 
6. Data collection should be at the point of care whenever possible.  Review of closed records is 
discouraged.  Findings from reviews should be forwarded to the HIM Department.   OrgOps/HIM/013 2 
7. When other documentation review activities, such as case management or performance 
improvement, identify documentation issues these should be reported to the HIM Director/Manager. 
 
8. The HIM Director /Manager will forward findings from all  review activities at the Regulatory 
Meeting for action. 
 
9. All individuals participating in the ongoing records review program will honor patients’ rights to 
privacy, protect medical information, and report information without referring to specific patient 
names. 
 
 