  OrgOps/HIM/009 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Organizational 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Operational 
Subject:  Medical Record and Medical Media Policy Section:  HIM 
Date of Origination:  July 17, 2003 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
August 9, 2012 
October 2022 
Serial Code:  OrgOps/HIM/009 
  
POLICY: 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center must ensure a single unit medical record is comprised of 
all appropriate medical data generated on each individual OLOL patient for continuity of patient care 
and legal purposes.  Any copies made of medical records for convenience (shadow records) or any other 
copies made for a healthcare operation of OLOL must be tracked and secured just as if these copies were 
the institution’s official medical record. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Unit Medical Record (UMR ):  The official OLOL medical record maintained by the Health 
Information Management Department (HIM) contains OLOL original patient care documents.  The 
UMR is designed to contain the written interpretations of all significant clinical information gathered for 
a given patient, whether as an inpatient, outpatient, or emergency care patient.  The entire patient’s 
medical record is in this one volume, or multiple volumes, under one unit number with a four -digit 
suffix number to differentiate the episode of care.  The UMR will be retained according to the OLOL 
Record Retention Policy (OrgOps/GN/031) 
 
Organization Medical Record  (OMR):  A medical record maintained by a specific department other 
than the HIM department, which contains original documents concerning outpatient healthcare 
administered by OLOL healthcare providers to OLOL patients. 
 
Shadow Records:  The medical records maintained by a specific physician or department that includes 
only copies of original patient care information that has already been forwarded to HIM for inclusion in 
the UMR.  These records are considered convenience copies only and have no record retention schedule.  
These records never contain original medical records. 
 
Medical Media:  Includes health information stored in any original media.  Examples of medical media 
include, but are not limited to: x -rays, videotapes, ultrasounds, photographs (either conventional or 
digital images) and EKG strips.  These forms of medical media have unique retention schedules.  The 
unit medical record must contain a written interpretation of all medical media.  Medical media is distinct 
from the written interpretations of significant clinical information that has been forwarded to the UMR. 
   OrgOps/HIM/009 2 
Designated Record Set:   Includes the UMR and billing records of patients.  Additionally, the 
designated record set includes any records that OLOL or a Business Associate has used while making 
health care decisions.   
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
Unit Medical Record :  A UMR shall be generated for each patient and HIM will maintain all unit 
medical records. 
 
1. All pertinent OLOL health care information created is to be documented either electronically or 
paper-based on approved medical record forms.  All proposed forms must be recommended by 
the Integrated Document Committee. 
 
2. Patient name and unit number are to be clearly printed or included on a label attached to each 
page of the medical information. 
 
3. Completed original medical record forms are to be forwarded to HIM immediately for inclusion 
in the unit medical record. 
 
4. Any OLOL employees who use the UMR must ensure that PHI is maintained confidentially and 
must use only the minimum necessary amount of information required to complete the 
employee’s tasks. 
 
5. No one other that HIM can disclose information from the UMR, for purposes other than 
treatment, payment or healthcare operations (TPO).  Departments must forward all non – TPO 
requests for Protected Health Information to HIM for processing.   
 
Organization Medical Record:  OLOL prohibits departments from maintaining their own organization 
medical records, unless approval has been obtained from OLOL Administration.  All original medical 
information must be sent to HIM for inclusion in the UMR. 
 
Medical Media – Refers to original information in any format that is used as a basis of a diagnostic test 
or report.  The original written interpretation of the medical media data must be stored in the UMR. 
 
1. JCAHO standards on medical record services, OLOL policies and procedures, and applicable 
state and federal laws must be adhered to. Medical media must be maintained in a manner that 
ensures the confidentiality of the PHI. 
 
2. Any department containing medical media must designate a person responsible for compliance 
with this policy. 
 
3. Any and all requests for release of the PHI (Protected Health Information) must be referred to 
HIM.  PHI will not be disclosed from medical media, except for emergency purposes. 
 
4. Medical Media may be audited at any time to verify adherence to this policy.   OrgOps/HIM/009 3 
 
5. Audit results will be reported to the Privacy Officer. 
 
Shadow Records – Each department that maintains shadow records must appoint a person responsible 
for compliance with this policy. 
 
1. Shadow records must be maintained in a manner that ensures the confidentiality of the PHI in 
accordance with JCAHO standards on medical record services, OLOL policies and procedures 
and applicable state and federal laws. 
 
2. Any and all requests for the release of PHI must be referred to HIM.  PHI will not be disclosed 
from shadow records, except for emergencies. 
 
3. Shadow records may be audited at any time to verify adherence to this policy. 
 
4. Audit results will be reported to the Privacy Officer. 
 
5. If shadow records are found to contain original medical information that should be in the UMR, 
they shall be removed and forwarded to HIM for inclusion into the UMR.  
 
6. When the shadow record is no longer needed the documents must be disposed of in a manner 
that ensures the confidentiality of the information. 
 
Physical Management of Medical Records  – Any department that maintains either medical media or 
copies of medical records must designate a person who will be responsible for securing and tracking 
those records.  Physical maintenance requires: 
 
1. Appropriate measures to ensure that medical media or copies of medical information are 
maintained in a secure location with restricted access.   
 
2. A tracking system must be used to account for the inventory and location of the medical media 
or copies of medical information.  The tracking system must include the following: 
 
a. An inventory that shows when records are added or destroyed, and 
 
b. A system for establishing the location for the record.  This must include establishing the 
party responsible for the record once it has been checked out. 
 
3.  This tracking system may be manual, automated or a combination of the two. 
 
Release of Information  – As a result of the HIPAA regulations, releasing information has become 
extremely complex due to several specific reporting requirements.  HIM will also be responsible for the 
release of any information for purposes other than TPO.   
 
   OrgOps/HIM/009 4 
 
Enforcement – All supervisors are responsible for enforcing this policy.  Individuals who violate this 
policy will be subject to the appropriate and applicable disciplinary processes, up to and including 
termination or dismissal.  
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
Stephanie G Manson, SVP Chief Operating Officer     
 
 