OO-HIM-010 
Page 1 of 2 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: HIM 
Title: Verification of External Requestors Policy Reference #: OrgOps/HIM/010 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: July 17, 2003 Last Review Date: June 11, 2007, 
Sept. 4, 2014 
Last Revision Date: September 24, 2009 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To offer guidance on how to verify the identity of individuals who are requesting protected health 
information (PHI) to facilitate compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) standards for Privacy of Individually Identifiable Health Information (Privacy Standards).   
 
POLICY 
 It is the policy of Our Lady of the Lake RMC to- 
A. Verify the identity of any person or entity requesting a patient’s PHI when the person or entity is 
unknown to the workforce member, and 
B. Verify the person’s or entity’s authority to have access to the information. 
 
PROCEDURES 
Workforce members must verify the identity of any person or entity requesting PHI through one of the 
mechanisms listed below if the person or entity is unknown to them.  
 
A. Patient/Patient Representative Requestors. Approved methods of identity verification are any one 
of the following three options. 
 
1.  Valid Photo ID (e.g., passport, government ID, driver’s license, employment 
Identification Card with photograph, Student ID with photograph); or 
 
2.  The positive match of signature to a signature on file (e.g., request received from 
patient via fax or mail and the signature is compared to patient signature on 
conditions of admission 
3.   Unacceptable forms of identification for purposes of this policy are as follows: 
• Employment Identification Card (ID) without photograph 
• Student ID without photograph 
• Membership ID Cards 
• Generic Billing Statements (utility bills) 
• Supplemental Security Income (SSI) Card  
• Credit Cards (photo or non-photo) 
 
B. Third-Party Requestors. To verify that a requestor is truly a representative of the third party and 
that the request is on behalf of said party, the following elements should be taken into 
consideration when reviewing the request: OO-HIM-010 
Page 2 of 2 
 
1. Letterhead: Request is on official printed letterhead and PHI is mailed or faxed to the address 
or number printed on the letterhead. 
2. Fax Coversheet with company logo:  Requested information is mailed or faxed to address or 
number contained in the coversheet. 
3. Fax transmission/header: May be referenced as an additional source of verification. 
4. Photo ID with official credentials when a third party request is made in person (e.g., law 
enforcement, other public officials). 
5. When in doubt, follow-up via telephone by calling the entity’s main phone number.  
 
D. Verification of Public Officials or Someone Acting on the Official’s Behalf. Public officials or 
someone acting on the official’s behalf should have one or more of the following: 
1.  Agency identification badge or other official credentials. (e.g., photo ID issued by a    
government agency). 
2.  A request written on appropriate government letterhead. 
3.  A written statement on appropriate government letterhead that the person making the request 
is acting on the government’s authority. 
 
REFERENCES: 
A. Health Information Portability and Accountability Act, 42 U.S.C. §1320d-1329d-8. 
B. HIPAA regulations, 45 C.F.R. § 164.514(h). 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO 