OO-PC-002 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Pastoral Care 
Title: Baptism Policy Reference #: OrgOps-PC-002 
Supersedes #: AD/A/045 
Date of Origination: October 1, 1980 Last Review Date: January 22, 2018 
Last Revision Date: January 22, 2018 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To specify how and when a baptism may be performed when requested by or on behalf of the patient and in 
keeping with the religious beliefs of Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL). 
 
POLICY: 
Baptisms in the hospital are reserved for emergencies only. A Baptism is provided upon request for patients 
who are not already baptized and are in danger of death. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. When an unbaptized person is in danger of death and he or she requests baptism, or in the case of a 
minor child, the parents or guardians request baptism, anyone can and indeed should baptize the dying 
person. 
 
2. Baptism is to be administered as follows: 
a. The one to be baptized accepts the basic tenets of the Christian faith and intends to receive 
baptism or in the case of a minor that intention is supplied by parents or guardians. 
 
b. The one performing the baptism intends to perform baptism according to the norms of the 
patient’s church, even if the one baptizing does not share that faith. 
 
c. The one baptizing pours a small amount of water on the head of the person to be baptized, 
saying while pouring the water, "I baptize you in the name of the Father and of the Son and 
of the Holy Spirit, Amen" or as appropriate to the patient’s religious tradition. 
 
3. The person who performs the baptism assumes the responsibility for having the fact of baptism 
recorded on the patient's medical chart and the appropriate information provided to the OLOL Pastoral 
Care Department.  When the person is being baptized into the Roman Catholic Church, his or her 
baptism is entered into the baptismal register that is kept electronically on the Pastoral Care T drive.  
 
4. When time and circumstances allow, it is recommended that the pastor or appropriate religious leader 
be called and invited to perform the baptism. 
 
5. A complete record of a Roman Catholic baptism is entered into the hospital baptismal record on the 
Pastoral Care T drive.  For Catholic patients, the original certificate of baptism is sent to St. Aloysius 
Catholic Church and a copy of a certificate of baptism is given to the patient, family or guardian upon 
request.  For patients of other religious traditions, a certificate of baptism will be sent to the patient, 
family, or guardian upon request.  OO-PC-002 
Page 2 of 2 
 
6. In all cases the wishes, customs and traditions of the family and the patient are to be respected.  In no 
case is a child to be baptized contrary to the wishes of the family or an adult to be baptized contrary to 
his or her stated wishes. 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
Terrie P. Sterling, Executive Vice President/COO 