OO-PC-006 
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Organizational Section: Pastoral Care 
Title: Visiting Clergy Policy Reference #: OrgOps-PC-006 
Supersedes #: AD/A/010 
Date of Origination: March 15, 1997 Last Review Date: August 29, 2018 
Last Revision Date: August 29,2018  
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to describe the process to be used for and by Visiting Clergy. 
 
POLICY: 
Official representatives of all religious bodies are encouraged to visit their own members and to offer to 
them the consolations of their faith group. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. While it is the responsibility of all hospital employees to make every reasonable effort to extend 
hospitality and welcome to the official representatives of any religion, the Pastoral Care Department 
assumes primary responsibility for relations with religious bodies. 
 
2. For the safety and privacy of our patients all licensed and ordained clergy are asked to obtain an Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) issued ‘Visiting Clergy’ picture identification 
badge through the Pastoral Care Department and wear this badge whenever visiting hospitalized 
members to identify them as visiting clergy to hospital staff. 
 
3. Religious visitors are asked to limit their visits to members of their parish/church or denomination or 
those who have requested their services.  
 
4. Any religious literature for public distribution must be cleared by the Pastoral Care Department. 
 
5. Any public religious event or service, which involves more than one patient, religious leader, and 
family or takes place in a public area of the hospital, must be cleared through the Pastoral Care 
Department. 
 
6. Clergy wishing to visit patients in the critical care areas are asked to check-in with the Critical Care 
CSR and present their OLOL visiting clergy picture identification badge. 
 
7. Clergy desiring to visit patients in the Psychiatric and Chemical Dependency units may do so at the 
request of the patient after providing the patient identification number to and receiving approval 
from the unit staff and Pastoral Care. 
 
 
 