1 
OPR.01.001_340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Operations 
SUBJECT:  
340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
PAGES: 
14 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
OPR.01.001 (08/16/2023) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 04/19/2021   
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
02/14/2024 
POLICY NUMBER:  
OPR.01.001 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Our Lady of the Lake Hospital and its wholly owned sponsored organizations (collectively “Hospital”). 
PURPOSE: 
To provide written policies and procedures that Hospital uses to oversee 340B Program operations, provide oversight of 
contract pharmacies, and maintain a compliant 340B Program. 
POLICY: 
Section 340B of the Public Health Service Act (1992) requires drug manufacturers participating in the Medicaid Drug 
Rebate Program to sign a pharmaceutical pricing agreement (PPA) with the Secretary of Health and Human Services. 
a. This agreement limits the price that manufacturers may charge certain covered entities for covered outpatient 
drugs.  
The 340B Program is administered by the federal Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) in the 
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).  
Upon registration on the HRSA 340B Database as a participant in the 340B Program, Hospital: 
a. Agrees to abide by specific statutory requirements and prohibitions. 
b. May access 340B drugs. 
The purpose of this policy is to facilitate efforts by Hospital to comply with all requirements and restrictions of Section 
340B of the Public Health Service Act and any accompanying regulations or guidelines including, but not limited to, the 
prohibition against Duplicate Discounts, and the prohibition against transferring drugs purchased under 340B to anyone 
other than a patient of Hospital.  
DEFINITIONS: 
“340B Program” means the 340B Program is the program created under Section 340B of the Public Health Service Act 
allowing for certain safety net providers to purchase covered drugs at substantially discounted pricing. 
“Administer” means to give a medication to an individual, typically in a hospital or a clinic, based on a health care 
provider’s order. 
“AIDS Drug Assistance Programs (ADAP)” mean ADAP programs provide medication assistance to insured and 
uninsured patients infected with HIV based on patient financial status. ADAP programs may benefit from the 340B 
program by either direct purchase of drugs or through manufacturer rebate. 
“Authorizing Official” means the Authorizing Official is the individual responsible for certifications to HRSA OPA 
regarding the Hospital’s compliance with 340B Program requirements. 
 
 
2/14/2024 10:30 AM 
 
2 
OPR.01.001_340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
“Bank Identification Number (BIN)” means a unique number or code used by FFS and MCO plans, in conjunction with 
a PCN and Group number to identify plan members. 
“Child Sites” mean a Child Site is any site, such as a Provider-Based Clinic, which derives its Covered Entity status 
from a “Parent” site and qualifies as an off-site outpatient location that is fully integrated into the DSH and would derive 
its eligibility in one of two ways: 
1. Listed as reimbursable on the most recently filed Medicare cost report and registered on HRSA’s 340B 
Database. 
2. A clinic that otherwise meets the criteria for inclusion on a reimbursable line on the cost report but is not yet 
listed due to timing (i.e., cost report has not yet been filed that includes such location, but will be filed with that 
location when appropriate) or other reason such as it not being customary to include such location as a separate 
cost center on the cost report. 
“Clean Site” means a Clean Site is a site where only patients who qualify as Eligible Patients entitled to Covered 
Outpatient Drugs are treated, allowing for the Administration or Dispensing of Covered Outpatient Drugs purchased 
under the 340B Program, exclusively. 
“Contract Pharmacy” means a Contract Pharmacy is any retail pharmacy location which has entered into a signed 
contract with Hospital to dispense drugs to qualifying Eligible Patients and do not qualify as “ship to” pharmacies. 
“Covered Entity” is an entity that falls within one of the categories specified in the 340B Program statute as qualifying to 
receive 340B Program pricing on their purchases of covered drugs. Hospital qualifies because it is a DSH hospital. 
“Covered Outpatient Drug” means a covered outpatient drug is an FDA-approved prescription drug, an over the counter 
(OTC) drug that is written on a prescription, a biological product that can be dispensed only by a prescription (other than 
a vaccine, or FDA-approved insulin). Furthermore, such drugs must be separately payable under Medicaid. Hospital has 
reviewed the drugs that are separately payable under Louisiana Medicaid, and which ones are not. Hospital will check 
annually to determine whether there are any changes in Louisiana Medicaid drug payment rules and shall revise its list of 
Covered Outpatient Drugs accordingly.  
“Dispense” means to provide a medication, typically in a hospital or a clinic, for self-administration, based on a health 
care provider’s order to be administered to a patient. 
“Disproportionate Share Hospital (DSH)” means DSH hospitals are inpatient acute care hospitals that have a 
disproportionate share adjustment of 11.75% or greater. 
“Duplicate Discounts” mean Drug manufacturers are protected from duplicative discounts on covered outpatient drugs 
provided to covered entities through the 340B program and to Medicaid via drug rebates for the same units. Duplicate 
Discounts are not prohibited on Medicare or commercial utilization.  
“Eligible Patient” means an individual meeting the following criteria:  
a. the covered entity has established a relationship with the individual, such that the covered entity 
maintains records of the individual's health care; and 
b. within the prior 3 years, the individual has received health care services from a health care professional 
who is either employed by the covered entity or provides health care under contractual or other 
arrangements (e.g., referral for consultation) such that responsibility for the care provided remains with 
the covered entity. 
An individual will not be considered a patient of the covered entity if the only health care service received by the 
individual from the covered entity is the dispensing of a drug or drugs for subsequent self-administration or 
administration in the home setting. Furnishing Medication Management services shall be considered a health care service 
that is more intensive than dispensing of a drug for purposes of the definition of “Eligible Patient.” 
“Eligible Professional” means an Eligible Professional is a health care professional who is either employed by the 
covered entity or provides health care under contractual or other arrangements (e.g., referral for consultation) such that 
responsibility for the care provided remains with the covered entity. This definition includes but is not limited to 
employed physicians, physicians with medical director agreements or who have other obligations to the Hospital, such as 
furnishing services in service lines where there is no, or insufficient, capacity with respect to such service line among 3 
OPR.01.001_340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
Hospital’s integrated physicians. Eligible Professionals also includes nurse practitioners, physician assistants, registered 
nurses, residents, and other healthcare professionals employed by, or contracted with (directly or through an employer 
contracted with), the Hospital. Eligible Professionals are also pharmacists who provide Medication Management, 
consultation, and other services at Hospital.  
“Fee for Service Medicaid (FFS)” means Traditional Medicaid plan where providers are paid directly for covered 
services received by Medicaid beneficiary. 
“GPO Prohibition” means the Hospital participates in a Group Purchasing Organization (GPO). As such, the 340B 
program requires that the Hospital, registered child sites, and owned pharmacies not dispense GPO-acquired drugs to 
Eligible Patients qualifying for Covered Outpatient Drugs. 
“Group Number” means a unique number or code used by FFS and MCO plans, in conjunction with a BIN and PCN to 
identify plan members. 
“Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)” means HRSA is the agency of the U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services that is responsible for the 340B Program.  
“Inpatient Status” means a patient is designated as an inpatient when a physician, with appropriate privileges, writes an 
order admitting the patient to an inpatient status.  
“Managed Care Organizational (MCO)” means a service agreement between the State and a health plan for management 
of services to Medicaid beneficiaries through a network of providers included in the organization’s network. 
“Material Breach” means a Material Breach will be deemed to have occurred when, either during a routine audit, or 
during an audit conducted in response to a particular instance of suspected noncompliance, it is determined after 
reviewing a non-statistical sample of at least 20 transactions that there is an error rate of the greater of at least 20% or at 
least $30,000 in value (measured by the difference between WAC and the 340B price for the ineligible utilization).  The 
concept of “Material Breach” is relevant only when less than a 100% review of the applicable utilization is conducted.  
“Medicaid Exclusion File (MEF)” means Covered entities are required to designate in the application process whether 
340B drugs will be utilized for Medicaid patients. HRSA maintains this information in the Medicaid Exclusion File and 
provides to state Medicaid programs. The purpose of this file is to exclude 340B drugs from Medicaid program rebate 
invoices sent to manufacturers. This prevents drug manufacturers from providing Duplicate Discounts. 
“Medication Management” shall mean the services described in Attachment A. 
“Mixed Use Area” means a mixed-use area is a location that serves both outpatients and inpatients. These areas include 
but are not limited to: Emergency Room, Surgery, Endoscopy, and Interventional Radiology.  
“National Drug Code (NDC)” means the NDC is the identifying drug number maintained by the Food and Drug 
Administration. NDCs are 11 digits, which is comprised of 3 components, including a labeler code, product code, and 
package size code. 
“Office of Pharmacy Affairs (OPA)” means OPA is a component of HRSA which provides administration of the 340B 
Program. 
“Outpatient Status” means Patients are considered outpatients if they are receiving emergency room services, 
observation care or any other types of services in which the doctor hasn’t written an inpatient admission order. 
“Parent Site” means Hospital’s main campus and any other inpatient areas included under the same Medicare provider 
number.  
“Prescribe” means to provide a prescription for a medication to an individual to be filled at an outpatient pharmacy. 
“Processor Control Number (PCN)” means a unique number code used by FFS and MCO plans, in conjunction with a 
BIN and Group number to identify plan members. 4 
OPR.01.001_340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
“Provider Based Clinic” means Medicare sets standards that “provider-based” departments or clinics must meet to 
enable the entity to bill Medicare a facility fee under the outpatient prospective payment system.  
“Split Billing Software” means this software is employed to manage the splitting of outpatient utilization eligible for 
replenishment under the 340B Program from ineligible, inpatient utilization. It relies on the proper interfacing with 
Hospital’s billing software system. 
“UD Modifier” means Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System medical code (HCPCS) modifier defined as 
Medicaid level of care 13, as defined by each state.  
“Wholesaler Acquisition Cost (WAC)” means WAC is a reference to wholesale acquisition cost, which is the cost of a 
drug that is not purchased through a special pricing program. A “WAC account” is an account through which Hospital 
may purchase drugs that are not subject to GPO or 340B Program terms. Such purchases may nevertheless be subject to 
their own discounted pricing terms. 
PROCEDURE: 
Eligibility and Database Maintenance 
1. The Hospital qualifies as the following type of Covered Entity, as described in the 340B Program 
statute:  
Is a private, nonprofit hospital that has a contract with a state or local government to provide health care 
services to low-income individuals who are not entitled to benefits under Title XVIII of the Social 
Security Act or eligible for assistance under the state plan under this title.  
2. The Hospital has a disproportionate share adjustment percentage greater than 11.75%. 
3. The Hospital does not purchase covered outpatient drugs from a GPO.  
4. The Hospital dispenses or prescribes 340B drugs for eligible patients.  
5. Hospital ensures that the HRSA 340B Database is complete and accurate for all 340B eligible locations 
including the Parent Site, off-site locations, and contract pharmacies. All off-site locations that use 340B 
drugs will be registered in the HRSA 340B Database. 
a. All main addresses, billing and shipping addresses, the authorizing official, and the primary 
contact information are correct and up to date. 
b. The Hospital annually reviews its 340B Database entry to determine its continued accuracy. 
c. The Hospital informs HRSA of any changes to its information by updating the HRSA 340B 
Database /Medicaid Exclusion File  
d. Registration dates:  
i. January 1–January 15 for an effective start date of April 1 
ii. April 1–April 15 for an effective start date of July 1  
iii. July 1–July 15 for an effective start date of October 1  
iv. October 1–October 15 for an effective start date of January 1 
6. The Hospital annually recertifies its information on HRSA’s 340B Database. Such recertification shall 
entail the following: 
Item Action Data Source Accountable Party 
Disproportionate 
Share Percentage 
(DSH 
Verify DSH Percentage accurate and above the limit set 
by HRSA (>11.75%) 
Cost Report Finance 
Hospital/Clinic 
Billing 
Verify that the National Provider Identification (NPI) 
Number(s) is(are) all entered in the database including 
the retail pharmacies 
Internal List Finance/Pharmacy 
Clinic eligibility 
verification 
Verify accuracy of clinics listed, clinic addresses, suite 
numbers and cost centers 
Cost Report 
Crosswalk 
Cost Report Team 
Medicaid Exclusion 
File (MEF) 
Verify all of the “carve in” locations appear on the 
Medicaid Exclusion File (MEF)  
OPA Database Pharmacy 5 
OPR.01.001_340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
Provider List Verify Provider List is Accurate  MSOW & 
GME 
Medical Staff Office 
Medicaid Billing Verify that all Medicaid Billing numbers are listed 
including retail pharmacies 
Internal List Finance/Pharmacy 
Medicaid Letter of 
Understanding 
Ensure that billing practices reflect the expectation of the 
applicable State Medicaid program and that there is not a 
chance for Duplicate Discounts 
Medicaid Finance/Pharmacy 
External Audit 
Review 
Discuss results of audit performed on contract pharmacy 
and verify no issues are present 
Audit Company Pharmacy 
Internal Audit 
Review 
Discuss results of audits performed on 340b program and 
verify no issues are present 
Data Analysts Pharmacy 
 
7. The Hospital will voluntarily withdraw from the 340B Program if its Medicare disproportionate share 
adjustment percentage results in a disproportionate share percentage less than 11.75%.  
Enrollment Procedure: New Outpatient Facilities 
1. The Hospital determines that a new outpatient service or facility is eligible to participate in the 340B 
Program. 
a. The criteria used to include that the outpatient service must be fully integrated into the Hospital, 
appear as a reimbursable service or clinic on the cost report, have outpatient drug use, and have 
patients who meet the 340B patient definition. 
2. The Hospital’s authorizing official, or designee, completes the online registration process during the 
registration window. 
a. The Hospital submits any updated Medicare cost report information, as required by HRSA.  
Enrollment Procedure: New Contract Pharmacies 
1. The Hospital has a signed contract pharmacy services agreement containing the essential compliance 
elements in the Contract Pharmacy Guidance, in place between the entity and contract pharmacy prior to 
registration on the HRSA OPA 340B Database. 
2. Hospital’s authorizing official or designee completes the online registration during one of four 
registration windows. 
3. The Hospital begins using the contract pharmacy services arrangement only on or after the effective date 
shown on the HRSA OPA 340B Database.  
Patient Eligibility 
1. Hospital only considers patients to qualify for Covered Outpatient Drugs if: 
a. The patient qualifies as an Eligible Patient. 
b. The patient is not (or imminently will not be) in Inpatient Status either at the time the 
medication is Dispensed, Administered or Prescribed. 
c. The patient is Dispensed, Administered, or Prescribed the Covered Outpatient Drug in either the 
Parent Site or a Child Site.  
d. The patient received services from an Eligible Professional.  
Prohibits Duplicate Discounts 
The Hospital has mechanisms in place to prevent Duplicate Discounts. 
Medicaid Carve-In  
1. Hospital dispenses or administers 340B purchased drugs to Medicaid patients AND subsequently bills 
Medicaid for those 340B drugs (carve-in). 
a. Hospital has answered “yes” to the question, “Will the covered entity dispense 340B purchased 
drugs to Medicaid patients?” on the HRSA OPA 340B Database. 
2. Hospital bills Medicaid per state Medicaid reimbursement requirements and state AIDS Drug Assistance 
Program (ADAP) (if applicable).  6 
OPR.01.001_340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
3. The Hospital informs HRSA of any changes in its Medicaid Exclusion File information by updating the 
HRSA 340B Database before the 15th of the month prior to the quarter when the change takes effect. 
4. Hospital annually reviews its 340B Database Medicaid Exclusion File records.  
Pharmacy Claims 
1. Louisiana Medicaid FFS and MCO are required to utilize unique BIN, PCN, and Group Numbers to 
identify prescription claims for Medicaid beneficiaries. Claims for Medicaid beneficiaries are billed 
according to Louisiana Medicaid requirements as follows: 
a. FFS claims at actual acquisition cost plus dispensing fee. 
b. MCO claims at the contracted rate between the pharmacy provider and the MCO. 
c. All FFS and MCO claims will include both indicators below: 
NCPDP Field NCPDP Field Name NCPDP Value 
420-DK Submission Clarification Code 20- 340B 
423-DN Basis of Cost Determination 08-340B Disproportionate 
Share Pricing 
Physician Administered Claims 
Louisiana 
1. Providers shall submit the UD modifier to identify 340B drugs on outpatient physician administered 
drug claims. This includes outpatient professional service 340B drug claims. Due to the cost to charge 
methodology, outpatient hospital claims are excluded from the claim level indicator requirement. 
a. CMS 1450/UB04: Enter UD Modifier immediately following drug HCPCS/CPT code in field 
44. For example, HCPCS J1111 billed as J1111UD 
b. CMS 1500: Enter HCPCS code in field 24C followed by the UD Modifier 
c. 837I: Loop 2400 SV2 can send up to four modifiers SV202-3, SV202-4, SV202-5, and SV202-
6. 
d. 837P: Loop 2400 SV1 can send up to four modifiers in SV101-3, SV101-4, SV101-5, and 
SV101-6. 
Mississippi 
1. Providers shall submit the UD modifier to identify 340B drugs on outpatient physician administered 
drug claims.  
2. Claims will be submitted at the usual & customary price (U&C)  
AIDS Drugs Assistance Programs (ADAP) 
1. Prescriptions for ADAP patients through a contract arrangement will be filled with a separately 
maintained ADAP physical or virtual 340B inventory.  
a. Uninsured patient prescriptions where the ADAP is the primary payer will be filled with 340B 
inventory provided directly by the ADAP and separately maintained by the pharmacy.  
b. Insured patients’ prescriptions will be filled with WAC inventory if the ADAP is billed as a 
secondary payer. 
Medicaid Carve-Out for Contract Pharmacies 
1. Hospital’s contract pharmacies carve out Medicaid, and Hospital annually audits to ensure compliance 
with this provision. 
Program Integrity and Compliance with 340B Program requirements. 
1. Hospital has established a 340B Oversight Committee that is responsible for the oversight of the 340B 
Program, as follows:  
a. Meets on a routine basis. 
b. Reviews 340B rules, regulations, and guidelines to ensure consistent policies, procedures, and 
oversight throughout the Hospital and across the Hospital system.  
c. Identifies activities necessary to conduct comprehensive reviews of 340B compliance.  7 
OPR.01.001_340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
d. Ensures that the organization meets compliance requirements of program eligibility, patient 
definition, 340B drug diversion, and Duplicate Discounts via ongoing multidisciplinary 
teamwork.  
e. Integrates departments such as information technology, legal, pharmacy, compliance, and 
patient financial services to develop standard processes for contract/data review to ensure 
program compliance.  
f. Oversees the review process of compliance activities, as well as taking corrective actions based 
on findings. 
g. Assesses if audit results are indicative of a Material Breach 
h. Considers ongoing refinements to compliance processes. 
Ongoing Education and Training  
1. Hospital will ensure that employees complete annual education and exhibit competency regarding 
compliance with the 340B program. This education includes but is not limited to online learning, 
training seminar, and other training from approved sources. 
2. 340B key stakeholders complete initial basic training upon hire and annually thereafter. 
3. Hospital provides educational updates and training, as needed, and conducts annual verification of 340B 
Program competency.  
4. Training and education records are maintained per organizational policy and available for review. 
Prevention of Diversion 
1. 340B Program inventory is procured and managed in the following settings:  
a. Child Site administration 
b. In-house and/or applicable acute pharmacies  
c. Contract pharmacy 
2. Hospital uses one of the following inventory methods:  
a. Clean Sites 
i. Stocks only 340B inventory.  
b. Mixed Use Sites 
i. Hospital relies on either.  
ii. its Split Billing Software to maintain virtual inventory through replenishment; or 
iii. where Split Billing Software has not been implemented, separate 340B and GPO stock. 
iv. Where there is drug wastage, the Split Billing software is adjusted to remove that 
utilization. 
3. Hospital relies on several safeguards to determine that it is compliant with the GPO prohibition. This 
includes:  
a. the audit of the Split Billing Software programming;  
b. the establishment of three accounts for WAC, GPO, and 340B for all of the distributors and 
manufacturers from which Hospital purchases; and  
c. auditing activities, including auditing of Clean Sites.  
d. Arranges for earn-outs or repayments to manufacturers, where necessary 
4. Certain outpatient sites are not subject to the 340B Program requirements. These sites all meet the 
following criteria: 
a. They are at a separate physical address from the Parent Site and Child Sites. 
b. They have their own wholesaler accounts. 
c. They are not registered in the HRSA OPA database. 
d. The site maintains records indicating compliance with the requirement that its drugs are not 
commingled with other sites’ drugs.  
5. Hospital places 340B, GPO, and WAC drug orders, based on orders created from the Split Billing 
Software where a virtual inventory system is employed. Otherwise, orders are placed based on the need 
for drugs resulting from the depletion of stock.  
a. An 11-digit to 11-digit NDC match is used to order 340B drugs.  8 
OPR.01.001_340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
b. Hospital also verifies that the multiplier established in the medical record matches the amount 
accumulated and ordered for each product. 
c. All such orders are maintained in a readily retrievable and auditable format. 
6. Any manual exceptions created to the Split Billing Software are logged and the reasons are documented. 
All such exceptions are subject to routine audit. 
7. On a routine basis, purchasing records and dispensing records are reconciled.  
340B Program Ongoing Compliance Review for the Parent Site and Child Sites 
Diversion, as well as improper use of GPO drugs, are also prevented through Hospital’s internal monitoring 
program.  
1. Hospital develops an annual internal audit plan under the supervision of the 340B Oversight Committee, 
which includes annual external audits and monthly internal reviews.  
a. During internal review, Hospital selects records from a drug utilization file and then compares 
the patient’s records pertaining to drug administration or dispenses to the manner in which such 
administration or dispense was accumulated in the Split Billing Software.   
b. Hospital also randomly selects Medicaid claims to validate that they have been completed in 
accordance with the applicable State Medicaid program’s billing rules. 
2. Hospital annually reviews as part of the recertification process the HRSA OPA 340B Database to ensure 
the accuracy of the information for the Parent Site, Child Sites, and Contract Pharmacies.  
3. Hospital annually reviews the Medicaid Exclusion File (MEF) to ensure the accuracy of the information 
pertaining to Hospital.  
4. The 340B Oversight Committee reviews the internal audit results and assesses if they indicate a Material 
Breach.  
Contract Pharmacy Compliance and Oversight 
Hospital remains responsible for all 340B drugs used by its contract pharmacies. 
1. Hospital has a written contract in place for each contract pharmacy location and registers each contract 
pharmacy location with HRSA OPAIS prior to the use of 340B drugs at that site. 
2. Hospital uses a replenishment model using an 11-digit to 11-digit NDC match. 
3. Hospital implements a bill-to, ship-to arrangement with the contract pharmacies. 
a. Each Contract Pharmacy orders 340B drugs based on 340B eligible use as determined by Split 
Billing Software once a full package size at the 11-digit NDC has been achieved.  
b. Invoices are billed to Hospital. 
4. Contract Pharmacies enter into agreements with Hospital that comply with HRSA’s essential 
compliance elements. 
5. Covered Entity does not replenish drugs used for Medicaid patients with purchases under the 340B 
Program.  
6. Hospital validates through audit that Contract Pharmacies are complying with their agreements and are 
only dispensing drugs replenished through the 340B Program to qualifying Eligible Patients. The 
following elements will be included when conducting self-audits of contract pharmacies to ensure 
program compliance: 
a. Prescription is written in an appropriate site of care.  
b. The patient qualifies as an Eligible Patient. 
c. The prescription is written by an Eligible Provider or by a physician whom an Eligible Provider 
referred to for consultation, where the Eligible Provider remained involved in the Eligible 
Patient’s ongoing care.  
d. An 11-digit NDC match can be documented for accumulation and/or replenishment of a 340B 
Dispensation or Administration. 9 
OPR.01.001_340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
e. The payer is not a Medicaid program. 
7. Hospital also engages independent auditors to conduct independent audits of each Contract Pharmacy 
for compliance with the 340B Program requirements, including reviews of: 
a. 340B eligibility.  
b. 340B registration.  
c. Documented policies and procedures.  
d. Inventory, ordering, and record keeping practices for all 340B accounts.  
e. Review of the listing in the Medicaid Exclusion File and its reflection in actual practices.  
f. Testing of claims sample to determine any instance of diversion or Duplicate Discounts in a set 
period of time.  
Action on Audit Findings  
This section defines Hospital’s policies for determining what further action is necessary when it learns of an 
issue through audit or otherwise.  
1. Hospital takes action on all findings occurring during any internal reviews or external audits, as well as 
on any information that it receives that indicates a reasonable likelihood that there may be 
noncompliance with 340B Program requirements. 
2. If information is received outside of an audit that indicates a reasonable likelihood of noncompliance, 
Hospital will structure an audit to determine whether such noncompliance has occurred. In any such 
audit, a minimum of 20 transactions will be reviewed.  Transactions chosen to be in the sample reviewed 
must logically relate to the potential noncompliance. Thus, if there are questions relating to whether 
utilization in mixed used areas is properly being accumulated, only utilization from those mixed-use 
areas will be evaluated. 
3. Irrespective of whether an audit occurs on a routine basis or in response to specific information, Hospital 
will repay or earn out any 340B Program-purchased drugs, whichever is more convenient, for any drugs 
determined on audit to have been administered or dispensed to patients other than Eligible Patients. 
4. Additionally, if the error rate on audit indicates a Material Breach, then a further review will be 
performed. This review will either be an extrapolated review, or a 100% review, whichever is more 
convenient. 
5. A decision will be made by Pharmacy staff, in consultation with Legal, Compliance, and any other 
applicable stakeholders, after such audit as to what sort of communication will be made to affected 
manufacturers, including whether payment will accompany such communication. 
6. Where there is evidence of a Material Breach or of willful or reckless conduct, Pharmacy staff, in 
consultation with Legal, Compliance, and any other applicable stakeholders, will decide whether a letter 
to HRSA will also be prepared that discloses the nature of the noncompliance, as well as the corrective 
measures that have been undertaken.  
Note: The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Public Law 102-585, Section 602, 340B Guidelines, 340B Policy Releases]. 
• 340B Drug Pricing Program: Hospital Registration Instructions 
(http://www.hrsa.gov/opa/files/hospitalreginfo.pdf) 
• 340B Contract Pharmacy Guidelines 
(https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2010-03-05/pdf/2010-4755.pdf). 
• State policy(ies) for 340B reimbursement/billing/duplicate discount prevention (state Medicaid manual, etc.) 10 
OPR.01.001_340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
• Apexus Tool: 340B Compliance and the Controlled Substance Ordering System (CSOS) may be used to articulate 
compliance solutions in this area: 
https://docs.340bpvp.com/documents/public/resourcecenter/340B_Compliance_CSOS.pdf 
• Federal Register / Vol. 61, No. 165 / Friday, August 23, 1996 / Notices 
https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2010-03-05/pdf/2010-4755.pdf 
• 340B University: Defining Material Breach Documentation Tool 
https://docs.340bpvp.com/documents/public/resourcecenter/Establishing_Material_Breach_Threshold.pdf 
• Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 43 / Friday, March 5, 2010 / Notices  
(https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2010-03-05/pdf/2010-4755.pdf) 
ATTACHMENTS:  
Medication Management Scope and Example 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
President of Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. 
  11 
OPR.01.001_340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
Attachment A 
 
The following services are illustrative of the scope of a Medication Management encounter between a 
pharmacist acting as an Eligible Professional and an Eligible Patient: 
 
Initial Assessment and Onboarding (70 – 100 minutes)  
See Exhibit 1 for completed de-identified copy of an initial assessment.  
1. Create a personal medication record for the patient within the Covered Entity’s electronic medical 
record. 
2. Review the prescribed therapy for appropriateness of therapy and safe dosage.  
3. Review whether the prescription order is correct based on what was prescribed by the physician 
within the medical record, if available. 
4. Review patient’s medical history for allergies, drug safety, and any potential drug-drug interactions.  
5. Discuss the prescribed therapy with the patient including proper: 
a. Adherence 
b. Administration 
c. Missed dose management 
d. Storage 
e. Safe handling and disposal 
f. Duration of therapy 
6. Discuss adverse symptoms, side effects, and symptom management so the patient is aware of what 
to expect while on therapy.  
7. Review patients’ disease and non-disease specific lab work to assess overall health. 
8. Educate the patient on ways to mitigate side effects and provide recommendations.  
9. Make an assessment for adherence risk and document any potential barriers 
10. Perform wellness and lifestyle counseling including review of nutrition, diet and hydration, and up-
to-date immunizations. 
11. Perform a complete medication reconciliation. 
12. Review the goals of therapy, and document that the patient agrees/understand the goals of the 
therapy. 
 
Cycle Check Ins (5 – 30 minutes) 
Depending on the therapy and the individual patient’s needs, additional follow up encounters are performed. 
As an example; 1st cycle check in (5-7 days post start), 2nd cycle check in (30 days post start), 60-day 
check-ins, etc. During these calls, the pharmacist will: 
1. Assess the patient’s adherence to therapy.  
a. Ensure the patient is taking the medication as prescribed.  
b. Record the number of units remaining (e.g., pills, syringes). 
c. Review any potential barriers to adherence and counsel on how to overcome them. 
d. Confirm the patient is aware of where to obtain refills. 
e. Document if the patient has had any issues receiving refills. 
f. Communicate/coordinate with the physician’s office and patient’s care team as needed. 
2. Monitor adverse effects including but not limited to: injection site reactions, fever, allergic 
reactions, chest pain, swelling in hands or feet, weight loss, and other. 
a. Counsel patients on how to treat these or when to see their provider to assist. 
3. Review with patient their progress towards goals of therapy. 
4. Continuously monitor patient’s lab work to assess treatment efficacy and overall health. 
5. Discuss the next appointment the patient has with the physician. 
a. Communicate with the physician via email, phone, or direct messages within the medical 
record, if necessary, based on clinical judgement. 
b. Coordinate an appointment with the physician’s office or other healthcare provider, if 
necessary, based on clinical judgement. 12 
OPR.01.001_340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
Clinical Interventions (5-30 minutes) 
Patients may also call the clinical pharmacist hotline to speak with a clinical pharmacist or be referred by a 
pharmacy liaison to speak with the clinical pharmacist. Based on the pharmacist’s clinical judgement, they 
may communicate with the physician to coordinate an appropriate plan of action or coordinate emergency 
services depending on the circumstance and clinical judgement.  
  13 
OPR.01.001_340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
Exhibit 1 
 
(ON2) PHARMACIST NEW START - Initial Assessment  
Dx: Colon cancer  
 
Tx prescribed: Xeloda 1500 mg (3x500mg) take 3 tablets PO twice daily 14/21d (+oxaliplatin +Avastin)  
• Administration: Planning to take in morning and evening within 30 minutes of a meal and with full glass 
of water  
• Proper Handling/Disposal: Have anyone else administering medication wear gloves or transfer in a paper 
cup or medicine cap, do not dispose in trash or down sink or toilet, use local disposal procedures  
• Storage/Excursion: Store at RT  
• Duration of therapy: Until progression or intolerable SE  
• Emetogenic potential: Minimal to low  
• Supportive ppx meds: Zofran, Compazine (nausea)  
 
Adherence & Potential Barriers: Adherence predictor score=0, low likelihood for non-adherence, no issues 
identified on call.  
• Missed dose mgmt: Rvd missed dose mgmt to skip dose if missed; resume normal schedule, do not double 
up. Write down missed dose for MD.  
 
List Common, Serious SE & Mitigation Reviewed:  
• NV: pre-medicate, eat bland foods/drink ginger ale, small meals, avoiding heavy/greasy foods  
• Diarrhea: hydration importance, Imodium ppx, BRAT diet, avoid coffee, tea, EtOH, fatty/greasy foods, 
sweets  
• Hand-foot: use moisturizer 2-3x/day, avoid hot water/detergents/chemicals, reduce friction on feet/hands 
via loose fitting shoes/gloves, appears 4-6 weeks after therapy  
• Anemia/Fatigue: rest between activities, utilize naps, eat an adequate diet with proteins and calories, drink 
plenty of fluids  
• Dec appetite: eat foods that are high in protein/calories, eat smaller more frequent meals (4 -5 vs 2 -3), 
Boost List Precautions Reviewed:  
• Serious: call MD if fever >100.4, sore throat, chills or shakes, new pain, SOB, CP, cough, trouble 
breathing, cardiotoxicity  
 
S/Sx: No present sx of disease, doing well per pt at present recovering well from surgery.  
Clinically Relevant, Abnormal Labs: 1/10/23  
• CBC: WNL  
• CHEM 7: BUN 7L  
• CRCL/GFR: 82 ml/min  
• LFTs/TBili: Alk phos 164H  
• BP/HR: 128/86, 93  
• Cancer Specific Biomarkers: CEA 44.7H 11/26/22  
• Drug Specific Labs: CrCl, CBC, LFTs  
 
Wellness/Lifestyle Counseling:  
Nutrition: reports an improved diet and appetite after surgery and has worked herself back up a normal diet, 
continues to have smaller meals throughout the day. Let know to continue and she has Boost on hand, 
counseled on use if she feels like she needs nu trition or any further decline in appetite. Hydration: reports 
an excellent hydration status and drinking plenty of water and carries bottle of water around with her. 
Encouraged to continue. Exercise: reports she exercises via walking often and keeps track of steps with 
daily goals. Let know this was great and to continue as exercise can have great health benefits during 
therapy.  
• Immunizations: COVID 4th booster and flu given this September, Shingles in the past year. Eligible for 
pneumonia vaccine, counseled on talking with MD of getting at local pharmacy if interested.  
 14 
OPR.01.001_340B Policy & Procedures Manual 
Med Rec/Updated drug list: EMR inaccurate, medication changes reviewed with patient: ( -) Bentyl, ( -) 
Hyoscyamine, (-) lorazepam, (-) promethazine, (-) pantoprazole, (-) Zoloft  
DI Check: None clinically significant  
Common DI & Dietary Avoidance: None  
 
Goals of Therapy:  
• Maintain or achieve remission, if applicable  
• Reduce progression of disease (POD) and/or improve quality of life--penetration to peritoneum, positive 
lymph nodes, multiple at least 5 liver lesions on R side, bilateral pulmonary nodules, some new. QOL is 
good and fully active and functional.  
• Mitigation of side effects--common/serious SE discussed above  
• Promote optimal medication administration and adherence--importance of adherence and admin discussed 
above  
• Improve overall survival (OS) and progression free survival (PFS)  
• Reduce tumor biomarkers, if applicable--CEA 44.7H 11/26/22  
 
- Patient has agreed/understands to goals of therapy during education/counseling  
 
Additional: I had a pleasant conversation with [patient] who has rcvd her Xeloda and is planning to get her 
first dose of Oxaliplatin on 1/12/23 and begin taking her Xeloda 1/13/23. She has metastatic colon cancer 
and PET scan 12/20/22 showed interval partial colectomy with penetration to peritoneum, positive lymph 
nodes, multiple at least 5 liver lesions on R side, bilateral pulmonary nodules, some new. She has recovered 
well from surgery and is fully functional and active at present. She has a statistical chance of cure with good 
response and overall, very good performance status. Her CEA was elevated at 44.7 11/26/22 and will be 
used as biomarker for response. Discussed proper admin of morning and evening 12 hours apart within 30 
minutes of a meal, with water for 14/21d. Counseled on common/serious SE and given mitigation strategies. 
Counseled on infection precautions and report to MD if having, wear mask and wash hands when going out 
in public. She has ppx meds and not taking what is on med chart for most part. She was prescribed 
pantoprazole from an admission, but is not taking and does not have reflux, let know to throw away if not 
needed, as it has a DDI with Xeloda. Pt has trouble sleeping unrelated to cancer, has temazepam rx to be 
picked up and couns eled on natural melatonin for sleep PRN if she wishes. She reports a good diet and 
appetite that is improving, and she has smaller meals during the day and Boost on hand in case of declined 
appetite. She has a very good hydration status and is walking for exercise, very motivated and tracks on 
phone. She was appreciative of the call and welcomes future follow up from clinical team. Will push out 1 
week from 1/13/23 start date for first cycle call. 
 