 
OS008 
1 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Oncology Support  
SUBJECT:  
Cancer Registry Quality Control (CoC S6.1) - Oncology 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
N/A 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 4/1/22 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/15/24 
DATE LAST REVIEWED: 
03/15/24 
POLICY NUMBER: 
OS008 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System, Inc. (FMOLHS) and its wholly owned sponsored 
organizations that propose and adopt System wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines to ensure high-quality cancer registry data collected in the Our Lady of the Lake Cancer Institute 
(OLOLCI) cancer registry. 
POLICY: 
 This policy explains the activities used to evaluate the quality of cancer registry data and activity.   
DEFINITIONS: 
  
PROCEDURE: 
I. The Cancer Registry Quality Coordinator will work with the registry staff and other departments to oversee and 
implement the quality control policy and procedure.   
II. The OLOLCI cancer registry quality control policy will include the following elements:  
a. Review criteria will include at least 10% of the annual analytic caseload (up to 200 cases annually) and 
will include cases from each of the Oncology Data Specialists (ODS) abstracting cases within the 
OLOLCI cancer registry. 
b. The quality review will be performed on a monthly basis by the CoC Program Manager, who is an ODS 
in good standing. 
c. Quarterly audits will be performed by the Louisiana Tumor Registry (LTR) and reported to the OLOLCI 
Cancer Registry through LTR’s Data Quality Indicator (DQI) report.  A percentage of these external 
audits will be counted towards meeting the 10 percent of the annual analytic requirement.  
III. The following areas will be evaluated for all analytic cases: 
a. Case Finding 
b. Abstracting timeliness 
c. Percentage of information coded as unknown (will also utilize the NCDB Data Completeness Reports) 
 
OS008 
2 
IV. The accuracy rate will be set at 90% for the following areas of the annual quality review. 
a. Class of case 
b. Primary site 
c. Histology 
d. Grade 
e. AJCC or other appropriate staging system as appropriate for cancer site 
f. First course of treatment 
g. Follow-up information 
i. Date of first recurrence 
ii. Type of first recurrence 
iii. Cancer status 
iv. Date of last cancer status 
V. Cancer registry data submitted to the NCDB will meet the established quality and timeliness criteria included in 
the annual NCDB Call for Data. 
VI. Documentation of the quality control activity will include a copy of the completed excel tracking form titled, 
“Quality Review” that includes all of the quality review data items, overall compliance score and comments 
from the reviewer as well as the registrar who abstracted the original case.  
VII. The results of the cancer registry abstract quality review will include the percentage of accuracy for all areas 
evaluated.  Recommendation and any necessary action plan to address area(s) that fall below the established 
accuracy rate, will be reported to the cancer committee at least annually.  Discussion will also be documented in 
the cancer committee minutes.  
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
N/A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
Cancer Registry Quality Control excel tracking sheet “Quality Review” 
 
Policy Oversight by:  Amy Wall 
 
TITLE Manager, Cancer Registry 
 