 
OS003 
1 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Oncology Support  
SUBJECT:  
Genetic Counseling & Risk Assessment (CoC S4.4) - 
Oncology 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
OC057 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 12/2/15 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
4/1/22 
DATE LAST REVIEWED: 
3/15/24 
POLICY NUMBER: 
OS003 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System, Inc. (FMOLHS) and its wholly owned sponsored 
organizations that propose and adopt System wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To educate patients about the risk of developing cancer, help patients obtain personal meaning from genetic information, 
and empower patients to make educated, informed decisions about genetic testing, cancer screening, and cancer 
prevention. 
POLICY: 
 This policy outlines the process for providing cancer risk assessment, genetic counseling, and genetic testing.   
 
OS003 
2 
DEFINITIONS: 
Genetics Professional is defined as: 
•  An individual board-certified/board-eligible by American Board of Genetic Counseling (ABGC) or American Board 
of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ABMGG)  
•  An Advanced Practice Nurse in Genetics (APNG), or an Advanced Genetics Nursing Certification (AGN-BC) 
credentialed through the American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC), or a Genetics Clinical Nurse (GCN)  
•  An advanced practice oncology nurse or physician assistant with specialized education in cancer genetics and 
hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes – The Advanced Oncology Certified Nurse Practitioner (AOCNP) or 
equivalent certification from the Oncology Nursing Certification Corporation (ONCC) is preferred. 
•  A registered nurse with specialized education in cancer genetics and hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes 
(defined as education resulting in a certification and undergoing ongoing continuing medical education in cancer 
genetics and hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes) 
•  A board-certified/board-eligible physician with experience in cancer genetics (defined as providing cancer risk 
assessment on a regular basis and undergoing ongoing continuing medical education in cancer genetics and hereditary 
cancer predisposition syndromes)  
 
PROCEDURE: 
Cancer risk assessment begins with the initial visit with the surgeon or medical oncologist.  Cancer risk assessment and 
counseling involves pre-test counseling, consideration of the most appropriate tests, and post -test counseling. Once the 
provider determines that the patient meets the criteria for a genetics evaluation, and a written informed consent is obtained, 
a qualified genetics professional will provide the following:   
1.  Risk assessment and pre-test counseling, 
a. Collecting relevant information needed to assess a patient’s personal and family medical history for 
cancer genetic risk assessment 
b. A three to four (3-4) generation pedigree (an appropriate written family history is acceptable if genetic 
risk can adequately be evaluated from the information provided) 
c. Evaluate the patient’s genetic risk for cancer and psychosocial status 
d. Provide appropriate genetic counseling with discussion of testing options, risks, benefits, implications, 
and limitations of testing 
e. Obtaining informed consent for genetic testing if genetic testing is provided and,  
f. Plan for providing testing results, either by phone or through return visit in person 
2. Consideration of the most appropriate tests to order 
a. Refer to NCCN Guidelines Principles of Cancer Risk Assessment and Counseling, section Choice of 
multi-gene testing. 
3. Post-test counseling to the patient once results are available 
a. Discussion of results 
b. Significance and impact of the test results including: 
i. Implications for the patient 
ii. Implications for relatives and family members 
c. Discuss medical management options when appropriate 
d. Informing other relatives, and 
e. Future contact and available resources. 
4. Annually, the Cancer Committee will review the policy and procedure as well as monitor compliance with 
evidence based national guidelines with a selected cancer site. 
a. The number of patients identified as needing referrals for the selected cancer site, and  
OS003 
3 
b. How many patients identified as needing referrals for the selected cancer site received a referral for 
genetic counseling. 
i. It is encouraged, but not required, to track whether patients who received referrals, ultimately 
had genetic counseling.  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
N/A 
ATTACHMENTS/ REFERENCE:  
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) Guidelines Version 1.2022, 8/11/21, EVAL-A 
 
Policy Oversight by:  Amy Wall 
 
TITLE Manager, Cancer Registry 
 