 
OS007 
 
 
1 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Oncology Support  
SUBJECT:  
Psychosocial Distress Screening (CoC S5.2) - Oncology 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
Policy # and date it was last approved 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 4/1/22 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE:  
N/A 
DATE LAST REVIEWED: 
3/15/24  
POLICY NUMBER: 
OS007 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System, Inc. (FMOLHS) and its wholly owned sponsored 
organizations that propose and adopt System wide policies. 
PURPOSE: 
To assess the psychological impact on the patient of having a diagnosis of cancer and to provide patients identified with 
distress, the appropriate resources and/or referrals that address physical, psychological, social, spiritual, and financial 
needs.  
POLICY: 
I. Cancer patients will be screened for psychosocial distress while receiving care at Our Lady of the Lake Cancer 
Institute (OLOLCI). 
II. Psychiatric / behavioral assessments are performed initially and with each clinic visit with a medical oncologist 
and documented in the electronic health record.  
III. Patients undergoing surgery only will be assessed for Psychosocial/ Distress as requested by the patient’s 
surgeon. 
IV. All cancer patients scheduled for Chemotherapy Teaching will be assessed for Psychosocial/ Distress and need 
for Community Resources.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Provider – may include medical oncologist, surgeon, and/or nurse practitioner.  
PROCEDURE: 
I. At a minimum, patients will be screened for distress at time of medical oncology consult or time of teaching within 
the medical oncology and infusion clinic s. Additional screening will be done at pivotal points throughout the 
cancer journey such as change in treatment or a newly diagnosed cancer.   
II. Inpatient distress screenings will be completed by the social worker within the case management department.   
III. Patients seen within the Thoracic, Colorectal, or General Surgery clinics will be seen as requested by the provider.  
 
OS007 
 
 
2 
IV. A modified version of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) “Distress Thermometer” will be 
utilized as the Distress Screening tool (Attachment 1). 
V. The Distress Screening tool will be entered into the patient’s electronic health record in the “ Distress Tool 
Flowsheet” section. 
VI. The Distress Screening tool scale ranges from 0-10.  A score of 4 or above is considered elevated and patients will 
be contacted by the NN and/or SW during subsequent visits following initial visit. If the patient does not have a 
subsequent visit scheduled, the NN and/or SW will conduct a telephone assessment with the patient/companion 
within 5 working days. Patients scoring 4 or higher during any visit will be referred to the appropriate supportive 
service based on the identified problem.  
a. Psychosocial or practical problems – Social Worker 
b. Emotional or psychological problems –Social worker 
c. Spiritual concerns – Chaplain 
d. Informational or physical problems – Nurse navigator 
e. Nutritional concerns –Dietician  
f. Financial concerns – Patient financial advisor 
 
VII. OLOLCI staff will assist the patient with needs identified on the Distress Screening tool, including referrals to  
outside resources and other providers where indicated (see Attachment 2 for community resources). 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to 
deviate from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
N/A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
NCCN Distress Thermometer 
Community Resource Referral Request Form 
 
 