PADM-01 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care  
Subject:  Pediatric Emergency Department Rapid 
Treatment Area (RTA) 
Section:  Pediatric Emergency 
Department 
Date of Origination:  July 8, 2011 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
February 28, 2025 
Serial Code:  PADM-01 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for the triage of the pediatric patient to the Pediatric Emergency Department Rapid Treatment Area. 
   
POLICY:  
Pediatric emergency room patients will be evaluated in triage flow area using the following guidelines and 
escorted to the Rapid Treatment Area (RTA) if appropriate. 
 
Pediatric patients will have a triage assessment in the Pediatric Emergency Department and an 
Emergency Severity Index (ESI) Acuity level assigned.  During low volume times, triage flow RN 
may assess, identify pertinent history and ensure appropriate for RTA, obtain weight/height if 
appropriate.  Complete triage including vitals, height and weight to be obtained prior to moving 
patient to RTA area.  
 
1. Patients will have a complete registration collected after provider initial assessment completed.  
Patient/Family will be instructed to return to ER access/admission area to complete registration if not 
done in RTA prior to discharge.   
 
2. The flow of the patients to RTA will be regulated by the flow nurse.  Patients will be assigned to 
RTA automatically when there is an open bed. 
 
3. Lower acuity patients that are triaged while the RTA treatment area is full will have their charts 
placed in flow file folder designated for RTA. The patient will remain in the pediatric emergency 
department waiting area under assigned flow nurse supervision. Low acuity ESI level 4 & 5 patients 
will be placed in rooms outside of RTA designated area if there are multiple open available rooms.  
This will be based on census, unit need and as directed by the charge nurse and attending provider. 
We will place high acuity ESI levels as a priority in all open rooms outside of RTA designated area. 
 
4. Patients identified by physician in RTA with change in acuity requiring higher level of care will 
remain in area until disposition discharge or admit decision if predicted care time is less than 90 
minutes.  
5. The rapid treatment area nurse will communicate with the charge nurse if assistance or additional 
available room resources are needed for waiting RTA patients.  
 
6. RTA provider will communicate with attending if provider handoff needed. Attending provider will 
discuss with charge nurse if extended care warrants movement of patient to next available 
emergency department bed in the acute area. PADM-01 
Page 2 of 2 
 
7. The RTA nurse should have no more than a 7:1 patient to nurse ratio at any time and will be 
dependent on patient level of acuity and patient needs. 
 
8. No patient with potential physical/sexual abuse and/or DCFS (Department of Children and Family 
Services) involvement should be sent to RTA. 
 
9. No adult patient (18 >) should be sent to RTA. 
 
10. All patients with ESI acuity level 4 or 5, are appropriate chief complaints to send to RTA, with the 
exceptions listed below.  Tracking board will designate as an RTA patient and patient will be placed 
in appropriate room for evaluation.  
 
11. Chief Complaints not appropriate for RTA are as follows: 
• Altered Level of Consciousness 
• Acute respiratory distress, increased work of breathing, or abnormal breath sounds 
• Neonate with fever 
• Tachycardia without fever 
• Mental/Behavioral Health (MBH)   
• MVC-Trauma Level 3 
 
 