PADM-02 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:   Patient Care 
Subject:  Pediatric Emergency Department Mental 
Behavioral Health Activity Room 
Section:  Pediatric Emergency 
Department 
Date of Origination:  March 5, 2019 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
 
February 2, 2024 
Serial Code:  PADM-02 
  
PURPOSE: 
To protect and plan appropriate care for individuals visiting the mental behavioral health activity room through 
established behavioral level designation.  
To establish guidelines for observation of the mental and behavioral patient who is placed under a Physician’s 
Emergency Certificate (PEC), Coroner’s Emergency Certificate (CEC), Suicide Precautions, or other legal hold 
for mental health treatment while being treated within the Pediatric Emergency Room. 
 
POLICY:  
A Suicide Screening will be completed on patients upon admission to the Pediatric Emergency Department.  All 
mental and behavioral health patient’s history will be assessed for potential violence through patient diagnosis, 
patient and family reports, and patient’s history of violence.  A treatment plan will be initiated to include 
individualized goals and interventions.  As clinically appropriate, patients will be assigned a behavioral level: 
green, yellow, or red.  Behavioral levels will be utilized to determine patient’s ability to safely interact within 
the activity room. 
 
PROCEDURE:  
I. Behavioral Leveling System 
A. Level Green: The primary objective of a level green intervention is to maintain a therapeutic 
milieu and autonomy.  The patient may participate in group activities and utilize the activity 
room without direct clinical supervision;/parent present.  Line of sight monitoring will be 
maintained.  Early interventions should prevent escalation of distress and unacceptable behaviors 
and therefore should be initiated as soon as mild agitation is detected.  Some potential behavioral 
management techniques for Level Green are to: 
1. Listen and convey interest in and concern about the patient’s welfare,  
2. Engage the patient in conversation about his or her experiences and feelings to calm or 
rectify any disturbing situation,  
3. Offer choices to give the patient a sense of control and may include interaction with a trusted 
staff member,  
4. Offer physical activity such as walking or exercising, listening to music, mediation, or 
diversional activities,  
5. Approach the patient in a nonthreatening manner and be sensitive to a patient’s need for 
adequate personal space, 
6. Offer the patient a quiet place within the milieu, either to be alone or to interact with staff if 
needed, PADM-02 
Page 2 of 2 
7. Maintain a therapeutic milieu that keeps patients engaged or occupied and conveys a sense of 
staff control. 
B. Level Yellow: The primary goal of level yellow intervention is to reduce the target symptoms.  
However, to the greatest extent possible, it is also important to maintain the patient’s autonomy 
and a therapeutic milieu.  The patient may participate in group activities and utilize the activity 
room with staff supervision by a Basic Life Support and Crisis Prevention and Intervention 
trained team member.  Direct line of sight observation will be maintained within the activity 
room anytime a Level Yellow patient is present.  Level Yellow interventions should be 
considered when Level Green interventions are not appropriate or have not been successful.  
Level Yellow interventions focus on interpersonal responses and medications to ameliorate 
specific symptoms and assist the individual in achieving behavioral control.  All Level Yellow 
interventions require voluntary cooperation from and communication with the patient.  Level 
Yellow interventions may include: 
1. Removing other Patients and other stimuli from the immediate vicinity to help the patient 
regain control by decreasing stimulation.  
2. Voluntary physical separation from an over stimulating environment to a quiet, less 
stimulating area.  Once removed from the stimulating environment, staff may use Level 
Green interventions to manage the situation. 
3. Increasing the number of staff present during an acute aggressive episode to help a patient 
regain self-control.  This approach also helps secure the safety of other persons. 
4. Distance Restrictions – instruct patient to maintain a specified distance from other patients. 
5. Administering medication aimed at reducing the target symptoms and calming the patient. 
C. Level Red: The primary goal of a Level Red intervention is to maintain the safety of the patient, 
other patients and the staff.  Level Red interventions are the most restrictive and are used as a 
last resort when Level Yellow interventions are either not appropriate or unsuccessful.  The 
patient may not participate in group activities, however, will be allowed to visit the activity room 
1:1 observation monitoring status with a Basic Life Support and Crisis Prevention and 
Intervention trained team member.  The exception is any situation the nurse deems imminently 
dangerous to the patient, other patients, or staff.  Level Red interventions may include:  
1. Medications aimed at reducing the target symptoms and calming the patient. 
2. Time Out to regain self-control. 
3. Additional interventions will be utilized to refrain from unsafe behavior in the milieu. 
4. As a last resort, restraint may need to be considered to assist the patient to maintain self-
control and refrain from unsafe behavior when the patient is incapable of such control. 
D. Patients will move within the level system as behavior necessitates.  A patient may be placed on 
a more restrictive level (Yellow or Red) at any time depending on their behavior.  Once a patient 
is placed on Yellow or Red, they will remain there or at a more restrictive level for a minimum 
of four hours or until patient and nurse have debriefed and evaluate the patient’s readiness to 
change levels. 
II. Activity Room Rules and Regulations 
A. No food or drink will be allowed in the room. 
B. All toys/games, electronic devices, activities and supplies will be removed from the room after 
patient use, disinfected, and stored in a designated area within the nurses’ station. 
C. Room use and number of patients in the activity room will be based on nurse discretion, no more 
than 3 patients at a time. 
D. Activity room visits are a privilege, if more than 3 patients in the MBH area, time will be limited 
to 1- hour per patient until all patients that have activity room privilege have had an opportunity 
to visit the activity room. 