POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Access Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:    
Subject:  Participating Provider Policy Section:    
Date of Origination:  June 2015 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: June 1, 2015; 
Jan 2018 
 Serial Code:    
 
PURPOSE:    
To define the participating provider requirements as they pertain to patient registration in the State of 
Louisiana, per LA RS 22:1880. 
 
 
POLICY: 
The facility will issue a Notice to Patients regarding Participating Provider Status, as required by 
Louisiana law.   This form will be presented to every insured patient during the patient’s first encounter at 
the facility, every time the patient presents with a new insurance, or upon every registration if the registrar 
cannot determine if the form has been issued previously.  Emergency Department registrations are 
excluded from the requirements of this statute. 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
This form contains two sections:  the top section advises the patient that the physicians treating the patient 
may not be in network with the patient’s insurance and advises the patient how to make that 
determination; and the bottom section is used by the hospital to notify the patient if it is in network with 
the patient’s insurance.   
 
1. After completing the full registration, the Access Services Representative will complete fill out the 
form using only ONE of the appropriate check box. 
 
“Based on the information I have provided at the time of my registration, I understand that Our Lady 
of the Lake: 
a) Is  a Participating in my health plan, or 
b) Is NOT a participating provider in my health plan. 
2.  The ASR will present the form to the patient and have them fully read and sign the form.  
3. The ASR will scan the form into the patient’s electronic financial record. 
4. If the patient’s health plan is NOT a participating provider with OLOL, the ASR will issue the patient 
a “Patient Acknowledgement of Financial Responsibility for Services Rendered” form.   