 
Admitting  
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Access Services  
SUBJECT:  
Patient Identification 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY DATED: 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
January 2015   
REVISION DATE: 
Jan 2018 
SYSTEM POLICY NUMBER:  
FIN.04.022 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to all departments that register patients for services. 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure identification accuracy for all patients to FMOL, allowing for proper medical record 
assignment, testing, procedures and /or surgeries performed.  To provide a consistent 
systematic process, assuring the correct identity of the patient and the correct selection of the 
Medical Record Number and avoiding duplication.   
 
POLICY: 
All persons presenting for services at FMOL or its affiliates are identified and admitted with the 
correct identifiers and medical record number. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Patient’s identity must be established upon admit, using both active and passive 
methods.  
2. Registrar will obtain the adult patient’s driver’s license or state-issued identification.  
3. Registrar will ask the patient or designee if he/she had ever had services at the current 
facility or its affiliates. 
4. Registrar will ask the patient for his/her legal name and will verify it against the driver’s 
license or state-issued identification for adults, or verify with family members for minors.  
Registrar will  compare the name on file at the facility  and by using the legal name 
provided if different from state DL or ID.   
5. Registrar will ask the patient for his/her social security number  and search for the 
patient by the SSN.  NOTE:  If a potential HIPAA privacy issue exists at the point 
of registration, the registrar will ask for the last 4 digits of the SSN instead of the 
entire SSN.  Once the patient has been pulled up by the social security number, the 
registrar will verify the patient’s name and date of birth. If the social security number is 
not found, the registrar will c heck to make sure he/she has entered the numbers 
 
Admitting  
correctly and then will search another way (see Next Option). 
i.  If the patient is already in the system with the social security number – follow 
the P & P on admitting a patient already in the system. 
6. Next Option: If unable to pull the patient up by social security number, the registrar will 
search by the patient’s last name and first name. Once the patient has been pulled 
up by this method, the registrar will verify the date of birth and address. 
i.  If the patient is already in the system – follow the P & P on Admitting a 
patient already in the system 
7. Next Option: if unable to pull the patient up by his/her name, the registrar will use 
partial name, remove all but a few letters of the first name and trying to pull the patient 
up again. Again, once the patient has been pulled up by this method, the registrar will 
verify the patient’s date of birth and address. 
8. If unable to pull the patient up; the registrar will ask patient if he/she could have been 
listed under a different name. 
NOTE:  The registrar must make all the attempts to identify a patient in the system 
prior to moving on to the next option. 
 
9. If still unable to pull the patient up you , the registrar will add the patient as a new 
patient. 
10. In the case of an unresponsive patient , the patient will be admitted using the driver’s 
license information when available or family/acquaintances when possible.   If not 
available, the patient must be admitted as a John/Jane Doe, placing the current date as 
the date of birth.  “Change” will be listed in the address field and the hospital phone 
number.  The registrar must follow up and update the information at the first 
opportunity. 
11. Admissions must make every effort to properly identify each and every patient on 
admit. 
 
 
 
Patient’s SS# Patient’s Name Patient DOB Actions taken 
Listed in the database Match information provided by 
patient 
Match information provided by 
the patient 
• Proceed with patient 
registration following 
the Admitting a 
Patient Already in 
System P&P 
Not listed in database Match information provided by 
patient 
Match information provided by 
patient 
• Verify & Add the 
patient’s social 
security number to 
account. 
• Follow the 
Demographic Change 
P&P 
Listed in the database Partial name listed Match information provided by 
the patient 
• Verify & Update 
patient’s name 
• Follow Name Change 
P&P and Demographic 
Update P&P 
Listed in the database Match information provided by 
patient 
Does not match information 
provided by patient. 
• Verify & Update 
patient’s DOB 
• Follow Demographic 
Change P&P 
Not listed in database Not listed in database Not listed in database • Add a new patient. 
Patient unresponsive Patient unresponsive Patient unresponsive • Click Anonymous 
(system will pre-
populate alias and 
dob) 
• Once ID verified; 
Follow Name Change 
P&P and Demographic 
Update P&P   
Admitting  
 