 
 
 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Emergency Srvs. 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   
Subject:  Emergent Precipitous Deliveries  Section:  Patient Care 
Date of Origination:  6/22/2020 Supersedes:  
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed: 
September 5, 2023 
May 23, 2024 
Serial Code:  PC05 
 
 
 PURPOSE: 
 
To guide the nursing staff in assisting and providing care to a laboring mother, and in the care and emergent 
delivery of the newborn infant.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A. Obtain necessary equipment and supplies 
B. Coordinate transfer with the appropriate receiving facility as soon as possible. Transfer prior to delivery per 
provider order and discretion based on individual patient acuity and assessment findings 
C. If delivery imminent notify attending provider and essential team members, Children’s Hospital to initiate 
Code Stork see Children’s Hospital policy PADM-03 
D. Notify House Manager/House Supervisor of pending precipitous delivery 
E. Notify access service regarding imminent delivery and need for registration and identification for neonate.    
F. Notify Health Information Management (HIM) to coordinate vital records registration (birth certificate 
preparation), see policy OrgClin/037: 10A).  
G. Assessment and documentation standards: 
1. Maternal assessment and care: 
a. Complete Initial assessment and on-going assessment with vital signs excluding temperature 
every 15 minutes during delivery. If no complications post-delivery assessment should follow 
assessment policy standards. Post-delivery fundal assessments should be completed every 15 
minutes.  
b. Documenting Estimated weeks of gestation, gravid and parity, and maternal obstetric history, 
identify due date. 
c. Recording of fetal heart tones every 15 minutes; every 5 minutes once patient is completely 
dilated and during the pushing stage  
d. Assessment of patient’s labor process to include: 
i. Time membranes ruptured or intact, meconium present in amniotic fluid:  document 
color, amount, and odor 
ii. Time labor started  
iii. Time, frequency, and duration of contractions 
iv. Fetal Movement  
 
 2 
v. Signs of fetal distress (i.e., late decels)  
vi. Assess pre- and post-delivery vaginal bleeding, notify provider for excessive 
bleeding  
vii. Time of newborn delivery 
viii. Time placenta delivered-may take 20-30 minutes, no attempt should be made to 
extract prior to separation, note if intact 
ix. Perineal lacerations if present 
e. Document pre-delivery interventions.: If time permits, Don sterile gloves and drape perineum 
wash perineum with povodine iodine and rinse with water. If allergic to povidone iodine use 
antibacterial cleanse 
f. Immediately following delivery, ascertain consistency of the fundus, massage as necessary, 
bleeding and clots is normal and will lessen with fundal massage. 
g. Provider to ordered collect cord blood and place blood in tubes as appropriate in plain red blood 
tube and purple top tube and cord segment on ice in biohazard bag, if possible. Note: If the 
newborn is not reactive and/or has depressed respiratory effort, respiratory to assist to obtain cord 
blood for cord blood gas analysis 
h. After placenta is delivered:  
i. If special studies or labs (cytogenetics, microbiology, or other testing) are needed as 
ordered by provider, the placenta should be placed in a specimen container without 
formalin transferred to lab by a team member 
ii. If no special studies or clinical analysis are required, place the placenta in a specimen 
container with formalin transfer to lab by a team member 
2. Newborn Assessment and Care 
a. Follow most current Neonatal Resuscitation Guidelines – note: blankets contraindicated if using 
radiant infant warmer 
b. Approximately 30-60 seconds post-delivery double clamp cord at least 4 inches from baby and 
cut between clamps. Check cord and monitor for excessive bleeding, document findings  
c. Utilizing APGAR Scoring System (attachment A), assign a one minute and five-minute APGAR 
rating after birth.  Provide appropriate care and inform physician of score. If 5 min score less than 
7, additional scores should be assigned every 5 minutes up to 20 minutes or per provider 
direction.  
d. Perform heel stick glucose check during initial assessment of newborn 
e. Administer erythromycin ophthalmic ointment and Aqua Mephyton as ordered by provider. 
Medications can be delayed for up to 2 hours. 
f. Document vital signs every 30 minutes including pulse, respiratory rate, and temperature. If 
temperature 97.4 or below initiate warming measures and notify provider. 
g. Obtain and document initial weight, and length 
F. Admission Process: 
1. A separate registration/chart is completed for the newborn upon delivery.  
2. The newborn will be identified as follows: (see OrgClin/018) 
a. In instances in which the birth certificate has not been completed, DOB and the mother’s last 
name, mother’s first name and neonate’s gender (i.e., Johnson, MaryBabygirl).   
 
 3 
b. For those neonates with ambiguous genitalia, DOB and the mother’s last name, mother’s first 
name and “baby” (i.e., Johnson, MaryBaby).  
c. For multiple births, DOB and the mother’s last name, mother’s first name, neonates’ gender 
and birth order (i.e., Johnson, MaryBabygirl1). Upon registration, a bracelet will be placed on 
the parent to be used as the third identifier. 
d. For those neonates whose birth certificate has not been completed and are being transferred 
within the Franciscan system, the naming convention previously assigned will be retained to 
allow for continuity of the medical record. 
3. Patient identification bands are placed on both the mother and on the newborn, which include 
each medical record number.   
G. Stillborn or Fetal Death after Delivery: 
1. Stillborn is defined as any birth without a heart rate, without breathing effort, and without 
voluntary movement and a weight of equal to or greater than 350 grams “12 ounces” or is equal 
to or greater than 20 weeks gestational age. 
2. Follow department procedures for obtaining/notifying pastoral care services to address spiritual 
needs. 
3. Offer baptism of fetus/newborn 
a. Done by priest or minister of choice 
b. May be done by RN or MD if time does not allow for priest/minister to arrive.  Use the 
words, “I baptize thee in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost”.  While 
saying these words, pour a small amount of water on infant’s head.  Note this in the 
record. 
4. Prepare newborn for presentation and parent interaction 
5. Identification of newborn and medical record criteria 
a. If stillborn: 
i. Place identification bracelet that reads, “Stillborn Mother’s last name, mother’s 
first name, and neonate’s gender. ” i.e., “Stillborn Johnson, Mary babygirl” 
ii. Document in mother’s record time of delivery and that newborn was stillborn. 
b. If live birth, then death 
i. Must have new medical record separate from mother 
ii. Inform LOPA and Coroner’s office  
6. Burial requirement: (No Formalin in case of genetic studies requested)  
a. MUST be buried or cremated  
i.  Greater than 20 weeks gestation  
ii. Weighs 350 grams or more  
iii.  Born with heart rate, respiratory action, or voluntary movement of muscles  
b. NO burial or cremation required.  
i. Less than 20 weeks gestation 
ii. Weighs less than 350 grams   
iii. Born without a heart rate 
iv. Place all of the products of conception into a specimen container supplied from 
surgical area, or lab if no surgical area in facility and transfer specimen to 
laboratory by team member for weighing and routine tissue exam 
v. Parent may still choose to bury the fetus, Louisiana Law states we must notify 
the parents within 24hrs, See “Death of a patient/autopsy policy OrgClin/037”.    
 
 4 
7. Transfer of Mother and Baby to accepting/receiving healthcare facility should take place 
according to the “Patient Transfer Policy in Emergency Services ADM-01”.  For Children’s 
Hospital patient may be transferred to NICU for stabilization.  
 
 
 
 
 
References: 
Neonatal Resuscitation Textbook (2021). 8th edition. AHA & AAP. 
Thomas, D.O. and Bernardo, L.M. (2009). 2nd edition. Core Curriculum for Pediatric Emergency Nursing. 
Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett. 
Emergency Nurses Association (2023). Provider manual Emergency Nursing Pediatric Course (6th ed.). Des 
Plaines, IL: Emergency Nurses Association. 
 
“Refer to facility designated on-line clinical reference.” 
  
 
 5 
Attachment A 
 
APGAR SCORE 
 
Sign 0 1 2 
Heart Rate Absent Slow- less than 100 bpm Greater than 100 bpm 
Respiratory Effort Absent Slow-irregular, weak cry, 
hypoventilation  
Good Crying 
Muscle Tone Flaccid 
Limp 
Some Flexion and 
resistance to extension of 
Extremities 
Active motion 
Color Blue or pale, 
pallor, cyanosis 
Body Pink, Blue 
Extremities (acrocyanosis) 
Completely Pink 
Reflex Irritability No response Grimace, weak cry vigorous cry, cough, sneeze, or 
active withdraw 
 
 
 
 
 
 