ECLS-012 6119 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Environment of Care Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for PCU (2119) 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012 (2119) 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: September 30, 2020 Review Date: June 17, 2024 
Revision Date: June 17, 2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Location of Exits  
1. Across from director’s office. 
2. End of A, B, and C hallways 
3. Beginning of C hallway towards the rehab gym.  
• Location of Adjacent Smoke Compartment(s)  
1. The adjacent Smoke Compartment is through the exit by 3 South B hall nurse station to 3 ECLS-012 6119 
Page 2 of 3 
South A hall. 
2. The adjacent Smoke Compartment is through the exit by 3 South C hall nurse station 
towards rehab gym. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
(Charge nurse will delegate tasks as appropriate per situation.) 
• The CNA or designee will ensure that the hallway is clear of any carts or equipment by moving 
them to the equipment room and that all doors and windows are closed. 
• The CSR or designee will confirm that all fire doors that are usually held open by magnetic locks 
are release and closed on activation of the fire alarm and will prevent any people from using the 
elevators. 
• The nurses will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is conducting an 
emergency exercise to ensure your safety”. The nurse will also assist those with Limited English 
Proficiency (LEP) and those with sensory or mobility disabilities. 
• The charge nurse will ensure all employees and patients are accounted for and that all rooms are 
empty. (They will mark the door/door frame with chalk to indicate the room is empty.) 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
Medical gas shut off valves are located in nurses’ station, near the tube system. Nursing director, unit 
supervisor, charge nurse, respiratory supervisor, and Plant Management (or anyone deemed 
appropriate by previous responsible parties) have the authority to shut off medical gas valves.  
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• Patient beds/ wheelchairs will be used for horizontal evacuations. Sheets and blankets will be 
used for vertical evacuations. Oxygen tanks, and respiratory devices will be used for both 
horizontal and vertical. 
• Patient beds located in patient rooms, wheelchair located in connecting hallway behind 
medication room, sheets and blankets located halfway point of each hallway in rolling metal 
cart, oxygen tanks and other respiratory devices located in equipment storage. 
• Majority of patients on PCU are non-ambulatory. Assistance may be needed for non-ambulatory 
patients if a vertical evacuation is necessary. If assistance is needed, the director, supervisor, or 
charge nurse will seek help from neighboring departments. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguishers are located near staircases at end of hallway 3 South B, 3 South C, and in 
connecting hallway behind medication room.  
• Manual pull stations are located near staircases at end of hallway 3 South B, 3 South C, and near 
staircase across from Elevator E. 
• All team members are educated on proper use of fire extinguishers and are familiar with P.A.S.S. 
and R.A.C.E. 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Special patient populations may include patients with tracheostomies, laryngectomies, 
ventilators, and various oxygen requirements with various oxygen delivery systems.  ECLS-012 6119 
Page 3 of 3 
• Majority of patient population is non-ambulatory due to neurological conditions or surgical 
interventions.  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• The primary horizontal evacuation route will be to 3 South A hall. 
• The secondary horizontal evacuation route will be to hallway towards rehab gym.  
• The primary vertical evacuation route is to exit the building via stairwell across from director’s 
office and bridge to Parking Garage 2. 
• The secondary vertical evacuation route is to exit the building via stairwells at the end of 
hallways and to Parking garage. 
 
See egress map by main public elevator 
 
 