1  Pediatric GME Pay Practice, May 23, 2023 
Pediatric Residency Pay Practice  
(Effective 07/01/2023) 
Components of the Compensation Model: 
Section 1: Compensation 
(A) Base Compensation.  During the term of this Agreement, OLOLH shall pay Resident, 
as provided in this Agreement, annual compensation as follows depending on the PG 
level, which compensation may be adjusted as provided in Exhibit A, Section 2.   
 Salary 
PGY 1 $ 56,941.49 
PGY 2 $ 58,960.29 
PGY 3 $ 60,978.06 
 
(B) Payment Intervals.  OLOLH shall pay the Resident’s compensation on a bi-weekly 
basis. 
(C) Deductions.  OLOLH shall deduct from compensation all state and federal taxes, 
social security taxes and such other similar payroll deductions as the laws now or 
hereafter in force shall require. 
(D) Housing Allowance.  Residents may receive a one-time payment of $3,600.00 for 
housing during the academic year. 
(E) Re-location Allowance. PGY1 Residents may receive a one-time payment of 
$1,000.00 for relocation expenses.   
(F) Phone Allowance.  Residents may receive a one-time payment of $735.00 per year 
as a phone stipend.   
(G) Education Allowance.  Resident may receive reimbursement of reasonable education 
expenses. The maximum Education Allowance to be paid by OLOLH pursuant to this 
provision shall be $400.00 per academic year under this Agreement. Said payment 
will be paid by OLOLH within a reasonable amount of time following OLOLH’s receipt 
of sufficient documentation and approval by the Program Director of such education 
expenses.   2  Pediatric GME Pay Practice, May 23, 2023 
(H) Professional Fees. Resident may receive reimbursement of reasonable professional 
fees. Said payment will be paid by OLOLH within a reasonable amount of time 
following OLOLH’s receipt of sufficient documentation and approval by the Program 
Director of such professional fees. 
Section 2. Adjustment of Compensation.  Resident’s salary will be commensurate with 
years of successful completion within the Program.  Further, the compensation set forth in 
Section 1 may be adjusted during any leave of absence, consistent with law and OLOLH policy. 
Section 3. Moonlighting 
Moonlighting is defined as professional activities outside of the scope of the residency program, 
which includes volunteer work or service in a clinical setting, or employment that is not 
required by the residency program.  
(A) There are two types of moonlighting: 
(1) External moonlighting: any moonlighting outside of FMOLHS.  
(2) Internal moonlighting: any moonlighting within FMOLHS. 
(B) Residency training is a full-time educational endeavor. It will be the responsibility of 
the Program Director to ensure that the resident’s moonlighting activities do not 
interfere with the ability of the resident to achieve the goals and objectives of the 
program, the resident’s educational performance, nor the resident’s opportunities 
for rest, relaxation, and independent study.  
(C) It is the sole discretion of each Program Director to determine whether outside 
activities interfere with the responsibilities, duties and assignments of the residency 
program. Should adverse effects be noted, the Program Director may withdraw 
approval for and/or restrict the resident’s moonlighting activities. 
(D) Residents cannot be required to engage in moonlighting activities.  
(E) Moonlighting is not permitted for residents in their first year of training. 
(F) Residents must request approval for moonlighting and be approved to do so before 
scheduling moonlighting.  
(G) Internal and external moonlighting activities will be counted toward the 80-hour 
weekly limit on duty hours. 
Compensation for internal moonlighting has been approved for up to $65 per hour 
depending on the service. Compensation for external moonlighting is determined by the 
external entity. 
 
  3  Pediatric GME Pay Practice, May 23, 2023 
Section 4. Benefit Package. 
(A) Health, Life and Disability Insurance.  OLOLH will make available to Resident health, 
dental, vision, flexible spending accounts (childcare and/or medical), life, and 
disability insurance plans then in effect for OLOLH employees in accordance with the 
terms and conditions of those plans.  Resident will be subject to share the costs of 
such coverage to the same extent as OLOLH employees.  
(B) Retirement Benefits.  Residents are eligible to participate in the OLOLH retirement 
plan and in the voluntary retirement plan. 
(C) Leaves of Absences.  It is the policy of the Program to grant a leave of absence to 
eligible Residents as required by state or federal law and in accordance with the 
Leave of Absence Policy (GME/ RES/ 01).  Where applicable, the Program will 
provide timely notice of the potential effect a period of leave may have upon the 
Resident’s ability to satisfy the requirements for program completion. 
 The following additional leave benefits/parameters are administered directly through the 
program. 
(1) Vacation Leave: PGY1 Residents may receive up to three weeks (21 days to be 
taken in 7 day intervals) of vacation during the academic year. Residents PGY2 
and above may receive up to four weeks (28 days to be taken in 7 day intervals) 
of vacation during the academic year.  Residents are not entitled to vacation 
until such time as they apply for vacation leave and such is approved in writing 
by the Program.  Vacation leave is a gratuitous benefit afforded to Residents and 
is not considered to be part of the Resident’s wages.  Likewise, the maximum 
vacation available, as identified above, will not be carried forward from year to 
year and will not be paid as wages upon the Resident’s departure from the 
Program.  Scheduling is pre-determined by the Program and is determined by 
the rotation schedule and those rotations that allow for leave.  Available paid 
vacation leave will run concurrently with any type of approved Resident leave of 
absence. 
(2) Sick Leave:  Residents may be afforded up to 14 sick days per year for leave 
related to the Resident’s own personal illnesses.  Residents are not entitled to 
sick leave until such time as they request such leave, and it is approved in writing 
by the Program.  Sick leave is a gratuitous benefit afforded to Residents who 
become ill and is not considered to be part of the Resident’s wages.  Likewise, 
the maximum sick leave available, as identified above, will not be carried 
forward from year to year and will not be paid as wages upon the Resident’s 4  Pediatric GME Pay Practice, May 23, 2023 
departure from the Program.  Available paid sick leave will run concurrently with 
any type of approved Resident leave of absence. 
(3) Educational Leave:  Resident is permitted up to five total days of educational 
leave to attend or present at medical meetings approved by Program.  Residents 
are not entitled to educational leave until such time as they request such leave 
and it is approved in writing by the Program.  Educational leave is a gratuitous 
benefit afforded to Residents and is not considered to be part of the Resident’s 
wages.  Likewise, the maximum educational leave available, as identified above, 
will not be carried forward from year to year and will not be paid as wages upon 
the Resident’s departure from the Program. 
(D) Additional Benefits.  Access to food service while on call is provided by OLOLH in 
addition to library and lounge facilities, lab coat and scrubs, and parking.  Secure call 
rooms are available for all Residents when needed.   
 
   
 