PEDS-10 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual:  Children’s Hospital 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Patient Care 
Subject:  Pediatric Fever Control Section:  Pediatric Emergency 
Department 
Date of Origination:  April 1994 Supersedes:  
Date Last: 
  Revised 
  Reviewed 
 
March 2019 
February 28, 2025 
Serial Code:  PEDS-10 
  
PURPOSE: 
To establish a standard for obtaining temperatures based on developmental age and appropriate fever 
management in pediatric emergency patients. 
 
 
POLICY:  
I. All patients will have a temperature obtained during the triage assessment. 
II. To obtain temperatures on the pediatric patient: 
A. For all infants, birth through 6 months of age: 
1. Rectal temperature in triage if presenting with a medical complaint that is fever related, unless 
immunocompromised, rectal bleeding, recent rectal surgery, or infection around rectal area. 
2. Rectal temperature for subsequent vital signs if febrile in triage or if the child has a history of 
fever at home. 
3. Rectal temperature may be taken if ordered by provider and at the discretion of RN. 
B. For all patients greater than 6 months of age: 
1. Oral temperatures may be taken per the patient’s ability to cooperate and when developmentally 
appropriate. 
2. Axillary temperatures will be obtained when other means of temperature measurement are 
clinically not feasible and in cases of facial trauma, respiratory compromise, or if the patient is 
unable to cooperate to obtain oral temperature. 
3. Rectal temperature if patient is unable to cooperate or if unable to obtain an accurate temperature 
via axillary or oral methods.  Rectal temperatures may be requested at the discretion of the nurse 
or provider. 
III. Nursing intervention for a patient with a temperature of 100.4°F or higher. 
A. Administer acetaminophen or ibuprofen per provider or protocol order. 
B. In triage, initiate triage fever protocols and administer medication prior to returning patient to 
waiting or escorting to assigned treatment room. 
C. Febrile patients should have their outer clothing and blankets removed to help decrease core 
temperature.  If a patient is shivering, a light sheet may be provided. 
 
 
REFERENCE: 
 
Emergency Nurses Association (2023).  Provider Manual Emergency Nursing Pediatric Course (6th ed.). 
Burlington, MA: Jones and Bartlette Learning  
 
See Ebsco Online Resource                                                                                                                                                                    PEDS-10 
Page 2 of 2 
Treating Pediatric Patients with Fever 
Managing Fever in Newborn 