 
PH.2458_Electronic Prescribing 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Electronic Prescribing 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2458 (02/25/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/17/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
07/13/2020 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2458 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines that the pharmacy operating system is able to accept electronic prescriptions. 
POLICY: 
A. Pharmacy’s dispensing system supports electronic prescribing and is integrated with its drug 
management system. Electronic prescribing serves to enhance information flow and promote quality and 
safety.  [URAC CSCD 13] 
 
B. Pharmacy electronic claims processing complies with the requirements of the National Council for 
Prescription Drug Programs (NCPDP) standard claims transactions for pharmacy drug claims, eligibility, 
benefit coordination and related pharmacy services.  
 
C. The National Council for Prescription Drug Programs (NCPDP) standard transactions are the code set 
standards under HIPAA for the retail pharmacy environment. As a member of the National Council for 
Prescription Drug Programs, Inc. (NCPDP), the electronic prescribing system has applied NCPDP 
standards and guidelines to its business practices and continues to closely monitor both NCPDP and 
ANSI standards. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
1. NCPDP (National Council for Prescription Drug Programs) is a not-for-profit, multi-stakeholder forum for 
developing and promoting industry standards and business solutions that improve patient safety and health 
outcomes, while also decreasing costs. The work of the organization is accomplished through its members who 
bring high-level expertise and diverse perspectives to the forum.  
2. ANSI (American National Standards Institute) oversees the creation, promulgation and use of thousands of 
norms and guidelines that directly impact businesses in nearly every sector 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
7/13/2020 11:56 AM 
 
 
PH.2458_Electronic Prescribing 
2 
PROCEDURE:  
A. Pharmacy’s operating system has the capability to receive electronic Rx claims. The system offers the 
safety of electronic prescriptions through an NCPDP SCRIPT-based interface with secure e- prescribe 
systems.  
B. The pharmacy operating system supports electronic prescribing and is integrated with the pharmacy’s 
medical management system. The pharmacy is able to complete the following electronically: 
1. Receive an e-prescription from the prescriber either directly from the EMR for providers within the 
health system or through Surescripts for provides external to the health system;  
2. Acknowledge receipt of an e-prescription with initial review of the prescription from the pharmacy 
queue;  
3. Request refills for a previously received prescription via electronic transmission; and  
4. Receive a refill response in the queue of the pharmacy dispensing system. URAC CSCD 13] 
 
C. Pharmacy electronic prescribing system includes:  
1. A unique provider electronic identifier  
2. Consistency with security standards   
3. Promotes interoperability with internal and external sources  
4. Produces alerts to the prescriber for undesirable or unsafe situations, such as drug-drug 
interactions, drug-allergy interactions, drug-disease state interactions, or potentially 
inappropriate dosing 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC Standards: DRX5-18B 
• URAC Standards: CSCD 13 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 