 
PH.2401_Prescription Processing and Dispensing 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Prescription Processing and Dispensing 
PAGES: 
8 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2401 (10/26/2021) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 11/11/2013   
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/29/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2401 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy establishes the outline of services and processes for filling and dispensing prescriptions through the OLOLH 
owned pharmacies. 
POLICY: 
A. Prescription services will be provided by the pharmacy to all patients presenting with a valid prescription. 
B. Prescription services are limited to usual and customary retail prescription services and specialty pharmacy 
services that excludes IV admixtures or sterile preparations. 
C. Prescriptions will be accepted via fax, telephone, e-script, or hard copy during regular business hours.  
D. Prescriptions will be filled using a workflow system which includes barcode verification in addition to visual 
verification. 
E. The pharmacy ensures it verifies the patient’s eligibility. The following criteria are used: [URAC P-OPS 2-2 (a-i, 
a-ii)] 
1. The pharmacy must provide product/services required; 
2.
 Patient must reside or receive service in the state of Louisiana; and the 
3. Patient must have ability to pay for services either through insurance or financial arrangements made with 
the pharmacy aligned with the mission to serve those in need.  
4. No other restrictions exist other than those imposed by manufacturers. 
F. Prescription orders are reviewed and verified by pharmacist. The pharmacist reviews the prescription for the 
following criteria:  
1. Prescribers are verified using NPI and/or DEA numbers.  
2. The pharmacy will accept prescriptions only from licensed prescribers. 
3. Pharmacy personnel receiving prescriptions from previously unknown prescribers will verify the 
prescriber’s authenticity using the NPI database, similar resource or direct contact with the office.  
4. The pharmacy is notified by the Board of Pharmacy when a provider’s license has become inactive, 
suspended, surrendered or terminated. Any prescribers whose licenses have become inactive, been 
suspended, been surrendered, been terminated, or in any other way become inactive will be documented 
in the operating system, their active prescriptions will be inactivated and patients contacted. Their records 
will be flagged in the Pharmacy Operating Software to prevent dispensing future prescriptions until such 
time as the prescribers are again licensed in good standing.  
5. The prescription source verification process is compliant with state and federal law and regulations. 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
 
3/29/2023 1:33 PM 
 
 
PH.2401_Prescription Processing and Dispensing 
2 
G. Prescriptions are reviewed for legibility and accuracy. If inaccuracies are identified, the prescriber is contacted for 
resolution.  
1. The prescription legibility verification and clarification process resolve incomplete and unclear 
prescriptions. 
2. This process includes verification and resolutions of prescription ambiguities and prescriptions that do not 
make sense as written. 
3. The information obtained through clarification is documented on the prescription and scanned into the 
pharmacy software system or in the prescription notes section of the pharmacy software system if the 
prescription is received electronically. 
H. Prior to dispensing a prescription, the pharmacist will review all medication orders for appropriateness, clarity, and 
accuracy. The pharmacist will also verify the prescriber, patient and/or caregiver, if necessary, in accordance with 
state laws.  
1. A pharmacist has oversight of the prescription intake and verification processes prior to dispensing.  
I. The pharmacy accepts verbal, hardcopy, fax, or e-scribed prescription orders in accordance with state and federal 
laws.  
DEFINITIONS: 
Patient – any person presenting a bona-fide prescription to the pharmacy  
Prescription – an order from a licensed practitioner written within their scope of practice. 
Discharge Prescription – a prescription written for a patient prior to or at the time of discharge for self-administration 
after discharge. 
340B Drug Pricing Program (“340B Program”) – a program under the regulatory oversight of HRSA that permits 
certain covered entities to purchase drugs at a discounted price in order to stretch scarce federal resources thus reaching 
more eligible patients and providing more comprehensive services. 
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) – the federal agency with oversight of the 340B Program. 
Office of Pharmacy Affairs (“OPA”) – a department of HRSA responsible for maintaining the 340B database which 
identifies covered entities, contract pharmacies, and other eligible 340B participants.  
CII – Schedule II Controlled substance - any substance defined, enumerated, or included in federal or state statute or 
regulations, 21 CFR §1308.11-15 or R.S. 40:964, or any substance which may hereafter be designated as a controlled 
dangerous substance by amendment or supplementation of such regulations or statute. The term shall not include 
distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, or tobacco. 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Prescriptions will be:  
1. Entered into the pharmacy software system by a certified technician or licensed pharmacist. 
a. Prescription entry into the pharmacy operating system is checked against any physical prescription, 
verbal prescription form, electronic prescription or faxed prescription received.  
2. Verified by a licensed pharmacist 
a. If the prescription is a new prescription for a current patient, the patient profile will be reviewed for 
changes in dosing, medication, strength, prep or form, SIG, to see if any there is a change in therapy 
or if a prescription needs to be discontinued in the pharmacy operating system.  
3. Filled by a certified technician or licensed pharmacist. 
4. Verified for accuracy by visual inspection and barcode verification by a licensed pharmacist. 
5. Placed in a holding bin or on a rack until the patient or their designee arrives. 
B. The pharmacy will ensure that claims are timely submitted to network providers.  Claims will be submitted in 
accordance with agreements established with network providers and will be: 
1. Accurate and complete  
2. Reflect the actual date of fill.  
PH.2401_Prescription Processing and Dispensing 
3 
3. Submitted online whenever possible with reasonable attempts to resubmit the claim and will contact the 
PBM directly to resolve issue preventing submission. 
4. Reversed when not picked up by patients in accordance with network agreement. 
C. The pharmacy obtains the following information for patients enrolled in the Patient Management Program from 
the patient, caregiver or prescriber during the enrollment process and ensures this information is kept up to date 
by asking the patient, caregiver or prescriber for updates during each refill call: [URAC P-OPS 2-1 (a)] 
1. Patient health history; [URAC P-OPS 2-1 (a-i)] 
a. This information is documented in the patient management system. 
2. Medication history; [URAC P-OPS 2-1 (a-ii)] 
a. Medication history includes prescription medications the patient receives at the organization's 
pharmacy as well as external pharmacies and over the counter (OTC) medications, if provided by the 
patient. 
b. This information is documented in the patient management system. 
3. Allergies and past sensitivities; [URAC P-OPS 2-1 (a-iii)]  
a. Obtained for each new prescription by  
(1) Verbal communication from patient at drop off  
(2) Written communication via e-script or fax from provider 
(3) Verbal communication from provider or agent 
(4) Written information in patient EMR (clinic and hospital records) 
(5) Other communication as appropriate 
(6) This information is obtained for all patients including those not enrolled in the specialty 
pharmacy patient management program. 
b. Entered into the patient management system or dispensing software for non-specialty patients by 
technician or pharmacist. 
c. Reviewed by a pharmacist during verification and checking of prescription, taking into account the 
type and frequency of side effects, and potential drug interactions to determine if treatment 
recommendations are warranted. Additionally, all refills will be verified at this time and provider 
notified of any concerns.  
4. Any pertinent information necessary to consult with the prescriber and counsel the patient and/or 
caregiver, such as receiving authorization from the patient to speak with caregivers regarding their care. 
[URAC P-OPS 2-1 (a-iv)] 
5. The pharmacists ensure that each prescribed medication is indicated for the disease state for which it is 
being prescribed. If the medication is being used off-label, the pharmacist will indicate in the patient file 
that physician is using the medication in a manner that is off-label.  
6. The pharmacy has each member sign a petition profile. The pharmacy will also maintain documentation 
that substantiates (i) that a Covered Item was dispensed to a member and (ii) the amount that was paid for 
such Covered item by the member. The pharmacy maintains documentation evidencing that (i) any 
counseling required by law occurred, and (ii) to the extent applicable, the correct dispense as written 
(DAW) code was transmitted.  
D. The pharmacy identifies high risk groups as pregnant, elderly or infant/pediatric patients. 
E. The pharmacy has established processes to label, package, and dispense products accurately.  
F. The Pharmacy’s labeling process of medications/prescriptions is performed to meet the state and federal laws and 
regulations to include the following:  
1. Appropriate warning labels 
2. Discard Date/Expiration Date 
3. Pharmacy and provider contact information 
4. Patient name 
5. Directions 
6. Drug name 
7. Dispense date 
8. Prescriber’s name 
9. FDA Disclaimer  
PH.2401_Prescription Processing and Dispensing 
4 
10. Prescription Number  
11. Strength of Medication 
12. Refill Information  
13. Pharmacist’s initials 
14. Any other appropriate information 
G. Prevention of contamination, which includes cross-contamination [URAC P-OPS 2-4 (a)].  Any medications that 
are not coated and have the potential to cross contaminate other medications are counted either through a manual 
counting tray (cleaned after each use) or dispensed through the pharmacy automation system which is a closed 
system.  
H. The Pharmacy ensures that medications are packaged to maintain stability and usability for patients. All 
medications are stored in light sensitive vials and are stored/dispensed per manufacturer guidelines.  
I. The packaging for dispensing will include the following:  
1. Appropriate temperature – medications are stored in a temperature and humidity-controlled environment 
until dispensed to the patient. The patient receives written and, if requested, verbal counseling to include 
storage instructions. 
2. Child proof caps and senior overrides if requested.  
3. Tamper evident sealing if prescription is shipped. 
J. The Pharmacy is able to dispense emergency or interim supplies of medications, as needed, to prevent 
interruption of services in the event of emergencies and local disasters. 
K. Pharmaceuticals shall be stored separate from food items or other sources of contamination. 
L. Pharmaceuticals are labeled as to the appropriate storage. 
M. Prescription Dispensing by Pharmacist - The pharmacist will verify that medication orders are prepared in 
accordance with the prescriber’s prescription, which includes the following: 
1. Dispensing medications that match the prescription with regard to the correct: 
a. Patient  
b. Route of administration  
c. Dosage and strength  
d. Administration schedule or time  
e. Medications  
f. Weight based dosing regimens are evaluated with every refill to validate that the correct dose is 
dispensed. Any dose consolidation opportunities are considered and intervened upon with the 
prescriber. 
2. The pharmacist will ensure that appropriate patient education material from appropriate sources (such as 
the manufacturer, FDA, AMA, or other including drug monographs) is included with dispensed 
medications.   
3. If the pharmacist has any questions regarding the legibility of the prescription or needs to resolve any 
discrepancies with the prescription, the pharmacist will contact the physician or physician representative to 
clarify.  
N. The pharmacy promotes cost effective healthcare practices through the elimination of duplicate/inappropriate 
therapy, reduction of medication overuse, and the pharmacy’s Patient Assistance Program (Policy # PH.2403), 
[URAC P-OPS 1-1 (c)] 
O. The pharmacy maintains an open formulary.  Medications are ordered pursuant to valid prescriptions.  
P. Pharmacists promote clinical appropriateness for each patient through review of medications, allergies and 
medical conditions, utilization of available clinical resources, and consultation with providers, when necessary, 
completing initial patient assessments, and reassessments. They also take into account issues related to the ease of 
adherence and therapy management when there are multiple drugs available for the prescribed indication. For 
example: tests needed, side effect profiles, simpler dosing regimens, etc.  
Q. The following resources for medical literature and evidence-based processes are utilized as required: 
1. Manufacturer’s Prescribing Information   
PH.2401_Prescription Processing and Dispensing 
5 
2. Lexicomp 
R. A Registered Pharmacist supervises Pharmacy Technicians, which means that the pharmacist must have a 
physical presence to observe, direct and supervise the pharmacy technician prior to dispensing, sale or distribution 
of medications.  
S. Prescriptions may be:  
1. Picked up from the pharmacy by patients or their designee during regular business hours. 
2. Delivered to the bedside of patients being discharged from Our Lady of the Lake Hospital or Lake 
Children’s Hospital. Counseling by a pharmacist will be offered in person or via phone.  
3. Delivered to the patient or designee while in the provider’s office of infusion suite as a convenience to the 
patient.  Counseling by a pharmacist will be offered in person or via phone.  
4. Delivered according to policy PH.2453.001 Prescription Deliveries 
T. Proper identification prior to filling or dispensing prescriptions will include the following obtained from the 
patient or designee: 
1. Patient name 
2. Patient date of birth 
3. Patient address 
U. Proper identification will be required when picking up prescriptions for controlled substance prescriptions or 
drugs of concern. 
V. Signature will be required for each prescription transaction via electronic signature pad for all prescriptions. In the 
event electronic signature pad is not available, verification of pick up will be reduced to writing and scanned into 
the patient electronic medical record in the pharmacy software system. 
W. Filled prescriptions will be held for 8-10 business days, after which time they will be reversed in the pharmacy 
software system and returned to stock. The patient can initiate a new request to fill if they choose. 
X. The pharmacy will maintain hardcopy prescription records on site for no less than 2 years from the date last filled, 
after which time they will be stored at an off-site storage facility for no less than 10 + 1 years. 
Y. Prescriptions will be filed digitally according to Louisiana State Board of Pharmacy regulations. 
1. In lieu of filing the actual original hard-copy prescription, the pharmacy may use an electronic imaging 
recordkeeping system capable of capturing, storing, and reproducing the exact image of a prescription, 
including the reverse side of the prescription  
2. Any notes of clarification of, and alterations to, a prescription shall identify the author and shall be directly 
associated with the electronic image of the prescription;  
3. The prescription image and any associated notes of clarification of, or alterations to, a prescription will be 
retained for a period not less than two years from the date the prescription is last dispensed;  
4. In the event a CII is filled, the hardcopy will be filed and stored separately.  
5. The pharmacy may retain the hard copy prescriptions in order of date scanned in lieu of numerical order.  
Z. Pharmacy Self Audits 
1. The pharmacy will maintain an “audit box” containing the following documents: 
a. Power of Attorney 
b. Iron Mountain Reports  
c. DEA 106 if applicable 
d. CII Invoices for current month 
e. CII Returns for current month 
f. Controlled 3-5 Invoices for current month 
g. Controlled 3-5 Returns for current month 
h. Non-Control Invoices for current month 
i. Non-Control Returns for current month 
j. Completed Controlled Substance Inventory  
k. Compound Worksheets 
l. Inspection Reports 
2. The pharmacist in charge will ensure that the audit box is maintained such that items are easily accessible.  
PH.2401_Prescription Processing and Dispensing 
6 
3. Pharmacists in Charge will be randomly assigned the task of conducting audits of pharmacies other than 
their own by the Senior Director of Pharmacy on a quarterly basis. 
4. Audits will be completed using the Quarterly Pharmacy Audit form and submitted to the Director of 
Pharmacy for review.  The audit will be completed by the 10th business day from the day assigned. 
5. Audits findings will require: 
a. The submission of a Corrective Action Plan (CAP) by the Pharmacist in Charge where the findings 
occurred.  The CAP will be due to the Senior Director of Pharmacy by the 10th business day from the 
date of discovery. 
b. If the audit included a discovery of a significant loss, the Pharmacist in Charge will be responsible 
for reporting to regulatory bodies as required. 
6. The audit form will be saved in Teamlink>Quarterly self-audit> Store name 
AA. Insurance Verification and Prior Authorization [URAC P-OPS 2-2] 
1. To verify benefits, appropriate pharmacy personnel will contact primary and secondary payers, 
providing clinical information to the payer organization to support the approval of a prior authorization 
for a specialty drug.  If a claim rejects, the pharmacy staff will research the denial and notify the provider 
and patient if necessary and provide reasonable assistance to the patient with appeals.  
BB. The pharmacy employees work with the patient, prescriber and/or payor to resolve issues related to drug-
utilization review, coverage or benefits, or medications that may be out of stock and/or on back order. 
Pharmacists and technicians follow state and federal regulations regarding allowed tasks.  The appropriate 
employee will make outreach to the patient, prescriber or payor about the issues/concern within 24 hours and 
then work to obtain a resolution.  Documentation of the communication will be noted in the patient’s record. 
[URAC P-OPS 2-3 (a-i, a-ii, a-iii)] 
CC. The pharmacy does not dispense covered drugs (i) more than twelve (12) months after issuance of the 
prescription order for non-controlled substances, (ii) more than six (6) months after issuance of the 
prescription for controlled drug substances, or (iii) if prohibited by applicable law or the professional 
judgement of the dispensing pharmacist.  
DD. Copay Assistance [URAC P-OPS 2-2 (a-iii)]  
1. The patient management system will monitor and flag patient assistance opportunities. If an opportunity is 
available, the information is shared with the patient. 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC Standards: DRX5-1D, DRX5-5A, DRX5-5F, DRX5-7A, DRX5-7A.01, DRX5-10A, DRX5-18B, DRX7-
9A 
• URAC Standards: P-OPS 1-1, 2-1, 2-2, 2-3, 2-4 
• 46 La. Admin. Code Pt LIII, 2511 et seq. 
• HRSA Office of Pharmacy Affairs http://www.hrsa.gov/opa/ 
• Louisiana State Board of Pharmacy website http://labp.gov 
• PH.2417_Central Fill Pharmacy 
• 75 Fed. Reg. 10272 (Mar. 5, 2010) 
• PH.2403_Pharmacy Patient Assistance Program 
• PH.2453.001_Prescription Deliveries 
ATTACHMENTS:  
• Quarterly Self Audit form 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.   
PH.2401_Prescription Processing and Dispensing 
7 
 
 
Compliance validation – to be completed by the Pharmacist in Charge 
Mark only if compliant.  Plan of correction required for all 
items not compliant. 
Q1 
Date________ 
Q2 
Date________ 
Q3 
Date________ 
Q4 
Date________ 
Dispensing Log Book.  Is there a signature recorded for each 
date? ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Legend prescription book.  Are the prescriptions being filed 
appropriately? Verify by looking at script number and 
date.  Ensure that no controlled scripts are present 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
C3-5 prescription book.  Are the patient address and Doctor 
DEA present? 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
CII prescription book.  Are the patient address and Doctor 
DEA present?  Are the prescriptions being voided with 
pharmacist’s signature and date? 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Review the temperature log for the refrigerator and 
freezer.  Are daily temperatures being recorded? 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Review 10 return to stock prescriptions.  Are they properly 
returned with protected patient information obscured?  Are 
they within the 12 month expiration? 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Review 10 random stock bottles.  Are they within the 
expiration date? 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Review 5 C3-5 invoices.  Are they signed and dated on each 
page? 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Review 5 CII invoices.  Are they signed and dated on each 
page? 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Review 5 Legend drug invoices.  Are they filed 
appropriately?    
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Review the most current annual controlled inventory.  Is it 
signed and dated with the name and address of the 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Quarterly Pharmacy Audit  
 
 
PH.2401_Prescription Processing and Dispensing 
8 
Compliance validation – to be completed by the Pharmacist in Charge 
pharmacy listed?  Are there 5 years in file if pharmacy open 
longer than 5 years? 
Review CII order blanks.  Are they completed with each line 
dated and received listed? 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Can staff locate the Power of Attorney forms for control 
substance ordering? 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Review waiting bin.  Are prescriptions being returned to stock 
within 14 days?   
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Is the emergency key secured and stored in a manner that 
will indicate if it is accessed? 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Is the pharmacy refrigerator free of any food items? ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Are licenses and certifications up to date? ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Review the compounding log.  Are compounds being 
recorded appropriately? 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
If the pharmacy has experienced any controlled substance 
losses is there a corresponding DEA 106 form on file? 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Nursing home delivery tickets.  Are delivery tickets present 
for each delivery?  Are all signed? (only form Rx ONE 
MedPlaza) 
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
     
Signature of Pharmacist In Charge     
 
 