 
PH.2449_Telephone Communication Processes 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Telephone Communication Processes 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2449 (02/10/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/30/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2449 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines certain telephone communications processes focusing on telephone performance monitoring and 
metrics. 
POLICY: 
All calls during business hours to the pharmacy will be answered by technicians and pharmacists. The pharmacy 
offers immediate telephonic access to pharmacy staff for patients and clinicians. (Typically, there is no “on hold” time 
prior to reaching a staff member.) 
If a patient contacts the pharmacy with an urgent or emergent situation (e.g., patient stating they are going to harm 
themselves or others), or stating they are having medical emergencies (e.g., experiencing a medical crisis such as a 
cardiac arrest or other serious medical condition): [URAC CPE 2-2] 
1. Staff are trained to never place the patient on hold, and to continue communicating with the patient while they 
notify a coworker to call 911. The patient will never be placed on hold or transferred in these circumstances.  
2. If a patient contacts the pharmacy after hours, they will hear a message informing them that if this is a 
medical emergency to please hang up and call 911 prior to them being able to request to speak to a 
pharmacist.  
DEFINITIONS: 
Average abandonment rate is the percentage of calls offered into a communications network or telephone system – 
i.e., automatic call distribution (ACD) system of a call center – that are terminated by the persons originating the call 
before being answered by a staff person. 
Average blockage rate is the percentage of incoming telephone calls “blocked” or not completed because switching or 
transmission capacity is not available as compared to the total number of calls encountered. Blocked calls usually occur 
during peak call volume periods and result in callers receiving a busy signal. 
Average speed of answer is the average delay in seconds that inbound telephone calls encounter waiting in the 
telephone queue of a call center before answered by a staff person. 
PROCEDURE: 
A. The pharmacy adheres to the following operating requirements for telephone calls: 
1. Average abandonment rate: 5% or less;  
2. Average blockage rate: 5% or less;  
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/30/2023 12:23 PM 
 
 
PH.2449_Telephone Communication Processes 
2 
3. Average speed of answer: 80% of calls are answered by a live person within 30 seconds;  
The pharmacy monitors and tracks telephone access by tracking the abandonment rate, blockage rate and 
average speed of answer. Reports will be generated on a monthly basis and reported to the Quality 
Management Committee (QMC). Should standards not be met, an analysis to determine the cause of non-
compliance will be undertaken and a corrective action plan will be implemented and monitored for 
effectiveness.  
B. On at least a quarterly basis, telephone performance metrics will be reported to the QMC.  
C. In the event that the telephone system fails, calls will route to the after-hours call service in accordance with 
standard operating procedure. The service will address the patient need and provide the pharmacy with a copy of 
the encounter consistent with policy PH.2431.  
D. All inquiries/communications from a patient or prescriber received through the pharmacy’s website or email will 
be responded to within one (1) business day. [URAC P-PSC 3-3 (a)] 
1. The pharmacy completes random audits of non-telephone communication from patients/caregivers and 
prescribers via a quarterly compliance audit tool to ensure compliance to response timeframes.  Results of 
the audit are reviewed during quarterly QMC meetings. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC Standards: DRX2-10F 
• URAC Standards: P-PSC 3-3, CPE 2-2 
• PH.2431 Ongoing Patient Support and On-Call Services 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 