 
PH.2431_Ongoing Patient Support and On-Call Services 
1 
 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT: 
Ongoing Patient Support and On-Call Services 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2431 (03/12/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/17/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/29/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2431 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines the pharmacies’ “On-Call” program, which is part of the ongoing patient support program.  This 
policy applies only to specialty pharmacy locations. 
POLICY: 
The pharmacy will provide after-hours access to a pharmacist for patients enrolled the specialty pharmacy program. 
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: [URAC P-PSC 3-4 (a-i, a-ii, a-iii, a-iv)] 
A. The “On-Call” program process for after-hours assistance is as follows: 
1. Patients may obtain assistance after normal business hours by calling the telephone number provided in the 
Welcome Packet. 
2. Calls will be received by a call center which addresses the patients’ needs. 
3. The “On-Call” service is available outside of regular business hours for patients to contact the pharmacy with 
questions related to medication(s), clinical questions, and urgent & emergent issues.  The “On-Call” service is 
also able to accept complaints. [URAC P-PSC 3-4 (a-i, a-ii)] 
B. No routine refills will be accepted through the call service.  
C. During business hours, all calls are answered by a pharmacy employee. After business hours, a pharmacist is 
available to respond to urgent and emergent calls and clinical questions. [URAC P-PSC 3-4 (a-i, a-iii)] 
D. The pharmacy’s staff are responsible for contacting patients to confirm and schedule medication orders as well as 
handling inbound customer service calls.  Staff work with pharmacists to request pertinent documents and 
prescriptions from physician offices and request insurance prior authorization in a timely manner.  
E. During posted business hours, non-clinical employees are trained to transfer calls to a clinician in the below 
scenarios: [URAC CPE 2-2] [URAC P-PSC 1-2 (a-vi)] [URAC P-PSC 3-4 (a-iv)] 
1. Patient has clinical questions including, but not limited to, those regarding their medication, possible side 
effects, how to inject their medication, possible drug interactions and/or requests a general consultation.  
2. Patient is experiencing side effects. 
3. Patient is having or has had an adverse reaction. 
4. Patient has passed away. 
5. There is an issue with the Patient’s medication (i.e., has “misfired”). 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/29/2023 1:35 PM 
 
 
PH.2431_Ongoing Patient Support and On-Call Services 
2 
6. Patient is completely out of medication and will miss a dose. 
F. Patients calling after hours are able to leave routine reorder – refill requests on a secure voice mail system. They 
hear the following message: [URAC CPE 2-2] [URAC P-PSC 3-4 (a-i, a-ii, a-iii, a-iv)] 
1. “Thank you for calling the O’Donovan Pharmacy. Our Hours of operation are provided at the store-specific 
level.  If this is a medical emergency, please hang up and dial 911.... If you are a patient requesting a refill and 
have your prescription number or are requesting the status of a refill press 1. If you are a patient requesting a 
refill and do not have your prescription number press 2.  If you are a physician or physician representative and 
need to request a refill press 3. If you have a question and need to speak to a member of our pharmacy staff 
during business hours press 4.  
2. Specialty patients are instructed to use the after-hours line for contacting a pharmacist outside of regular 
business hours.  This information is provided in the Welcome Packet. 
Clinical calls are answered by a technician and transferred to a pharmacist during business hours. After hours, 
a pharmacist responds to all urgent and emergent calls via the “on -call” process. [URAC P-PSC 3-4 (a-i)] 
3. The pharmacist shall call the patient/client immediately if conditions warrant and/or save the recorded 
message until messages are routinely retrieved the following business day. The pharmacy’s process involves 
providing patients with the after-hours number which is included in their Welcome Packet.  They can call and 
speak with a pharmacist if needed using that number.  
4. Routine refill requests will be treated as “non-emergent” or “not urgent” and will be serviced on the next 
business day. 
5. If a nurse or doctor call is necessary, the pharmacist shall instruct patients to call 911 or seek help at the 
nearest emergency department, if needed. [URACP-PSC 3-4 (a-iv)].  
G. The on-call system described above will be audited at least quarterly.  In the event that the paging or messaging 
system fails to work properly, the process will be re-evaluated to correct the issue and retested. 
H. A daily “On-Call” log will be maintained with any urgent or emergent calls and responses documented. 
I. If an after-hours call is received, notification and details of the call will be provided to the pharmacy to include: 
• Date and time of call 
• Date and time call was returned 
• Name of patient 
• Nature of call 
• Outcome/resolution  
• Name of pharmacist who handled the call 
In addition, call recordings can be requested for quality monitoring purposes. A review of the “On Call” log will 
be performed to identify any particular trends that require further evaluation and any complaint report and 
handling. The evaluation will be reviewed at the quarterly Quality Management Committee meeting.  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: CPE 2-2, P-PSC 1-2, P-PSC 3-4 
• ACHC Standards: DRX2-1A, DRX4-9C, DRX4-9D 
• PH.2464_Patient Complaint Process Policy 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  