 
PH.2427_Fraud Waste & Abuse Audits 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Fraud Waste & Abuse Audits 
PAGES: 
6 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2427 (05/22/2018) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE:  02/07/2017   
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/12/2020 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2427 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that the compliance program addresses fraud, waste and abuse as appropriate to the organization. 
POLICY: 
Fraud Waste and Abuse Audits are performed monthly to ensure claims are correctly being processed and that the 
pharmacy is in compliance with all requirements. 
 
Results of Fraud Waste and Abuse Audits Shall be reported on a quarterly basis to the Quality Management Committee 
by the pharmacy manager. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Fraud is generally defined as knowingly and willfully executing, or attempting to execute, a scheme or artifice to 
defraud any health care benefit program or to obtain (by means of false or fraudulent pretenses representations, or 
promises) any of the money or property owned by, or under the custody or control of, any health care benefit program. 
(18 U.S.C. § 1347) 
  
Waste is overutilization of services or other practices that, directly or indirectly, result in unnecessary costs to the 
health care system, including the Medicare and Medicaid programs. It is not generally considered to be caused by 
criminally negligent actions, but by the misuse of resources. 
 
Abuse includes any action(s) that may, directly or indirectly, result in one or more of the following:  
• Unnecessary costs to the health care system, including the Medicare and Medicaid programs 
• Improper payment for services 
• Payment for services that fail to meet professionally recognized standards of care 
• Services that are medically unnecessary 
 
Abuse involves payment for items or services when there is no legal entitlement to that payment and the entity 
supporting Humana (e.g. health care provider or supplier) has not knowingly and/or intentionally misrepresented 
facts to obtain payment. 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
3/12/2020 7:11 PM 
 
 
PH.2427_Fraud Waste & Abuse Audits 
2 
 
Abuse cannot always be easily identified, because what is “abuse” versus “fraud” depends on specific facts and 
circumstances, intent, and prior knowledge, and available evidence, among other factors. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Pharmacists advise patients and health care providers on the selection, dosages, interactions, and side 
effects of medications, and act as a learned intermediary between a prescriber and a patient to ensure the 
safe and effective use of medication. 
1. Audits are performed monthly  
a. All pharmacy staff are responsible for following compliance requirements  
2. Pharmacy Compliance Rating Legend: 
a. Excellent - the site’s overall score >=90% and zero non-compliant issues of high or very 
high risk. 
b. Good - the site’s overall score >=80% and no more than one non-compliant issues of 
high or very high risk. 
c. Fair - the site’s overall score >=70% and no more than three non-compliant issues of 
high or very high risk. 
d. Poor – the site’s overall score >=60% and no more than five non-compliant issues of 
high or very high risk 
e. Unacceptable – the site’s overall score is <60% or there are more than five non-
compliant issues of high or very high risk. 
 
3. Audits conducted in the pharmacy will follow the following procedures. 
a. Claims will be adequately supported 
(1) Select a sample of at least 5% of monthly transactions and test to determine the 
prescription (Rx) is on file; and 
(2) The following information from the pharmacy operating system matches to the 
Rx. 
b. If refill transaction, trace to original script: 
(1) Patient name 
(2) Drug name  
(3) Primary Price Plan  
(4) Secondary/Tertiary Price Plan (if applicable)  
(5) Patient Group  
(6) Quantity  
(7) Day supply 
(8) Number of refills  
(9) Dosage  
(10) Origin Code 
(11) Place of Service Code  
(12) Physician signature is on Rx unless phone-in which requires pharmacist (or tech 
if allowed by state law) initials 
(13) Number of refills was not exceeded  
(14) Refill was less than one (1) year from original date (can remedy with signed 
physician statement).  
(15) Signature was POS, Will Call (signature center) report, or on signed delivery 
receipt (can remedy with signed patient statement) 
c. Test 5% of monthly transactions only to verify date dispensed coincides with signature 
log. 
 
(1) Hardcopy requirements: Original Rx on file for Schedule II's                                           
PH.2427_Fraud Waste & Abuse Audits 
3 
(2) Medicare part B prescriptions require faxed or original prescriber signatures.                                  
(3) Medicare part B requires Oncology RXs have the diagnosis code on face of 
hardcopy. 
d. Monthly reports will be generated and audited to ensure that all patients provided 
medications assistance are eligible for the programs from which the assistance was 
provided.  This includes but not limited to: 
(1) Medicaid 
(2) Ryan White funded assistance 
(3) 340B drug pricing program 
4. Unusual transactions properly supported 
a. Extract unusual dispenses from the pharmacy operating system and trace to original 
prescription to ensure claim is adequately supported 
b. Refills more than 12 months from original date of service (payer contract may not 
allow) 
c. Fills with more than a 30-day supply (payer contract may disallow). 
d. Vacation or over the monthly limit overrides properly documented on prescription 
hardcopy                                         
e. Reason documented on original script for any early refills, high dollar transactions (over 
$2,000) per prescription 
 
5. Observe that pharmacy maintains documentation for period required to support claims: 
a. Hardcopy Prescriptions, two (2) years on site; 2-10 years off site     
b. Electronic Prescription Records, ten (10) years        
c. Invoices/Statements/Purchase Records, two (2) years on site; 2-10 years off site  
d. Controlled Substance Invoices, three (3) years on site 10 years off site                                                                                                                                                               
e. Claims Transaction Records, 10 years                                                                                
f. DEA Ordering Forms, three (3) years 
g. Rx-Daily Log, three (3) years 
h. Patient Signature, ten (10) years 
i. Patient Files/Medical Records (as applicable), 10 years 
j. Third Party Provider Agreements, current and up to 10 years beyond expiration     
k. Share of Cost Documents (as applicable) 10 years  
l. Medically Needy Programs, seven (7) years 
m. Universal Signature Log, 10 years 
n. Compounding Worksheets and Records, two (2) years on site; 2-10 years off site              
o. Signed UPS/US MAIL/FEDEX/Courier slips, 10 years if applicable 
     
B. Pharmacists will oversee the daily operations of the pharmacy and ensure the standards of practice are 
followed. 
 
C. Pharmacy Requirements 
1. All medications shall be stored at the proper temperature and conditions, as defined by law. 
2. A Registered Pharmacist may not accept any unused prescription or drug, in whole or in part, 
for the purpose of resale or re-dispensing to any person(s), after the prescription or drug has 
been originally dispensed, or sold.      
3. If the price of a drug for a patient is lower than the amount of the patient’s copayment under the 
patient’s prescription drug plan, the pharmacist shall offer the patient the option of paying for 
the drug at the lower price instead of paying the copayment amount.   
4. The Pharmacist-in-Charge shall have responsibility for the practice of pharmacy at the 
pharmacy for which he/she is the PIC. 
5. The PIC may advise the owner on administrative on operational concerns.  
PH.2427_Fraud Waste & Abuse Audits 
4 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: PHARM Core 4 
• ACHC Standards: DRX2-9A, DRX7-9A  
ATTACHMENTS:  
• Corrective Action Plan (CAP) 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 
   
PH.2427_Fraud Waste & Abuse Audits 
5 
CORRECTIVE ACTION PLAN (CAP) 
 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
Pharmacy 
Location & 
Department: 
  
Employee Name:  Date:  
Issue/Problem: Brief description (overview) 
 
Requirement(s) 
or Regulation(s) 
not met: 
Describe the requirement and/or deficiency that were not successfully 
achieved based on policy and procedures. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISSUE/PROBLEM DETAIL 
How was the 
Issue Identified: 
Describe how the issue was identified. 
 
 
Issue Description: Describe the issue, in detail. 
 
 
 
Root Cause: What is the cause?  Who should be held responsible? 
 
 
 
 
APPROACH TO COMPLIANCE 
Corrective 
Action: 
Describe the necessary steps to correct the issue.  What should be 
happening?  How can it be fixed?  
PH.2427_Fraud Waste & Abuse Audits 
6 
Roles and 
Responsibilities: 
Describe each employee, sponsor or Business Associate involved in the 
correction, and identify their associated responsibilities for ensuring 
resolution to the issue. 
Interim Activities 
(until compliance 
is reached): 
Describe any processes or procedures that need to be followed until the 
issue is corrected. Such as training, change of duties or responsibilities, 
etc. 
Approval of 
Approach: 
Describe the approval process required for the correction of the issue. 
SCHEDULE FOR COMPLIANCE 
Major 
Milestones: 
Provide the milestones and dates for the correction of the issue.  
Dependencies: List any dependencies to correction or resolution. 
COST OF COMPLIANCE 
Time: List any additional cost in time due to the correction of the issue. 
Resources: List any additional cost in resources due to the correction of the issue. 
Fiscal Impact: List any additional fiscal impact due to the correction of the issue. 
CONCLUSION AND NEXT STEPS 
Checkpoints: Designate checkpoints to ensure the correction of the issue. 
Re-assessment of 
Incident: 
Describe the steps required to re-assess the issue once it has been 
corrected. If the issue cannot be corrected, describe how it will be dealt 
with. Include any timeframes, if appropriate. 
Formal Review of 
Status: 
Describe the steps necessary for a formal status review of the correction 
of the issue. 
Submitted By:  
 
Printed Name 
 
 
Signature 
 
Date: 
Received By:  
 
Printed Name 
 
 
Signature 
 
Date: 
  
 