 
PH.2428_Managing Cultural and Communication Needs 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Managing Cultural and Communication Needs 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2428 (10/26/2021) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE:  03/29/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/31/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2428 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
To identify measures which OLOLH owned pharmacies will take to ensure that it provides an environment that is 
sensitive to the cultural backgrounds of the patient population and to address potential communication barriers posed by 
a patient/consumer’s limited English language proficiency or physical/cognitive impairment.  
POLICY: 
OLOLH owned pharmacies promote diversity, equity, and inclusion of its patient population through employee 
education.   
A. Diversity promotes an appreciation for the traditions and beliefs of diverse patient populations and an 
unde
rstanding of what effect stereotyping can have on decision making involving with patient populations. 
[URAC CPE 2-1 (a-i)] 
B. Equity ensures understanding of cross-cul tural awareness for problem solving and promoting patient compliance 
therapy. [URAC CPE 2-1 (a-ii)] 
C. Inclusion involves an understanding of techniques to deal with language or communication barriers. [URAC CPE 
2-1 (a-iii)]  
Because the behavior and attitudes of both patients and staff directly impact the care provided, the pharmacy is sensitive 
to the
 personal beliefs and cultural values as well as the language barriers, physical limitations, and cognitive 
impairments present in the care setting.  The pharmacy is dedicated to the quality of care delivered to all its patients. 
[URAC CPE 2-1 (a-i, a-ii, a-iii)] 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
• Culture is “The thoughts, communications, actions, customs, beliefs, values, and institutions of racial, ethnic, 
religious, or social groups. Culture defines how health care information is received, how rights and protections are 
exercised, what is considered to be a health problem, how symptoms and concerns about the problem are expressed, 
who should provide treatment for the problem, and what type of treatment should be given. In sum, because health 
care is a cultural construct, arising from beliefs about the nature of disease and the human body, cultural issues are 
actually central in the delivery of health services treatment and preventive interventions. By understanding, valuing, 
and incorporating the cultural differences of America’s diverse population and examining one’s own health-related 
values and beliefs, health care organizations, practitioners, and others can support a health care system that responds 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/31/2023 1:12 PM 
 
 
PH.2428_Managing Cultural and Communication Needs 
2 
appropriately to, and directly serves the unique needs of populations whose cultures may be different from the 
prevailing culture” (Katz, Michael. Personal communication, November 1998). 
• Health Literacy is the degree to which individuals have the capacity to obtain, process, and understand basic health 
information and services needed to make appropriate health decisions. 
PROCEDURE: [URAC CPE 2-1 (a-i, a-ii, a-iii)] 
A. Training/Education 
1. Staff members will be provided with education and resources to increase the cultural awareness of the 
consumers their serve.  Staff members receive training in an effort to understand how the patient’s cultural 
beliefs impact the perception of illness and the approach to health and healing. [URAC P-PSC 3-1 (a-ii)] 
2. S taff members will be provided education and resources concerning how to address patients/consumers with 
limited English language proficiency and/or whose ability to understand or communicate effectively 
concerning their care is impacted by physical impairments such as loss of/diminished sight or hearing, or 
cognitive impairments. [URAC P-PSC 3-1 (a-iii)] 
B. I f a staff member or independent contractor encounters a patient/consumer whose cultural beliefs may negatively 
impact the level of care, the staff member will report the concern to his/her immediate supervisor.  The pharmacy 
will ensure the continuity of care for the patient/consumer while working to resolve any conflict between the 
cultural belief and necessary care.  [URAC P-PSC 3-1 (a-ii)] 
C. I f a staff member or independent contractor encounters a patient/consumer who has difficulty communicating due 
to physical impairments (such as those related to sight or hearing), the pharmacy will determine what 
communication devices or resources may be needed in order to communicate effectively with the 
patient/consumer. Such devices or resources may include, by way of example, TDD line, TTY, live or remote 
interpretation, or other means of facilitating effective communication concerning the patient/consumer’s care. 
[URAC P-PSC 3-1 (a-iv)] 
D. I f a staff member or independent contractor encounters a patient/consumer with limited English language 
proficiency, the pharmacy will assist in obtaining translation assistance to facilitate training or any needed 
communication with the patient/consumer. [URAC P-PSC 3-1 (a-i, a-ii)]  
1. T he pharmacy presently utilizes “Language Line” f or language interpretation.  Translators are available to 
translate written materials such as formulary notices, Bill of Patient Rights and Responsibilities, Notice of 
Privacy Practices, Welcome Packet, as well as other patient materials disseminated by our organization. 
[URAC P-PSC 3-1 (a-i)] 
2. When appropriate, written materials may be translated.  
E. If a staff member or independent contractor encounters a patient/consumer with communication difficulty due to 
cognitive impairments, the pharmacy will provide information/education in a manner tailored to the patient’s age, 
language, and ability to understand. [URAC P-PSC 3-1 (a-iii)] This process may include, but is not limited to:  
1. Providing written information in general terms at a grade level appropriate to the patient through Lexicomp. 
2. Providing information to the patient’s authorized family members or significant others. 
F. The cultural values, language barriers, and physical and cognitive impairments addressed in this policy may be 
managed through procedures and care plans as documented in references including Lippincott Advisor and 
Lexicomp which are available to all team members on TeamLink. Care plans related to cognitive impairments 
include diagnoses such as Alzheimer’s, Stroke, and several other neurologic disorders. 
G. The pharmacy provides annual cultural diversity training to their employees [URAC CPE 2-4 (b)] 
1. The pharmacy employees receive training on the importance of Health Literacy. [URAC CPE 2-4 (b)]  
Training includes the following: 
a. Being able to create and provide information and services patient can understand and use most 
effectively with the skills they have. 
b. Working with educators and other healthcare providers to help patients become more familiar with 
health information and services and build their Health Literacy skills over time. 
c. Building skills as communicators of health information.  
PH.2428_Managing Cultural and Communication Needs 
3 
2. When speaking with patients, staff are trained to: 
a. Use plain language to improve patient safety and experience 
b. Staff have access to the Federal Plain Language Guidelines 
c. Encourage them to ask questions 
d. Create a shame-free environment 
e. Offer to review sections with them if they leave blanks on a form 
f. Ask patients to repeat back or teach back information you give to them 
g. Make sure they know when to return for appointments and where they need to go 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: P-PSC 3-1, CPE 2-1, 2-4 
• ACHC Standards: DRX2-8A, DRX2-8B, DRX4-6A, DRX4-8A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 