 
PH.2438_Identity Theft 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Identity Theft (Red Flag Rule) 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2438 (05/22/2018) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/12/2020 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2438 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that proper procedures are followed in regard to identity theft. 
 
POLICY: 
A. The pharmacy will follow all federal and state laws and reporting requirements regarding identity theft. 
This policy outlines how the pharmacy will (1) identify, (2) detect and (3) respond to red flags.  
 
B. The responsibility of implementing and maintaining the Red Flags Rule requirements is assigned to the 
pharmacy manager. This individual will be provided sufficient resources and authority to fulfill these 
responsibilities. 
 
C. All employees who have access to patient information will be trained on the Red Flags Rule as well as 
security rule that require appropriate physical, administrative and technical safeguards to protect health 
information and sensitive information related to the patient identity from any intentional or unintentional 
use or disclosure. Training will be documented and occur whenever there are revisions to the Rule or 
policy.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Red Flags are defined as patterns, practices or specific account or record activities that indicate the possible existence of 
identity theft. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Identify Red Flags  
1. In the provision of care or services for patients, staff may encounter suspicious documents, 
information or activity that may signal identity theft. Staff members are trained to identify the 
following as potential red flags: 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
3/12/2020 10:15 AM 
 
 
PH.2438_Identity Theft 
2 
2. Complaint or question from a patient based on the patient's receipt of: 
a. A bill for another individual; 
b. A bill for a product or service they deny receiving; 
c. An EOB (explanation of Benefits) for services never received 
3. A complaint or question from a patient about the receipt of a collection notice from a bill 
collector; 
4. A complaint or question from a patient about information added to a credit report by a health 
care provider or health insurer; 
5. A dispute of a bill by a patient who claims to be a victim of any type of identity theft 
6. A patient who has an insurance number but never produces an insurance card or other physical 
documentation of insurance 
 
B. Detect Red Flags  
1. Staff will be on alert for discrepancies in document and patient information that suggest a risk of 
identity theft or fraud. As part of the intake process, staff will verify patient identity, address and 
insurance coverage upon first fill with the pharmacy. 
2. If the patient is a first-time walk-in customer, they will be asked to produce their driver’s license 
or other photo ID and their insurance card. 
3. Staff should be on alert for the possibility of identity theft in the following situations: 
a. Individual is unable to remember their own date of birth or social security number. 
Identifying information belongs to another individual. (Be especially aware of an 
incorrect social security number provided to staff.) 
b. Individual presents with no form of identification (e.g. driver’s license, State ID Card, 
employee badge with photo) or proof of insurance and is unable to verbally provide 
other information.   
c. Individual provides little or no demographic information 
d. Individual has no proof of insurance yet rejects attempts for financial assistance.  
e. Individual cannot recall information from a photo ID, insurance card, or other 
documents presented. (For example, the individual must refer to the documents when 
asked for an address or phone number).  
f. Individual becomes agitated when you attempt to confirm demographic information. 
(For example, the individual is upset that you confirm their address, date of birth, etc.). 
 
C. Respond to Red Flags 
1. If an employee detects fraudulent activity, they will investigate the situation immediately. 
a. Notify the Pharmacy Manager, Pharmacist in Charge, or Technician Supervisor 
immediately. 
b. The patient should not be informed that the identification is questionable and that they 
are suspected to be committing medical identity theft. 
c. Pharmacy Manager will collect all relevant documentation and notify the Corporate 
Compliance dept. and on-site security. 
d. If the patient claims to be a victim of identity theft: The staff member discovering the 
issue will file an incident report through the hospital incident report filing process. 
e. All follow-up will be conducted through the corporate compliance office. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: PHARM Core 4 
• ACHC Standards: N/A  
PH.2438_Identity Theft 
3 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 