 
PH.2403_Pharmacy Patient Assistance Program 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Pharmacy Patient Assistance Program 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2403 (08/26/2019) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 11/11/2013   
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/12/2020 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2403 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
To establish a policy for financial hardship and determine patient eligibility and drug procurement of Patient Assistance 
Program (PAP) medication shipments or discounts from manufacturers or other entities participating in PAP programs.  
 
POLICY: [URAC SDrM 2 (c)] 
Pharmacy will provide reimbursement support for patients through use of manufacturer sponsored programs as well as 
other available programs.  This service is provided at no additional charge to the patient and with the intent of improving 
patient outcome by removing financial barriers that may interfere with patient adherence to the prescribed regimen. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
PAP drug – any drug received from a manufacturer for use by program-eligible patients. 
Coupons and Discounts – financial assistance procured directly from manufacturer or other entities participating in 
PAP programs. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Patient eligibility: 
1. Patients are screened at the time of admission to pharmacy service. 
2. Pharmacy technician evaluates patient for eligibility based on specific program criteria and enrolls the 
patient in PAP program. 
3. Eligibility is updated in pharmacy clinical software system by the technician. 
4. Eligible patients are instructed on pick up options for their medications.   
 
B. Prescription processing 
1. Proof of eligibility is verified by designation of PAP under patient insurance in pharmacy software 
program. 
2. Eligible patients are charged for prescriptions  
i. Direct shipments from manufacturer: 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
3/12/2020 2:31 PM 
 
 
PH.2403_Pharmacy Patient Assistance Program 
2 
1. At usual and customary fee until approval and subsequent addition of PAP insurance 
designation found in pharmacy software 
2. Free of charge if medication delivered patient-specific from the manufacturer. 
ii. Coupons and discounts 
1. In accordance with the copay requirements of the entity providing the coupon or 
discount. 
C. Re-evaluation of eligibility is conducted by PAP technician screening as required by individual program. 
D. Medications for direct manufacturer replacement are ordered by PAP technician directly from the manufacturer 
on a recurring schedule based on usage. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: SDrM 2 
• ACHC Standards: DRX3-2A, DRX3-5A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 