1 
PH.2453.002 Retail Pharmacy Prescription Deliveries Policy 
 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy  
Courier Fleet Management 
SUBJECT:  
Retail Pharmacy Prescription Deliveries 
PAGE: 3 REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 11/26/2024 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE:  POLICY NUMBER: 
PH.2453.002  
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines the structure, guidelines, and standards of Participating Retail Pharmacies to maintain the chain of 
custody of prescriptions to patients in conjunction with Policy PH.2453.001 and/or CP.2453.001.  
 
POLICY: 
Participating Retail Pharmacies will ensure that prescriptions delivered to patients will be handled in a secure and 
sensitive manner. Courier Fleet Management will collaborate with the pharmacy to schedule the delivery route.  
DEFINITIONS: 
 
1. Authorized Designee – Patient selected and approved person to receive delivery of prescriptions on behalf of the 
patient. Documentation authorizing a designee will be maintained by the Participating Retail Pharmacy.  
2. Courier Fleet Management –Department of Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System, Inc 
(“FMOLHS”) that oversees, coordinates, and performs various transportation and vehicular related activities for 
FMOLHS and its sponsored organizations.  
3. Designated Pickup Location – Agreed upon location at the Participating Retail Pharmacy where packaged 
prescriptions will be staged for pick-up.    
4. Designated Return Location - Agreed upon location at the Participating Retail Pharmacy where undelivered 
prescriptions will be returned.   
5. Participating Retail Pharmacy – Retail pharmacies that distribute prescriptions and participate in prescription 
delivery.     
6. Delivery Report – A report created by the Participating Retail Pharmacy that includes delivery information.  
7. Patient Identifier Info – Patient name, date of birth (DOB), address, phone number and prescription number. 
8. Pharmacy Label – Label created by the Participating Retail Pharmacy for each prescription that will include 
Patient Identifier Info and the name of approved designee (if applicable).  
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
 
11/26/2024 2:48 PM 
 
2 
PH.2453.002 Retail Pharmacy Prescription Deliveries Policy 
PROCEDURE: 
1) The Participating Retail Pharmacy will contact the patient to determine preferred delivery day, time, location, and 
Authorized Designee, if applicable.  Prescriptions will be delivered to the indicated location between hours agreed 
to by Participating Retail Pharmacy and Courier Fleet Management. Participating Retail Pharmacy will compile all 
requested patient deliveries on the Delivery Report.  The Delivery Report will be submitted to Courier Fleet 
Management one business day in advance of the requested deliveries.  
 
2) Courier Fleet Management will review each delivery request, indicate the nature of delivery, and assign the 
delivery to the trained Driver designated for Participating Retail Pharmacy deliveries.  As the volume of delivery 
requests increase and additional Drivers are trained, delivery requests will be assigned to the most appropriate 
route/ Driver. Courier Fleet Management will notify Participating Retail Pharmacy of the pick-up times in advance 
to ensure that prescriptions are properly packed, labeled and staged prior to pick-up.  
 
3) Each prescription will be packaged in an individual tamper evident bag with documentation generated by the 
Participating Retail Pharmacy.  Each bag will have one or more Pharmacy Label(s) attached.  Bagged prescriptions 
requiring temperature control will include appropriate packaging.  
 
4) Driver is an employee of the pharmacy from the time the prescription is picked up to the time the delivery is 
complete, or the medication is returned to the pharmacy if unable to complete the delivery. 
 
5) Driver will call the patient thirty (30) to sixty (60) minutes prior to the scheduled delivery time.  Any Driver 
concerns with delivery locations should be immediately reported to the patient (i.e. driveway access, weather 
delays, animals, etc.).  If the patient or his/her Authorized Designee will not be available to receive the delivery, 
Driver will contact the Participating Retail Pharmacy by calling the pharmacy phone number listed on the delivery 
ticket.  The Participating Retail Pharmacy will consult with the patient to provide updated instructions to the driver 
(i.e. patient is nearby, proceed with delivery; patient unavailable and will reschedule).  If the patient is unavailable 
and/or reschedules, Driver will proceed to the next delivery destination.  Driver will return all undelivered 
prescriptions to the Participating Retail Pharmacy immediately after delivery of the last prescription.    
 
6) Driver will arrive at the delivery destination and perform the following tasks: 
a) Ask for the patient or his/her Authorized Designee; ask for the patient’s DOB for validation. If the patient or 
his/her Authorized Designee cannot provide the patient’s DOB, the prescription will not be delivered, and the 
Driver will contact Participating Retail Pharmacy.  
b) Driver will obtain signature on documentation generated by the Participating Retail Pharmacy and place 
documentation in secure tote.  
 
The signature of the patient or his/her Authorized Designee and confirmation of the patient’s DOB is required for 
each delivery. Drivers will not accept payment in any form (neither cash, check nor credit card payments) as the 
Participating Retail Pharmacy will collect payment or bill the patient for any applicable charges.  
7) If the patient or his/her Authorized Designee is not available upon arrival to the delivery destination, the Driver will 
contact the Participating Retail Pharmacy. The Driver will then wait at the destination for 15 minutes and then 
proceed to the next delivery destination.  
8) Any undelivered prescriptions will be returned to Participating Retail Pharmacy immediately after the last 
prescription delivery.  
9) All transport materials and temperature controlling packaging will remain in the vehicle and returned during the 
next scheduled delivery or pick-up at any Participating Retail Pharmacy that has available space. 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 3 
PH.2453.002 Retail Pharmacy Prescription Deliveries Policy 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
PH.2453.001 Prescription Deliveries Policy 
CP.2453.001 Retail Pharmacy Prescription Deliveries Policy 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
 
  
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
Vice President, Materials Management 