 
PH.2441_Complaints & Incidents Performance Indicator 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Complaints & Incidents Performance Indicator 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2441 (10/26/2021) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/22/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:   
PH.2441 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that the pharmacy is logging all complaints and incidents and they are being resolved within the set 
timeframe. This policy applies only to pharmacies listed with NCPDP as specialty pharmacy providers.  Pharmacies not 
listed with NCPDP as specialty pharmacy providers will document complaints and errors through the online system 
reporting process 
POLICY: 
The pharmacy has processes in place in which data is collected on complaints and errors and reviewed by the Quality 
Management Committee (QMC) on at least a quarterly basis. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: [URAC P-PSC 2-1 (a, b-i, b-ii, c)] [URAC CPE 2-3 (a, b)] 
A. Description of Indicator: 
1.
 Turn Around Time of Complaints and Errors. This measure is to be known as Turn Around 
Time (TAT). 
a. TAT is a three (3) part measure that focuses on: 
(1) Patient/caregiver reported complaints and errors TAT; 
(2) Prescriber reported complaints and errors TAT; and 
(3) Overall complaints and errors TAT. 
b. Data is aggregated and trended to ensure: 
(1) Timely response to patients’ problems, concerns, complaints [URAC P-PSC 2-
1 (b-i)] 
(2) Timely response to erro rs including dispensing errors and shipping errors if 
applicable [URAC P-PSC 2-1 (b-i)] 
(3) Timely re sponse to provider/prescriber problems, concerns, and complaints 
[URAC P-PSC 2-1 (b-ii)] 
  
B. Fr
equency of Activities: 
Data is collected on a monthly basis. 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/22/2023 1:05 PM 
 
 
PH.2441_Complaints & Incidents Performance Indicator 
2 
C. Responsibility:  
The pharmacy manager has been designated the responsibility for collecting, tracking and 
trending data as well as presenting it to the QMC for review.  
 
D. Methods of Data Collection: 
1. Issues will be categorized by subject matter, for example: 
a. Medication Event 
b. Customer Service 
c. Supplies 
d. Expired Product 
e. Billing Concerns 
f. Injury to patient/staff member 
g. Other 
h. Reporter (Patient/caregiver or prescriber) 
 
2. Errors or complaints that reveal, predict or otherwise point to patient or employee harm are to be 
reported via the organizational on-line reporting mechanism immediately and acted upon in a 
way to help mitigate, treat or otherwise respond to in a way to address or relieve patient or 
employee pain and suffering.  
3. Completion of a Complaint Form should include taking any steps (if applicable) to prevent 
future similar occurrences. 
4. Once categories are established, data is collected on each of the categories. 
 
E. Threshold/Goal:  
1. Patient/caregiver reported complaints and errors TAT goal: 
a. 95% of all reported complaints and incident reports are resolved within 7 business days. 
2. Prescriber reported complaints and errors TAT goal: 
a. 95% of all reported complaints and incident reports are resolved within 7 business days. 
3. Overall complaints and errors TAT goal: 
a. 95% of all reported complaints and incident reports are resolved within 7 business days. 
4. If goals are not achieved there will be a written plan of correction. 
5. If goals are set by the pharmacy, they will be re-evaluated if acceptable limits are not met on a 
consistent basis as the goal may have been set too high. 
 
F. Reporting: 
1. The QMC shall receive reports at least quarterly.  
2. The QMC shall analyze data and identify performance trends on complaint and error metrics 
during quarterly QMC meetings.  Documentation of this review shall be found in the QMC 
meeting minutes. 
a. If the abovementioned goals are not met the QMC shall implement action plans 
designed to improve or correct identified problems as needed. 
 
G. Sample Size:  100% of all reported complaints and incident 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: P-PSC 2-1, CPE 2-3 
• ACHC Standards: DRX2-4A, DRX6-1A, DRX6-1G, DRX6-3E, DRX6-3F, DRX5-5A 
  
PH.2441_Complaints & Incidents Performance Indicator 
3 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 