 
PH.2409_Drug Ordering 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Drug Ordering 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2409 (10/28/2021) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 11/13/2013   
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/27/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2409 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
To establish a process for ordering medications and maintaining inventory to ensure patients’ needs are met in a timely 
manner. 
POLICY: 
The pharmacy will maintain sufficient inventory to meet the needs of the patients served and ensure the integrity and 
legitimacy of all medications purchased. 
DEFINITIONS: 
Wholesaler purchases – items purchased directly from primary wholesaler. 
Inventory par levels – level at which the pharmacy wishes to maintain inventory at all times.  Inventory levels that fall 
below the par level will be ordered through the wholesaler.  
PAP (Patient Assistance Program) drugs received for patients registered with specific manufacturer assistance programs. 
ADAP (AIDS Drugs Assistance Program) drugs – drugs owned by Louisiana AADAP, received via alternate wholesaler 
for use on patients of Louisiana Aids Drug Assistance Program and managed by the State’s mandated pharmacy benefits 
administrator. 
PROCEDURE: 
A. The pharmacy will maintain a perpetual inventory on all drugs in stock. 
B. The pharmacy limits its medication purchases to the following types of entities to ensure drug authenticity: 
a. Licensed wholesalers who, by contract or attestation, agree to purchase medications from licensed 
wholesalers or drug manufacturers. All purchased drugs will be ordered through the primary wholesaler using 
a 340B account or GPO account.  
b. Licensed distribution channels  
c. Drug manufacturers  
C. The Pharmacy is compliant with the Drug Supply Chain Security Act (DSCSA) when verifying and monitoring 
wholesalers/vendors.   
a. The Pharmacy will provide the Pharmacy Benefit Manager with all reasonably requested information and 
documentation regarding the Pharmacy’s distribution relationships and documentation for specific purchases. 
If requested, the Pharmacy will promptly audit any entity from which the Pharmacy has purchased 
prescription drugs and shall provide the results of such audit.  
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/27/2023 12:49 PM 
 
 
PH.2409_Drug Ordering 
2 
D. Drugs orders will be transmitted daily through the pharmacy software to the wholesaler and inventory levels 
updated in the system. 
E. Prescriptions are filled and ready for pick up on the business day received pending availability of the medication. 
a. In the event the pharmacy cannot fill a prescription for any reason, the patient will be notified of the delay 
within 2 business days.   
b. If the delay is anticipated to exceed 3 days, the patient and prescriber will be notified and alternative options 
will be made to obtain the drug or device 
F. Inventory adjustments to drugs shorted by the wholesaler will be made upon receipt of the drug and alternative 
drugs will be ordered at the discretion of the pharmacists on duty. 
G. Drugs received for PAP patients will be maintained in perpetual inventory under “P” group and will not be ordered 
from a wholesaler. 
H. PAP patients will be dispensed PAP drugs after they have been received from the manufacturer.  Prior to that time, 
any prescriptions for PAP patients will be filled with 340B inventory and charged the usual and customary price. 
I. PAP orders received will be manually added to the perpetual inventory by a technician or pharmacist at the time 
they are received. 
J. WAC drugs will be maintained in group W. 
K. Inventory PAR levels may be adjusted by pharmacists in order to meet the demands of the patients. 
L. ADAP drugs will be ordered directly from the State’s mandated pharmacy benefits administrator and delivered to 
the pharmacy.  These drugs will be entered into inventory under group “A” and be used only for 340B eligible 
patients presenting with the State’s mandated pharmacy benefits administrator insurance card as their primary 
insurer. 
M. Drugs will not be borrowed/loaned between OLOLH 340B inventory/LA-ADAP inventory. 
N. The employees will add products in order of expiration dates, otherwise known as rotating stock.  
O. On occasions when we are “out of stock” or short of an ordered item, employees will notify the patient if this 
situation delays their order, causing the patient to miss a dose of medication. If the patient will miss a dose, 
employees will work with prescriber, patient, and if necessary, alternate pharmacies to obtain medication or assist 
in that act so as not to disrupt drug therapy. [URAC P-OPS 1-1 (b)] [URAC P-OPS 2-3 (a-iii)] 
P. When the pharmacy receives prescriptions for Limited Distribution Drugs (LDD) to which the pharmacy does not 
have access, the patient is notified that the prescription cannot be filled at the pharmacy as well as the name and 
phone number of the pharmacy where the prescription has been transferred. A pharmacist will transfer the 
prescription to ensure there is no delay in therapy. [URAC P-OPS 1-1 (b)] 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: P-OPS 1-1, 2-3 
• ACHC Standards: DRX7-9A, DRX7-7C 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 