 
PH.2405_Hazardous Materials / SDS 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Hazardous Materials / SDS 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2405 (08/30/2022) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 07/09/2015 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/22/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2405 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to ensure that hazardous materials are properly used, stored and disposed of and all 
employees have access to Safety Data Sheets (SDS) within the pharmacy. 
POLICY: 
A. Departments using any hazardous materials must have an inventory list of these products as well as the SDS that 
are readily accessible during each work shift to employees in each Department.  
B. The pharmacy will ensure that all chemicals that exist in the workplace are identified and properly stored, with 
access to the SDS available to all employees through the SDS Online E-Binder located on Teamlink.  
C. SDS for all “on hand” chemicals (unless exempted) will be maintained online and available to all employees.  
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: [URAC P-OPS 5-2 (a, b, c)] 
1. Hazardous materials must be properly used, stored and disposed of to ensure a safe environment. 
2.
 All pharmacy personnel follow company policy and procedures for safe handling and storage of all chemicals 
and other hazardous materials. 
3. Materials Management maintains a file of SDS information for all hazardous materials which is accessible 
through Teamlink. This includes the identity (chemical name if known) of the hazardous substance or agent, 
where it is used (or was used), and when it was used these files must be retained for at least thirty (30) years. 
4. SDS contain each of the 16 sections requirement by 29 CFR 1910.1200(g) including but not limited to: 
• Health effects of the chemical or compound. 
• Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) required when using the material.  
• Procedures for cleaning up and disposing of the chemical. 
5. Personal protective equipment is provided to protect pharmacy personnel from injury while using, storing or 
disposing hazardous materials, including blood and body fluids. Pharmacy personnel are responsible for 
wearing protective equipment to protect them from exposure. 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
 
3/22/2023 1:04 PM 
 
 
PH.2405_Hazardous Materials / SDS 
2 
6. The pharmacy will rely on its suppliers and vendors to provide appropriate hazard determinations. SDS will 
reflect such hazards that are then present in the pharmacy. 
• SDS sheets are located on Teamlink.   
• All staff and pharmacy personnel have access to SDS Sheets at all times.  
7. The pharmacy uses the National Institute for Occupational Safety & Health (NIOSH) list of antineoplastic and 
other hazardous drugs in healthcare settings as the resource to define hazardous material. [URAC P-OPS 5-2 
(a)]  The NIOSH list is reviewed annually for changes.  
8. Appropriate personnel will be responsible for ensuring that all containers of hazardous materials are properly 
labeled. Labels must identify what is in the container, what the hazard is, and appropriate hazard warnings, i.e., 
"causes lung damage" and otherwise comply with 29 CFR 1910.1200(f).   
9. SDS will be requested for all substances in the workplace that are considered hazardous. SDS's will be 
reviewed annually and updated as required.  
10. SDS's shall contain precautions for safe handling, storage, appropriate disposal and effective use of the 
hazardous substance. First aid procedures must also be addressed on each SDS.  
11. Assessment of Risk 
a) Assessments of Risk are completed, and practices are implemented for the following: 
i. NIOSH-listed drugs that do not have to follow USP <800> containment requirements.  This 
includes the following unless required by the manufacturer: 
1. Final dosage forms of compounded hazardous drugs (HD) preparations 
2. Conventionally manufactured HD products that require no further manipulation other 
than counting or repackaging 
3. Non-antineoplastics HD dosage forms on the NIOSH list 
ii. Ot her materials stored in the pharmacy with hazardous potential (i.e., cleaning products) 
1. SDS information will be used to determine if the product is hazardous 
b) Assessments of Risk will include the following information: 
i. Type of HD 
ii. Dosage form (each form listed individually, even if same info) 
iii. Risk of exposure 
iv. Packaging  
v. Manipulation 
vi. Alternative containment and/or work strategies to minimize employee exposure 
vii. Information from the product’s SDS 
c) Hazardous drug and material Assessments of Risk will be reviewed on an annual basis. 
 
12. Pharmacy employees are trained, upon initial employment, with respect to the use and location of SDS in their 
work area at the time of their initial assignment, and  
a) When any new hazardous substance or chemical is introduced into the workplace, the pharmacy manager 
will coordinate placement of a copy of the SDS in the Online e-binder  
b) The pharmacy manager will promptly inform personnel via verbal notice or written memo regarding the 
new product and any precautions/safety equipment required in using it. 
13. Spill kits are readily available to pharmacy employees in the area where medication deliveries are received as 
well as storage area.  [URAC P-OPS 5-2 (c-ii)]   
14. A ll hazardous drugs will be stored, handled, labeled and transported using methods that protect employees, as 
recommended by the United States Pharmacopeia (USP) <800> guidelines, Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) and/or NIOSH. [URAC P-OPS 5-2 (b)]     
15. Where possible, the pharmacy may place alerts or comments in the medication order entry system, automated 
dispensing devices, or pharmacy workflow technology to help identify hazardous drugs. 
16. Hazardous drugs will be stored separately from other non-hazardous drug inventory.  
PH.2405_Hazardous Materials / SDS 
3 
17. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) 
a) Any employee who may, during the course of their normal pharmacy job duties, be expected to come in 
close proximity (during inventory receiving, distribution, stocking, inventory control, order picking, 
compounding, packaging for distribution or disposal) to hazardous drugs will wear appropriate PPE as 
defined in the USP<800> guidelines, OSHA (including as set forth in the SDS), and NIOSH standards. 
[URAC P-OPS 5-2 (b)] 
 
18. Training/Education [URAC P-OPS 5-2 (b)] 
a) The pharmacy will administer training and education around the appropriate storage, handling, labeling and 
transport of hazardous drugs to any employee who may, during the course of their normal pharmacy job 
duties, be expected to come in close proximity (during inventory receiving, distribution, stocking, inventory 
control, order picking, compounding, packaging for distribution or disposal) to hazardous drugs.   The 
pharmacy will provide training as well whenever a new chemical hazard is introduced into the employee’s 
work area. 
b) The pharmacy will administer education to its employees around the appropriate procedures for hazardous 
drug spill management. [URAC P-OPS 5-2 (c-ii)] 
c) The pharmacy will develop standard operating procedures that support appropriate storage, handling, 
labeling and transport of hazardous drugs as recommended by the OSHA, and the USP. 
d) The pharmacy will administer education to its patients enrolled in the patient management program on 
appropriate storage, handling, labeling, transport, disposal and pick-up of hazardous drugs, chemicals, waste 
and contaminated materials by:  
i.   Providing information during counseling. 
ii.  Providing printed materials during dispensing. 
19. Labeling and Transport 
a) Hazardous drugs will be transported in a manner that prevents spillage, breakage, leakage and minimal 
exposure to the person transporting the hazardous drug in compliance with OSHA and Department of 
Transportation standards.   
b) Should the hazardous drug be transported offsite, an appropriate hard-case carrier or storage container 
denoting hazardous drugs on the outside of the container will be used for transporting the hazardous drug.  
The employee will be aware of the SDS information prior to the transport and will also carry a spill kit 
during the transport.   
20. Disposal of Hazardous Materials [URAC P-OPS 5-2 (b)] 
a) The pharmacy uses a reverse distributor to dispose of unacceptable medications and hazardous materials. 
Unacceptable medications and hazardous materials are placed in a hazardous waste container which is then 
picked up by the reverse distributor for proper disposal.  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: P-OPS 5-2 
• ACHC: DRX7-6A, DRX7-6B 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  