 
PH.2440_Distribution Accuracy Performance Indicator 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Distribution Accuracy Performance Indicator 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2440 (03/12/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/27/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2440 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that the pharmacy has processes in place to track distribution accuracy 
POLICY: 
Pharmacy will have processes in place to track errors in the distribution process and report them to the Quality 
Management Committee (QMC) on at least a quarterly basis.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
PROCEDURE: 
[URAC P-MD 3-1 (a-i, a-ii, a-iii, a-iv)] [ACHC Standard DRX5-11B] [ACHC Standard DRX6-1A] 
[ACHC Standard DRX6-3F] 
 
A. Description of Indicator: 
This measure assesses the percentage of prescriptions delivered to the wrong recipient. (The 
recipient may be either a patient or a patient’s health care provider)  
 
B. Frequency of Activities: 
Data will be collected monthly and the rate calculated on a monthly basis then reviewed by the 
QMC Quarterly.  
 
C. Responsibility:  
The pharmacy manager has been designated the responsibility for collecting, tracking and 
trending data as well as presenting it to the QMC for review.  
 
D. Methods of Data Collection: 
1. Issues will be categorized by the below subject matter in order to meet URAC requirements: 
a. Part A measures the percentage of prescriptions mailed with an incorrect address. 
b. Part B measures the percentage of prescriptions mailed with a correct address that were 
not delivered to the correct location. 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/27/2023 12:54 PM 
 
 
PH.2440_Distribution Accuracy Performance Indicator 
2 
c. Errors or complaints that reveal, predict or otherwise point to patient or employee harm 
are to be reported to the pharmacy manager immediately and acted upon in a way to 
help mitigate, treat or otherwise respond to addressing and relieving patient or employee 
pain and suffering. Completion of Incident Form or Complaint Form should include 
taking any steps (if applicable) to prevent future similar occurrences. 
(1) Once categories are established, data is collected on each of the categories; 
(2) On a quarterly basis, data is depicted in a control chart to determine trends; 
(3) All staff is informed on the improvement activities to minimize adverse events. 
E. Threshold/Goal: 
1.  98% of all medications dispensed will be distributed accurately 
a. Numerator 
(1) Part A: The number of drugs and products dispensed with an incorrect address. 
(2) Part B: The number of drugs and products delivered to the wrong location 
despite having the correct address on the package. 
b. Denominator = All drugs and products dispensed by the organization to or on behalf of 
a specific patient during the measurement period. 
2. If goals are not achieved there will be a written plan of correction. 
3. If goals are set by the pharmacy, they will be re-evaluated if acceptable limits are not met on a 
consistently basis as the goal may have been set too high. 
 
F. Reporting: 
1. Summary analysis of all medication dispensing errors is forwarded to QMC for review and 
development of corrective action plans when indicated.   
a. Errors are reported internally to the QMC. 
b. Errors are reported externally when requested by payors or pharmaceutical 
manufacturers. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: P-MD 3-1 
• ACHC Standards: DRX5-11B, DRX6-1A, DRX6-3F 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 
 
 
  