 
PH.2459_Information Management Program Description 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Information Management Program Description 
PAGES: 
8 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2459 (10/28/2021) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/31/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2459 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that safeguards are put in place to protect patient and organization information within the pharmacy. 
POLICY: 
A. The pharmacy strives to provide appropriate and timely services to its customers/clients by securely collecting 
only the necessary information to carry out the services the pharmacy provides. The pharmacy places the highest 
priority on the protection of consumer’s Individually-Identifiable Health Information (IIHI) and Personal 
Identifiable Information (PII). To that end, the pharmacy strives to maintain consistent and accurate information 
flow through proactive information management systems. Various processes and mechanisms have been 
implemented to provide for: 
i. Data integrity  
ii. Data Storage, Maintenance, and Destruction] 
iii. Business Continuity/Disaster Recovery  
iv. Information Confidentiality and Security] 
v. Confidentiality of Individual-Identifiable Health Information  
vi. Responsibility and Requirement to Preserve Confidentiality  
B. The pharmacy conducts specialty pharmacy services on behalf of healthcare organizations that enter into 
contractual relationships with the pharmacy to provide these services.  Pharmacy complies with all relevant 
regulatory agencies and the relevant standards of URAC. 
DEFINITIONS: 
A. Data integrity means maintaining and assuring the accuracy, traceability and consistency of data over its entire 
life cycle, and is a critical aspect to the design, implementation and usage of any system which stores, processes, 
or retrieves data.  
B. Ephemeral messaging - Secure messaging that never creates electronic stored information. Messages only exist 
in volatile memory streaming from device to cloud to device and leave no data trace on devices or services. Data 
cannot be stored or shared and disappears once read by the recipient. The word “ephemeral” describes something 
that only lasts for a period of time. 
C. EPHI means electronic protected health information. 
D. IIHI – Individually Identifiable Health Information 
E. PHI – Protected Health Information is individually identifiable health information that is transmitted by electronic 
media, maintained in electronic media, or transmitted or maintained in any other form or medium. 
F. PII – Personal Identifiable Information is anything that could be used to uniquely identify and individual. 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/31/2023 1:12 PM 
 
 
PH.2459_Information Management Program Description 
2 
G. Tabletop Exercise - Test of a Business Continuity Plan (BCP) that includes documentation of the following 
aspects of the test: 
• A Tabletop Exercise simulates an incident in an informal, stress-free environment. 
• The participants, who are usually the responsible managers and the response team, gather 
around a table to discuss general problems and procedures in the context of an incident scenario. 
• A scenario is developed in advance, but there are no attempts to arrange elaborate facilities or 
communications. One or two evaluators may be selected to observe proceedings and progress 
toward the objectives. 
H. Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) – a company that administers the drug benefit program for an employer or 
health plan. 
I. Quality Improvement Project – (QIP) – ongoing project approved by the Quality Management Committee with 
goal of improving patient outcomes or services. 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Data Integrity [URAC RM 3-1 (a)] [URAC RM 3-2 (a-ii)] 
1. The pharmacy has systems in place to ensure a high level of confidence that the record retrieved is, indeed, 
the correct record and that the information documented therein is accurate. The pharmacy utilizes both paper 
and electronic systems which coordinate with each other.  For electronic data, the pharmacy utilizes 
dispensing and clinical software. These systems have persuasive guards to ensure data integrity, which 
include (but not be limited to): 
a. Data Entry controls for accuracy – the pharmacy has built-in features in its electronic system to 
restrict the users’ entry of data into appropriate fields. This includes the use of drop-down menus 
and calendars to control the data entry process.  This ensures that the data entered is appropriate for 
the data being requested. 
b. Cross-checking databases for consistency – Data structures which store the data have been 
developed to ensure consistency throughout the database, for example, a date field may only contain 
date information or numeric fields may not contain text information. 
c. Using unique identifiers for consumer data – A system generated unique number is created for each 
individual consumer and script. 
d. Prevention of and checking for duplicate entries – Routine system cross check reports review DOB 
and name to identify possible duplicate entries. In addition, when staff are pulling up patient profiles 
they are checking for name and DOB. If there happens to be multiple patients with the same name 
and DOB, Additional identifiers, such as address and prescription information, are used to ensure 
the correct patient profile is selected. 
e. The pharmacy does not have telecommuters. [URAC RM 4-1] 
B.  Data Storage, Maintenance, and Destruction [URAC RM 3-1 (b)] [URAC RM 4-1 (a-i, a-ii)] 
1. The pharmacy maintains a server which stores electronic information to hard drives. The hard drives are 
functioning at all times to verify data and have a “mirroring” function in case of failure. System maintenance 
is performed on a daily basis.  The p harmacy relies on electronic systems to store most IHII however paper 
prescriptions are filed and securely stored onsite.  The pharmacy delegates destruction of paper materials to 
Tiger Shredding which complies with all HIPPA requirements for shredding and disposal.  The pharmacy 
utilizes a local RAID-5 server for electronic data storage. Additionally, bo th on-site and off-site backups are 
performed nightly.  Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System (FMOLHS) IS staff is responsible 
for maintenance, storage, and destruction of this information through this product. 
2. P harmacy’s Server: 
a. The virtual server is located in a FMOLHS owned datacenter.  The system runs inside a Virtual 
Server infrastructure environment on the VMware Hypervisor.  
b. A nightly offsite backup is performed.  
3. Only Pharmacy personnel wi th a “need- to-know,” have a ccess to the electronic or p aper records. In ord er 
to retrieve electronic information, Pharmacy personnel must access the information using uni que 
usernames and passwords. The Pharmacy system administrator assigns passw ords and ac cess rights 
according to each program staff’s job ti tle and responsibility, ensuring that staff only have access to IIHI 
that is necessary to fulfill their program role. Passwords are updated every 90 days and follow the FMOLHS  
PH.2459_Information Management Program Description 
3 
policy IS.05.004 Password Management Policy and IS.04.002 Access Authorization Policy. [URAC RM 3-1 
(c)] 
a. Login credentials are promptly removed for staff who leave the pharmacy  or who no longer need 
access to the pharmacy’s data resources. Staff members are prohibited from sharing login credentials 
with another staff member.  The pharmacy maintains all electronic records permanently with periodic 
archiving.  Pharmacy follows the IS.04.003 Access Establishment and Modification Policy and the 
IS.03.003 Access Termination Policy. 
4. Destruction of hardware containing EPHI [URAC RM 3-1 (c)] [URAC RM 3-1 (b)] 
a. When the pharmacy deems electronic equipment obsolete, which may contain confidential 
information, FMOLHS IS ensures that the hard drive or memory card is wiped clean of all data. 
The pharmacy follows information system policy IS.13.001 Media Disposal Policy for 
disposal/destruction of electronic information.  
5. Destruction of Paper Materials containing PHI [URAC RM 3-1 (c)] [URAC RM 3-1 (b)] 
a. The pharmacy delegates destruction of paper materials to a vendor which complies with all HIPPA 
requirements for shredding and disposal. 
b. Shredding receptacles are located within the pharmacy and are easily accessible to staff. Frequency 
of destruction and receipt of documentation are detailed in contract relationship. 
6. The pharmacy maintains, in accordance with prudent business practices, accurate, complete and timely 
books, records and accounts of all transactions occurring as part of the furnishing of specialty pharmacy 
services to patients. The pharmacy maintains for a minimum of three (3) years (or longer if required by 
applicable Law), after the respective record is created, in original form, the claims and claim forms 
supporting the invoices and other records sufficient to verify covered items dispensed, claims processed, 
payments made to the pharmacy, and documentation and logs.  
C. Business Continuity / Disaster Recovery [URAC RM 4-1 (a-i, a-ii, a-iii, b)] 
1. The pharmacy maintains a business continuity/disaster recovery plan that is developed by an inter-
departmental team and approved by leadership. 
2. The pharmacy is primarily reliant on its telephone system and server to access data and provide services.  
These systems are critical to maintain in order for Pharmacy to effectively deliver services.  Sustained outages 
to these systems could impact Pharmacy’s ability to promptly provide services.  The pharmacy ensures it 
complies with state and federal regulations regarding business continuity.  
3. In the event of a natural disaster, power outage, or an interruption in connectivity the pharmacy has a plan to 
maintain business continuity.  In the event of a power failure, the pharmacy is hooked up to the hospital 
generator that restores power immediately and is capable of long-term electrical supply.  In the unlikely 
event that both telephone systems (cable and T-1) should fa il, the pharmacy will have calls rerouted to the 
after -hours call center.  
4. If ther e is an outage in the n etwork/server, the pharmacy contacts the network services to determine the reason 
and cause and estimated restoration of the system. If there is a sustained outage (more than four hours), 
business will continue according to the following back-up procedures:  
a. Pharmacy staff will continue to process requests via phone, and/or secure fax or e-mail and manually 
record data. 
b. Staff will document all necessary information in a Word document and save in a secured electronic 
folder. 
c. Wh en the network is restored, the information is then transferred into the electronic system and the 
word document is deleted. 
5. In the event damage to the physical server occurs; FMOLHS IS can restore 100% of data within 6 hours.  
6. FMOLHS IS maintains a recovery plan which enables reproduction of any lost information in the event of a 
disaster.  The business continuity/emergency management plan is tested at least every two years using a 
Tabletop Exercise or physical test.  The pharmacy uses test results to correct problems with the business 
continuity plan, including updates as needed to reflect current business processes and systems.  Testing 
results are documented clearly, and issues identified are corrected as soon as possible. FMOLHS IS follows 
the IS.07.004 Testing and Revision Policy. [URAC RM 4-1 (b)] 
7. The pharmacy maintains good employee relations, and there is no, and shall be no, labor unrest, work 
stoppages, or strike activity among the pharmacy’s employees that causes disruption to pharmacy services to  
PH.2459_Information Management Program Description 
4 
PBM members. The pharmacy maintains a business continuity plan to ensure that service to PBM members 
shall not be impacted.  
D. Information Confidentiality and Security [URAC CPE 1-1 (a, b, c)] [URAC CPE 1-2 (a-ii)]   
1. The pharmacy ensures business associate agreements (BAA) are executed with business associates. The BAA 
assures that business associates implement reasonable, technical, physical, and administrative safeguards for 
PHI and IIHI. The pharmacy retains copies of executed BAAs. 
2. The pharmacy understands the importance of securing confidential information and preventing security 
breaches.  The pharmacy works with their various customers/clients to ensure information is sent to the 
pharmacy using only HIPAA compliant mechanisms.  For example, the pharmacy receives information from 
clients via secure system and when needed, the pharmacy also utilizes a HIPAA-complaint facsimile.  
Additionally, the pharmacy uses the following mechanisms to ensure security of its systems: 
a. Emails 
(1) Pharmacy initiates e-mails with IIHI only when absolutely necessary. All e-mails that contain 
IIHI are sent and received through computers or other devices that require password- 
protected access. 
b. V oicemail  
(1) Pharmacy staff may receive IIHI via their voice mail boxes which are secured through 
password access and deleted once received. Pharmacy staff do not leave voice mails 
containing IIHI. 
c. Computers 
(1) Pharmacy computer systems contain a firewall.  Staff ensures the storage and use of their 
computer adhere to the minimum “two lock” principle.  All computers utilized at Pharmacy 
are password protected, maintained out of the direct view of passersby, and screens are locked 
when not in use.   All IIHI data is maintained in the secure dispensing and clinical software 
systems which also require a separate password to access. 
3. T he pharmacy a lso utilizes antivirus software to detect and contain viruses. The p harmacy maintains 
intrusion software to detect, contain and correct security breaches. The p harmacy also requires the 
maintenance of intrusion software of all its applicable IT support and storage contracts. Add itionally, to help 
ensure continuous security of confidential information, the pharmacy conducts an annual assessment of 
potential risks and vulnerabilities to the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information systems. In 
addition to conducting an annual assessment of potential risks and vulnerabilities to the confidentiality, 
integrity and availability of information systems the pharmacy also conducts an assessment of the potential 
risks and vulnerabilities to the confidentiality and integrity of its physical location. All FMOLHS owned 
entities adhere to these policies: 
a. IS.05.002 Malicious Software Protection Policy 
b. IS.01.001 Risk Analysis Policy 
c. IS.01.002 Risk Management Policy  
4. Breach Response [URAC RM 3-1 (c)] [URAC CPE 1-1 (c)]  
a. All suspected or actual security breaches are reported immediately to the FMOLHS Compliance 
Department.  The Compliance Department will initiate the investigation and respond to any potential 
compliance issues in adherence with all applicable regulations and FMOLHS policies.  FMOLHS IS 
will actively participate in the investigation, response, and implementation of corrective actions 
related to the security breach. For all identified breach incidents, the following response steps will be 
enacted: 
(1) Take immediate steps to contain the breach and mitigate risk.   
(2) Conduct a thorough Incident Specific Risk Assessment that evaluates all involved systems 
and operational practices. 
(3) Dev elop and ov ersee the implementation of a corrective action plan to remedy all identified 
issue, including the revision of policies, workflows, and staff re-training as necessary. 
(4) Draft and send breach notification to the required recipients within 60 days of the breach 
discovery or sooner if indicated by state regulations. This breach notice will follow the most 
stringent requirements of HIPAA, HITECH, and state regulations, including notification 
timeliness, content, and route of delivery. 
(5) Conducts ongoing periodic monitoring and reevaluation to ensure sustained compliance.  
PH.2459_Information Management Program Description 
5 
(6) The pharmacy follows FMOLHS IS policy IS.01.002 Risk Management Policy 
E. Confidentiality of Individual-Identifiable Health Information [URAC CPE 1-1 (a, b, c)] [URAC CPE 1-2 (a-ii)] 
1. Us e  of IIHI 
a. Pharmacy personnel utilize IIHI only to the extent necessary to carry out their assigned role. Only 
those individuals directly involved in the pharmacy process are allowed system access to sensitive 
information.  Other Pharmacy personnel are denied access to IIHI via system security levels.  Login 
and security level are at the job level, and access is only assigned to a job level if it is required to 
perform the job function. 
2. Personnel Access to IIHI [URAC CPE 1-2 (a-i)] 
a. Pharmacy personnel having access to IIHI include: 
(1) Pharmacy Managers 
(2) Pharmacists 
(3) Pharmacy Techs 
(4) IS System administrator for system maintenance and reporting 
b. Pharmacy files and securely stores paper prescriptions; no other paper files are maintained. Any 
paper generated containing IIHI is placed in secure shred bins and appropriately disposed of by the 
vendor.  
c. Tape  recordings of telephone conversations where consumer health issues are discussed are strictly 
forbidden.   
d. Voice mail message on Pharmacy’s telephone system are deleted by users upon receipt. 
3. Eliminating Incidental Access to IIHI [URAC CPE 1-1 (b)] 
a. From time to time there may be an individual or entity whose functions or service do not involve the 
use or disclosure of PHI however their work with the specialty pharmacy could put them in the 
vicinity of PHI. Examples of such individuals are PHI shredding vendor employees, maintenance 
and facilities personnel, firefighters, cleaners, etc.  These individuals and entities made aware that 
upon entering the pharmacy environment they need to understand the sensitivity of PHI.  These 
individuals do not have access to and are never left alone in the pharmacy or locations with PHI.  To 
eliminate incidental access to PHI a pharmacy staff member verifies the identity of the individual 
and once verified allows the individual access to the pharmacy.  While the individual is within the 
area where PHI is accessible a pharmacy staff member will monitor the individual to ensure PHI 
protection.  At no time will the individual be left alone.  Other staff within the pharmacy are aware 
to not leave PHI containing documents in plain sight, log off computers that are not in use, and to 
limit conversations involving PHI that may be overheard during these times.  A staff member will 
then escort the individual out of the pharmacy.  Please see FMOLHS IS policy IS.18.000 Data 
Transmission Security Policy for additional safeguards. 
F. Responsibility and Requirement to Preserve Confidentiality [URAC CPE 1-1 (a, b, c)] [URAC CPE 1-2 (a-ii)] 
1. Pharmacy has created a culture of respect for all persons and most importantly, respect for the personal health 
and other information of all persons.  All Pharmacy personnel receive training on HIPAA and HITECH 
compliance annually and all personnel, contractors, board, and committee members sign confidentiality 
attestations.  All Pharmacy personnel, board, and committee members understand that the responsibility of 
Pharmacy to preserve the confidentiality of individually- identifiable health information is implemented by 
each and every Pharmacy employee, contractor, board, an d committee member. Pharmacy personnel, board, 
and committee members understand that failure to comply with the preservation of confidentiality may result 
in disciplinary actions that may include termination and additionally they could be held personally liable for 
criminal prosecution and financial penalties. 
2. T here is a signed confidentiality statement for all personnel and for the governing body as required. 
Personnel and the governing body abide by the confidentiality statement and the organization’s policies and 
procedures. Personnel who violate confidentiality are subject to the corrective action policy. (See Regulatory 
Compliance Program) 
G. Risk Management Program [URAC RM 3-2 (a-i, a-ii)] 
1. The pharmacy has risk assessment processes in place for information systems to identify, document, thwart 
and/or remediate actual or potential threats to security for all of the following: 
a. Stored Data  
PH.2459_Information Management Program Description 
6 
b. Data Gathering 
c. Data Transfer 
2. The pharmacy completes risk assessments of paper PHI on a quarterly basis as part of their compliance audit 
program. Documentation of the risk assessment is maintained on the compliance audit tool and is reviewed 
during quarterly Quality Management Committee (QMC) meetings. Any identified risks as a results of the 
audit will be addressed immediately. The QMC may elect to approve a QIP or Action Plan as a result of any 
identified risk. 
3. Risk assessment processes includes an annual risk assessment conducted by an entity with the expertise to 
handle these types of assessments and that has not stake in the outcome of the assessment.  The intent is to 
plan for formal, independent, risk assessments of the pharmacy’s information systems.  Therefore, the 
information technology staff directly responsible (on a day-to-day basis) for the systems being evaluated may 
not conduct the periodic risk assessment, though they may be on hand to respond to questions that may arise 
in the process. The entity conducting the information systems risk assessment may be internal (e.g., from a 
separate unit, department or division) or external.  See IS.01.002 Risk Management Policy. 
H. Data Encryption of EPHI at rest [URAC RM 3-1 (c)] 
1. When risk analysis indicates it is necessary, appropriate encryption must be used to protect the 
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of EPHI contained on FMOLHS information systems. The risk 
analysis must also be used to determine the type and quality of the encryption algorithm and the length of 
cryptographic keys. 
2. At a minimum, FMOLHS’s risk analysis must consider the following factors when determining whether or 
not specific EPHI must be encrypted: 
• The sensitivity of the EPHI 
• The risks to the EPHI 
• The expected impact to FMOLHS functionality and workflow if the EPHI is encrypted 
• Alternative methods available to protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the EPHI 
3. All encryption used to protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability of EPHI contained on FMOLHS 
information systems must be approved by the Information Security Officer. 
4. Encryption should be used to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of EPHI stored on 
FMOLHS portable workstations and portable devices (i.e., laptops, notebooks, tablets, USB devices, etc.). 
5. Encryption should be used to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability as specified in FMOLHS’s 
IS.18.000 Transmission Security policy. 
6. FMOLHS must protect all of its cryptographic keys against modification and destruction; its secret and 
private keys must be protected against unauthorized disclosure. 
7. No department will implement encryption of data without the knowledge and approval of the Information 
Security Officer. 
8. The Information Security Officer will maintain documentation with regards to when encryption is utilized. 
I. Data Encryption of EPHI in transit [URAC RM 3-1 (c)] 
1. EPHI Transmissions to Non-FMOLHS Entities 
a. To appropriately guard against unauthorized access to or modification of EPHI that is being 
transmitted from FMOLHS’s Network to a network outside of such networks, the procedures 
outlined must be implemented: 
b. All transmissions of EPHI from the FMOLHS network to a network outside of the aforementioned 
networks must utilize an encryption mechanism between the sending and receiving entities or the 
file, document, or folder containing said EPHI must be encrypted before transmission. 
c. Prior to transmitting EPHI from the FMOLHS network to a network outside of the aforementioned 
networks the receiving person or entity must be authenticated in accordance with HIPAA Security 
Policy – IS.17.000 Person or Entity Authentication Policy. 
d. All transmissions of EPHI from the FMOLHS network to a network outside of the aforementioned 
networks should include only the minimum amount of PHI. 
e. For transmission of EPHI from the FMOLHS network to a network outside of the aforementioned 
networks utilizing an email or messaging system, EPHI transmission using e-mail or messaging 
systems below. 
2. EPHI transmissions using electronic removable media  
PH.2459_Information Management Program Description 
7 
a. When transmitting EPHI via removable media, including but not limited to, floppy disks, CD ROM, 
USB devices, memory cards, magnetic tape and removable hard drives, the sending party must: 
(1) Use an encryption mechanism to protect against unauthorized access or Modification 
(2) Authenticate the person or entity requesting said EPHI in accordance with HIPAA Security 
Policy – IS.17.000 Person or Entity Authentication Policy. 
(3) Send the minimum amount of said EPHI required by the receiving person or entity. 
b. If using removable media for the purpose of system backups and disaster recovery and the 
aforementioned removable media is stored and transported in a secured environment, no additional 
security mechanisms are required. 
3. EPHI transmissions using electronic mechanisms to external entities 
a. When transmitting EPHI via electronic mechanisms to external entities including but not limited to 
FTP, HTTP or other electronic means, the sending party must: 
(1) For FTP transfers, users must use the approved centralized FTP server which will use SFTP, 
PGP or other means to encrypt the data before transmission or during transmission using 
secure methods. 
(2) HTTP transmission of data will utilize HTTPS as a secure transport. 
(3) All transmissions of EPHI via electronic means must be approved by the Information 
Security Officer before the transmission has occurred. This ensures that FMOLHS has an 
accounting of EPHI that is transmitted externally from the organization. 
4. EPHI transmissions using email or messaging systems 
a. The transmission of EPHI from the FMOLHS network to the subject or person of the EPHI via an 
email or messaging system is permitted if the sender has ensured that the following conditions are 
met: 
b. The individual has been made fully aware of the risks associated with transmitting EPHI via email 
or messaging systems. 
c. The individual has provided written authorization to FMOLHS to utilize an email or messaging 
system to transmit EPHI to them. 
d. The individual’s identity has been authenticated. 
e. The email or message contains no excessive history or attachments. 
f. The transmission of EPHI from FMOLHS to an outside entity via an email or messaging system is 
permitted if the sender has ensured that the following conditions are met: 
(1) The receiving entity has been authenticated. 
(2) The receiving entity is aware of the transmission and is ready to receive said transmission. 
(3) The sender and receiver are able to implement a compatible encryption mechanism. 
(4) The proper subject line keyword triggers are used to forcibly encrypt the email message. 
Currently the subject line trigger is Secure. 
(5) No EPHI is contained in the non-encrypted areas of the communication (such as the subject 
line of an email message). 
(6) All attachments containing EPHI are encrypted. 
(7) Email accounts that are used to send or receive EPHI must not be forwarded. 
5. EPHI transmissions using network devices 
a. The transmission of EPHI over a wireless network within the FMOLHS network is permitted if the 
following conditions are met: 
(1) The local wireless network is utilizing an authentication mechanism to ensure that wireless 
devices connecting to the wireless network are authorized. 
(2) The local wireless network is utilizing an encryption mechanism for all transmissions over 
the aforementioned wireless network. 
b. If transmitting EPHI over a wireless network that is not utilizing an authentication and encryption 
mechanism, the EPHI must be encrypted before transmission. 
c. The authentication and encryption security mechanisms implemented on wireless networks within 
the FMOLHS networks are only effective within those networks. When transmitting outside of those 
wireless networks, additional and appropriate security measures must be implemented in accordance 
with this Policy. 
6. ADDITIONAL requirements for electronic transmissions:  
PH.2459_Information Management Program Description 
8 
a. All encryption mechanisms implemented to comply with this policy must support 256-bit or greater 
encryption. In the cases where 256-bit encryption or greater cannot be used, then 128- bit is the 
absolute minimum that can be used. 
b. When transmitting EPHI electronically, regardless of the transmission system being used, FMOLHS 
users must take reasonable precautions to ensure that the receiving party is who they claim to be and 
has a legitimate need for the EPHI requested. 
c. If the EPHI being transmitted is not to be used for treatment, payment or health care operations, only 
the minimum required amount of PHI should be transmitted. 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: RM 3-1, RM 3-2, RM 4-1, CPE 1-1, CPE 1-2 
• ACHC Standards: DRX2-5A, DRX5-1C 
• IS.01.001 Risk Analysis Policy 
• IS.01.002 Risk Management Policy 
• IS.01.005 Change Management 
• IS.03.003 Access Termination Policy 
• IS.04.000 Information Access Management Policy 
• IS.04.002 Access Authorization Policy 
• IS.04.003 Access Establishment and Modification Policy 
• IS.05.004 Password Management Policy 
• IS.07.000 Contingency Plan Policy 
• IS.07.001 Data Backup Policy 
• IS.07.002 Disaster Recovery Policy 
• IS.07.003 Emergency Mode Operations Policy 
• IS.07.004 Testing and Revision Policy 
• IS.16.000 Data Integrity Controls Policy 
• IS.13.001 Media Disposal Policy 
• IS.13.003 Hardware & Media Accountability Policy 
• IS.13.004 Data Backup & Storage Policy 
• IS.14.004 Encryption & Decryption Policy 
• IS.17.000 Person or Entity Authentication Policy 
• IS.18.000 Data Transmission Security Policy 
• PH.2466 Regulatory Compliance 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 