 
PH.2432_Customer Satisfaction Performance Indicator 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Customer Satisfaction Performance Indicator 
PAGES: 
4 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2432 (03/27/2023) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE:  02/07/2017   
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
11/25/2024 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2432 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that the pharmacy has a patient satisfaction survey in place. 
POLICY: 
The pharmacy has a patient satisfaction survey in place in which data is collected and reviewed by the Quality 
Management Committee (QMC) on at least a quarterly basis. This policy applies to all pharmacies listed with NCPDP as 
a specialty pharmacy provider.  Non-specialty pharmacies are encouraged to use patient satisfaction data collection as a 
quality improvement tool.  
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: [URAC P-PSC 2-2 (a, b, c)] 
A. D escription of Indicator:  
Patient Satisfaction Survey 
 
B. Frequency of Activities: 
An outside source distributes surveys on behalf of the pharmacy via mail through the year.  
 
C. Responsibility:  
The pharmacy manager or designee has been designated the responsibility for collecting, 
tracking and trending data as well as presenting it to the QMC for review.  
 
 
D. Methods of Data Collection: 
1. An outside source receives and reviews returned Customer Satisfaction Surveys.  
2. An outside source assigns given values to level of satisfaction for each survey question.  
3. Results are tallied.  
4. Satisfaction survey ratings are calculated and an outside source shares reports with the 
pharmacy.  
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
11/25/2024 4:30 PM 
 
 
PH.2432_Customer Satisfaction Performance Indicator 
2 
E. Threshold/Goal: 
1. The pharmacy will review all results for all survey questions.  
2. The goal will be determined after the first set of surveys is received and reviewed and will be 
based on a net promoter score.  
3. If goals are not achieved there will be a written plan of correction. 
4. If goals are set by the pharmacy, they will be re-evaluated if acceptable limits are not met on a 
consistently basis as the goal may have been set too high. 
 
F. Sample Size:  
100% of Completed Surveys received by an outside source.  
 
G. Reporting: 
1. The QMC shall receive reports at least quarterly.  
2. The QMC shall analyze data and identify performance trends on patient satisfaction during 
QMC meetings. Documentation of this review shall be found in the QMC meeting minutes.  
a) If the abovementioned goals are not met, the QMC shall implement action plans 
designed to improve or correct identified problems as needed.  
 
H. Criteria for Evaluation: 
1. See Addendum A for survey questions. 
2. Scale: 
a) Excellent (5) 
b) Very Good (4) 
c) Good (3) 
d) Fair (2) 
e) Poor (1) 
f) N/A (Does Not Apply) 
 
I. Pharmacy or Clinic Survey Drop Off Procedure: 
1. From time to time a patient may elect to drop off a completed survey at the pharmacy or in 
clinic to a liaison. If this occurs, the completed survey should be mailed to the address provided 
by the outside source on the survey.  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: P-PSC 2-2 
• ACHC Standards: DRX6-1A, DRX6-1G, DRX6-3C 
ATTACHMENTS:  
Patient Satisfaction Survey (Addendum A)  
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 
   
PH.2432_Customer Satisfaction Performance Indicator 
3 
Addendum A 
 
 
 
 
PH.2432_Customer Satisfaction Performance Indicator 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
  
