 
PH.2445_Medication Dispensing Accuracy Performance Indicator 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Medication Dispensing Accuracy and Near Misses 
Performance Indicator 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2445 (02/07/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/31/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2445 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that the pharmacy tracks medication errors. 
POLICY: 
The pharmacy has a process to report and record all medication dispensing errors. 
DEFINITIONS: 
Medication Error is any preventable or avoidable event that may cause or lead to inappropriate medication use or may 
cause harm to patient. Medication errors may occur by the patient or while the patient is in the control of the health care 
professional or caregiver. 
Near Misses are internal errors, which are found internally and corrected prior to dispensing and/or shipping the 
me
dications (if a dispensing error is detected prior to the final check by the pharmacist, this is considered a near miss). 
[URAC P-OPS 3-1 (a-i)] 
PROCEDURE: 
[URAC P-OPS 3-1 (a-i, a-ii, a-iii, a-iv)] [ACHC Standard DRX6-1A] [ACHC Standard DRX6-3F] 
A. Description of Indicator: 
1.
 Medication Dispensing Accuracy  
i. Assesses the percentage of prescriptions that the organization dispensed accurately. 
B. Frequency of Activities: 
Data collection and rate calculation is completed monthly. Dispensing accuracy rates are reported to the 
Quality Management Committee (QMC) quarterly. 
C. Responsibility:  
The Pharmacy Manager has been designated the responsibility for collecting, tracking and trending data as 
well as presenting it to the QMC for review.  
D. Methods of Data Collection: 
1. Any medication not dispensed accurately will be reported on a complaint form, the complaint log, and 
resolved immediately. 
2. Impact of medication events on clients is remediated and then recorded.  Recorded instances and their 
remediation are used to revise policies, procedures and training modules to ensure the adverse event is not 
repeated.   
3. Errors or complaints that reveal, predict or otherwise point to patient or employee harm are to be reported to 
the Pharmacy Manager immediately and acted upon by him/her in a way to help mitigate, treat or otherwise 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
 
3/31/2023 9:27 AM 
 
 
PH.2445_Medication Dispensing Accuracy Performance Indicator 
2 
respond to addressing and relieving relieve patient or employee pain and suffering. Completion of a complaint 
form should include taking any steps (if applicable) to prevent future similar occurrences. 
E. Threshold/Goal: 
1.  99% of all medications dispensed will be dispensed accurately. 
i. Numerator = Sum numerator parts A-F 
ii. Denominator = All drugs and products dispensed by the organization to or on behalf of a specific patient 
during the measurement period. 
iii. The Medication Dispensing Accuracy Rate will be calculated on a monthly basis. 
2. If goals are not achieved there will be a written plan of correction. 
3. If goals are set by the pharmacy, they will be re-evaluated if acceptable limits are not met on a consistently 
basis as the goal may have been set too high. 
F. Reporting: [URAC P-OPS 3-1 (a-ii, a-iii, a-iv)] 
1. Summary analysis of all medication dispensing errors is forwarded to QMC for review and development of 
corrective action plans when indicated on at least a quarterly basis. 
i. Errors are reported internally to the QMC. 
ii. Errors are reported externally when requested by payors or pharmaceutical manufacturers. 
2. The QMC shall analyze data and identify performance trends on dispensing accuracy during quarterly QMC 
meetings.  Documentation of this review shall be found in the QMC meeting minutes. 
i. If the above-mentioned goals are not met, the QMC shall implement a QIP and/or action plan designed 
to improve or correct identified problems as needed. 
G. Instructions:  
1. Issues will be categorized by the below subjects to meet URAC requirements: 
i. Part A: The number of drugs and products in the denominator in which an incorrect drug and/or 
product was dispensed (i.e., a consumer received a drug other than the one for which a prescription was 
submitted). 
ii. Pa rt B : The number of drugs and products in the denominator that were dispensed to an incorrect 
recipient (i.e., a prescription was dispensed to a consumer other than the one for whom the prescription 
was written.  
iii. Pa rt C : The number of prescriptions in the denominator that were dispensed at an incorrect strength.  
iv. Part D: The number of prescriptions in the denominator that were dispensed in an incorrect dosage 
form. (Examples of incorrect dosage form include incorrect route of administration specified, sustained 
release mistakenly dispensed in place of rapid release, tablet mistakenly dispensed in place of liquid, 
optic drops dispensed in place of ophthalmic drops).  
v. Pa rt E : The number of drugs and products in the denominator that were dispensed with incorrect 
patient instructions, i.e., the instructions on the label did not match the prescriber's instructions and/or 
the drug or product container had the wrong ancillary labels (e.g., "Take with Food," "may Cause 
Dizziness") attached. Missing ancillary labels are generally not tracked and are excluded from this 
measure.  
vi. Pa rt F : The number of drugs and products in the denominator that were dispensed as an incorrect 
quantity. 
2. Sample Size: 100% of all reported or discovered Medication Dispensing Errors  
H. Near Miss Performance Indicator 
1. Description of Indicator: 
i. Near Misses 
1. Assesses the number and type of near misses. 
2. Frequency of Activities: 
i. Data is collected monthly; the rate is calculated monthly and reported to the QMC quarterly. 
3. Responsibility 
i. The Pharmacy Manager has been designated the responsibility for collecting, tracking and trending, and 
presenting data to the QMC for review. 
4. Methods of Data Collection: 
i. Specialty drug near miss will be reported on a spreadsheet with categorized near misses. 
5. Threshold/Goal:  
PH.2445_Medication Dispensing Accuracy Performance Indicator 
3 
i. Goal is for one (1) near miss per quarter. 
ii. If goals are not achieved, there will be a written plan of correction. 
iii. If goals are set by the pharmacy, they will be re-evaluated if acceptable limits are not met on a consistent 
basis as the goal may have been set too high. 
6. Reporting: [URAC P-OPS 3-1 (a-ii, a-iii, a-iv)] 
i. Summary analysis of near misses is forwarded to the QMC for review and development of corrective 
action plans when indicated on at least a quarterly basis. 
1. Near misses are reported internally to the QMC. 
2. Near misses are reported externally when requested by payors or pharmaceutical manufacturers. 
ii. The QMC shall analyze data and identify performance trends on near misses during quarterly QMC 
meetings. Documentation of this review shall be found in the QMC meeting minutes. 
1. If the above-mentioned goals are not met, the QMC shall implement action plans designed to 
improve or correct identified problems as needed. 
7. Instructions: 
i. Near misses are to be documented whenever a near miss is identified. 
ii. Near miss reports should be collected monthly and reported to the QMC at least quarterly. 
8. Sample size: 
i. 100% of all discovered near misses.  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: P-OPS 3-1 
• ACHC Standards: DRX6-1A, DRX6-3F 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 