 
PH.2410_Product Procurement, Supply, Storage & Inventory 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Product Procurement, Supply, Storage & Inventory 
PAGES: 
4 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2410 (04/20/2022) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 11/11/2013   
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/29/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2410 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy is intended to provide a process for ordering and maintaining pharmacy inventory. 
POLICY: 
The pharmacy will maintain a primary inventory of drugs in the pharmacy software inventory system.  The Pharmacy 
has operating procedures to ensure the accurate and safe storage and dispensing of medications.  
DEFINITIONS: 
Inventory- any drug stored in the pharmacy for dispensing. 
340B drugs – medications ordered through wholesaler 340B account 
WAC drugs – medications ordered through wholesaler WAC account.   
U&C (Usual and Customary) pricing – the usual and customary non-discounted prescription price.  
PAP (Patient Assistant Program) drugs – drugs obtained through Patient Assistance Programs for use on patients that 
have been approved for participation in the program by manufacturers of the drugs. 
ADAP (AIDS Drug Assistant Program) drugs – drugs obtained directly from a bill-to ship-to arrangement with Ryan 
White 340B Entity. 
NIST – National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
PROCEDURE: 
Procurement and Supply:  
A. The primary inventory will be maintained perpetually through pharmacy software system with max/min inventory 
levels based on dispensing history. 
B. The pharmacy software system will calculate and generate a daily medication order based on daily usage.  The order 
will be transmitted via the pharmacy software system to the wholesaler and quantities received will be updated in the 
pharmacy software system automatically.  Pricing information will also be updated through the pharmacy software 
system. 
C. Drug manufacturers PAP drugs will be obtained directly from manufacturers for approved patients.  This inventory 
will be maintained perpetually in the pharmacy software system but will not be reordered from the wholesaler, rather, 
will be ordered for approved patients directly from the manufacturer.  Approved patients will be required to sign a 
document stating that if they do not pick up their medication, it will be used for other eligible patients. 
D. PAP drugs will be dispensed at a price of $0.00 cost + administration fee. 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3/29/2023 1:42 PM 
 
 
PH.2410_Product Procurement, Supply, Storage & Inventory 
2 
 
340B drugs will be dispensed at U&C price unless patient is qualified for additional discount based on income or if 
there is a contractual pricing agreement with a 3rd party. 
 
Product Storage: 
A. The pharmacy employees will store (identify and monitor inventory), dispense, package, label and ship 
medications in such a way as to comply with DEA and State Board of Pharmacy laws and regulations as well as 
other applicable laws and regulations. 
B. Proper medication storage protocols will ensure the maintenance of product potency and sterility. Pharmacists 
and pharmacy technicians will ensure that medications are stored within the temperature ranges specified by 
their respective manufacturers.  Sterile products will not be opened and will be dispensed in their original sealed 
containers, vials or syringes so that their sterility is not compromised as the pharmacy does not offer sterile 
product compounding.  
Medications in inventory will be rotated based on expiration date to ensure products that expire or are 
damaged do not get dispensed/shipped to patients. All expired or damaged items will be placed in a 
designated quarantined area away from active inventory clearly labeled “DO NOT USE”. All 
inventory will be reviewed at least every month. Items with expiration dates prior to the next 60 days 
will be removed from inventory.  
C. T he pharmacy uses an employee badge access system which control access throughout the facility including 
the pharmacy area. This system allows the pharmacy to control access levels to specific areas within the 
pharmacy. Access to the pharmacy area is restricted to authorized pharmacy personnel. Only the Director of 
Retail Pharmacy has the authority to grant pharmacy badge access. Upon termination, the IS department 
deactivates the badge to ensure employee has no access to any secure areas.  All pharmacy equipment is kept in 
the secured pharmacy area allowing only authorized personnel to have access to and the ability to lock, unlock, 
and seal pharmacy equipment.    
D. The manufacturer’s product storage guidelines will be followed. These guidelines include shelf life, 
refrigeration, prevention of cross-contamination, storage location for clean, dry products and proper segregation 
of products.  
E. All compounded medication will be stored in accordance with the American Compounding Pharmacist Society 
guidelines, commercial sources such as Paddock Laboratories’ web site or other reputable source  
F. Medications will be stored in the refrigerator or freezer, when required by their manufacturer, FDA, USP 659 
Guidelines or other recognized authority. R efrigerator and freezer temperature logs will be maintained 
continuously via electronic monitoring system . [URAC P-OPS 5-1 (a-i, a-ii)] 
G. The pharmacy will make sure that all medications are stored in conditions that ensure that their integrity is not 
compromised.  
1. Refrigerator and freezer temperature will be monitored via NIST compliant electronic monitoring system 
and logs will be maintained. The pharmacy monitors refrigerator and freezer temperatures with Wi-Fi 
devices placed in each refrigerator or freezer within the pharmacy. This provides a continuous electronic 
log of the temperature of each refrigerator or freezer throughout the day and alerts selected employees 
when the temperature falls out of the range allowed by the manufacturer and USP guidelines to ensure 
stability of the inventory.  
a. Devices are calibrated according to NIST standards. 
2. If/when storage areas fall above or below manufacturer temperature or humidity guidelines, package 
inserts and/or direct contact with manufacturers will be used to determine if the excursion falls within an 
acceptable range for the stability of the medication(s). The below storage guidelines are followed. 
[URAC P-OPS 5-1 (b)] 
a. USP 659 defined controlled room temperature at 20°–25° (68°–77° F). The following conditions 
also apply. Mean kinetic temperature not to exceed 25°. Excursions between 15° and 30° (59° and 
86° F) that are experienced in pharmacies, hospitals, and warehouses, and during shipping are 
allowed. Provided the mean kinetic temperature does not exceed 25°, transient spikes up to 40° are 
permitted as long as they do not exceed 24 h. Spikes above 40° may be permitted only if the 
manufacturer so instructs. 
b. USP 659 defines dry storage conditions as "place that does not exceed 40% average relative 
humidity at 20° (68° F) or the equivalent water vapor pressure at other temperatures.” The 
determination may be made by direct measurement at the place. Determination is based on no less  
PH.2410_Product Procurement, Supply, Storage & Inventory 
3 
than 12 equally spaced measurements that encompass either a season, a year, or, where recorded 
data demonstrate, the storage period of the article. There may be values up to 45% relative 
humidity provided that the average value does not exceed 40% relative humidity. Storage in a 
Container validated to protect the article from moisture vapor, including storage in bulk, is 
considered a Dry place.  
c. USP 659 defines freezer as a place in which the temperature is controlled between −25° and −10° 
(−13° and 14° F). It is noted that in some instances, articles may have a recommended storage 
condition below −20° (−4° F). In such cases, the temperature of the storage location should be 
controlled to ±10°. 
d. USP 659 defines a refrigerator as a cold place in which the temperature is controlled between 2° 
and 8° (36° and 46° F). 
3. In the event that power is lost and the refrigerator, freezer, room temperatures or humidity fall outside of 
the required range for greater than 2 hours, pharmacy staff will be notified by the monitoring system via 
e-mail and/or text.   
a. If refrigerator temperatures continue to exceed those established by the manufacturers and/or USP, 
transfer of medication to another monitored refrigerator will be done until repairs can be made. 
[URAC P-OPS 5-1 (c)] 
b. F acilities management will be called to resolve any iss ues with room temperature or humidity. In 
the event that products have been compromised, all refrigerated items will be removed from 
refrigerator, returned for destruction, and new product ordered. Transfer of medications to another 
monitored storage area will be done if necessary. [URAC P-OPS 5-1 (c)] [URAC P-OPS 5-1 (a-
iii, a-iv)] 
4. The pharmacist or their designees will contact a refrigerator or freezer repair vendor the next business day 
and not move medications to their original storage refrigerator until temperatures have returned to the 
accepted range.  
5. The Ambient room air temperature and room humidity in the pharmacy will be regulated and maintained 
within USP Guidelines. Room temperature and room humidity logs will be maintained and logged 
continuously via NIST compliant electronic monitoring system on each day of business. [URAC P-OPS 
5-1 (a-iii, a-iv)] 
a. The Pharmacy follows USP guidelines for appropriate ambient room temperature and room 
humidity. 
b. Devices are calibrated according to NIST standards. 
6. The Pharmacy ensures medication storage areas are clean. The Pharmacy cleans shelves, refrigerators, 
freezer, counters with 70% Isopropyl Alcohol. Medication storage areas are cleaned at least quarterly, 
and countertops are cleaned at least daily. Documentation of cleaning of each of the above areas as well 
as the cleaning agent used is documented in the cleaning log.  
 
Inventory Process:  
A. Staff will monitor the inventory levels and report discrepancies to the pharmacists on duty.  Pharmacists may 
make minor adjustments at their discretion. If significant discrepancies are discovered, the pharmacist on duty 
will notify the pharmacist in charge, pharmacy manager or director of pharmacy.   
B. Pharmacists may increase/decrease max/min levels as needed to ensure adequate supply of medication is 
available to meet the needs of the pharmacy patients. 
C. Inventory will be taken annually. All 340B and WAC drugs will be included in the inventory.  
D. Inventory will be checked on a monthly rotating schedule for expiration date.  
a. Medications expiring within 60 days will be pulled from stock. 
b. Items pulled will be removed from perpetual inventory and placed in a container labeled “Expired 
medications” Those medications will be returned for credit/destruction through a contracted reverse 
distributor in accordance with Louisiana State Board of Pharmacy regulations.  
E. Medications will not be transferred/loaned/sold or otherwise shared with other pharmacies outside of those 
directly owned and operated by FMOLHS.  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
  
PH.2410_Product Procurement, Supply, Storage & Inventory 
4 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• PH.2417_Central Fill Pharmacy 
• URAC Standards: P-OPS 5-1 
• ACHC: DRX7-9A, DRX7-9C 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  