 
PH.2435_Review of Marketing and Communication Materials 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Review of Marketing and Communication Materials 
PAGES: 3 REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2435 (02/07/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/22/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2435 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that materials used for marketing and communication are reviewed, approved and maintained. 
POLICY: 
A. The pharmacy has established a process to review all marketing and communication materials to ensure that 
services represented in these materials are accurate and clearly communicated. This process includes appropriate 
inter-departmental review and approval and prompt corrective action when problems are detected. 
B.  The pharmacy recognizes that its customer population is very diverse with differing cultural backgrounds,  
              physical needs, literacy levels and languages spoken which may impact communication with the  
              patients/caregivers. Through health literacy and culturally appropriate communications, the pharmacy will  
              ensure appropriate access and understanding for the population served, will empower consumers, and ensure  
              safety. Pharmacy will ensure all patients are treated with respect and in a manner that meets their individual  
              needs. Pharmacy will make any necessary accommodations in order to effectively communicate with its  
              consumers. 
DEFINITIONS: 
Health Literacy is the degree to which individuals have the capacity to obtain, process, and understand basic health 
information and services needed to make appropriate health decisions. 
PROCEDURE: 
A.   Ensuring Clarity and Accuracy of Marketing Materials 
1. The pharmacy safeguards  against misrepresentation in its marketing materials through its review and 
approval process. This process ensures that all communicated information about its services is clear 
and accurate and includes activities the organization delegates, if any. [URAC CPE 2-5 (a-i)] Prior 
to the final approval and use of marketing materials, the Quality Management Committee (QMC), 
consisting of department leadership, reviews all service-related materials for accuracy of 
information. [URAC CPE 2-5 (a-i)] The department leaders are responsible for ensuring subject 
matter expert review of any materials that represent services provided by their department. [URAC 
CPE 2-5 (a-i)] This review and approval process is documented in the Marketing Materials Log with 
the date of review and approval, and the review by content experts. 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/22/2023 1:02 PM 
 
 
PH.2435_Review of Marketing and Communication Materials 
2 
2. The pharmacy provides information to consumers in multiple formats (at least two) and media (e.g. 
print, live oral presentation, telephonic and/or interactive) so that all consumers will have access to 
the relevant information. If the Pharmacy provides any communication regarding its programs or 
services to consumers, it seeks to ensure those materials adhere to the Federal Plain Language 
Guidelines (www.plainlanguage.gov) to enhance comprehension. [URAC CPE 2-4 (a)] The 
pharmacy develops marketing content that adheres to People First Language and Plain Language 
guidelines. The pharmacy may enlist the assistance of the Marketing department or other resources 
at the discretion of the pharmacy manager to provide relevant information and guidance on plain 
language to staff that write or review consumer marketing materials to ensure they produce materials 
that are clear and easily understood by the intended audience.  
i. Th e pharmacy will use the Plain Language Guidelines to aid in Health Literacy. Please see 
Plain Language Guidelines attachment for reference. [URAC CPE 2-4 (a, b)] 
3. The pharmacy manager also ensures that all consumer print communication materials are written at 
reading levels appropriate to the intended audience. The general target ranges are 5th to 8th grade 
reading levels for consumers, up to 12th grade reading levels for general public, and college level for 
communication regarding provider, clinical and contractual issues. The Flesch-Kincaid Reading Ease 
tool is used as a guide to help determine reading ease (https://readability-score.com/).  Add itionally, 
focus groups that are inclusive of consumers may periodically review materials, as needed, to assess 
the use of plain language and validate reading ease and understanding.  
 
B. Monitoring and Modifications of Marketing Materials 
1. The Marketing Materials Log of all materials is maintained by the pharmacy manager.  All 
marketing materials are tracked through this log to monitor and ensure that all materials are 
maintained and remain accurate.  All Marketing materials are reviewed at least annually through the 
process described above.  The date of annual review and any revisions made are documented and 
maintained in the Marketing Materials Log. [URAC CPE 2-5 (a-i)] 
2. If  a d iscrepancy is noted in any marketing material, the pharmacy manager is notified and develops a 
plan to resolve the discrepancy as soon as possible. If the discrepancy is misleading to the point of 
creating confusion and inconvenience for customers, the material is recalled to the extent possible. 
Prompt corrective action is taken to resolve the issue and resume the use of accurate marketing 
materials. [URAC CPE 2-5 (a-ii)] 
3. Du ring the review/monitoring process which safeguards any communication with potential 
consumers and clients the pharmacy manager ensures that the pharmacy does not misrepresent its 
products and services and pharmacy’s ownership. [URAC CPE 2-5 (a-i)] 
 
C. Health Literacy and Culturally Appropriate Communication Requirements 
1. Through continual monitoring, review and analysis of the contracted specific patient population, the 
pharmacy will ensure that all communication that is provided to patients/consumers will: 
i. Conform to the literacy levels of the consumer, as appropriate. The Flesch-Kincaid Reading 
Ease tool is used as a guide to help determine reading ease. Materials are written in plain 
language with a literacy level in the range of 4th through 9th grade.  
ii. Help consumers be aware of what effect a health care decision may have on their daily lives 
(e.g. information about any potential activity limitations, food/drug interactions, 
consequences with medication non-compliance) 
iii. Display information in a way that highlights information important to consumer. Examples 
of this may include the use of bold or large font, yellow highlighting on the prescription 
label, use of patient information sheets, colored stickers as well as other display methods 
to attract attention to important information.  
iv. Pr e sent and deliver in a way that is appropriate to the diversity of the pharmacy’s enrollment 
1. Literacy level [URAC P-PSC 3-1 (a-i)] 
2. Language differences [URAC P-PSC 3-1 (a-i)] 
3. Cultural differences [URAC P-PSC 3-1 (a-ii)]  
PH.2435_Review of Marketing and Communication Materials 
3 
4. Cognitive and/or physical impairments [URAC P-PSC 3-1 (a-iii, a-iv)] 
2. A primary focus of the pharmacy’s customer service, the staff are trained/informed on how to 
identify consumer specific needs and access the appropriate resources needed for the clear 
communication 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: CPE 2-4, CPE 2-5, P-PSC 3-1 
• ACHC Standards: DRX2-1A, DRX2-1B, DRX5-5F 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 