 
PH.2464_Pateint Complaint Process 
1 
 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Patient Complaint Process 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2464 (03/12/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE:  02/14/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/29/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2464 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that OLOLH pharmacies has a process to record and resolve complaints. 
POLICY: 
OLOLH pharmacies value input from its customers to help ensure the highest quality of services are provided. OLOLH 
pharmacies maintain a formal process to address customer complaints, responds in a timely manner and utilizes the 
information to promote organizational improvement.  
The complaint process is a way for us to monitor, identify and address issues related to the quality of service provided by 
the pharmacy staff in order to better meet the needs of our patient population.  
DEFINITIONS: 
In accordance with organizational policy ORG/CLIN020 
Complaint: 
An expression of dissatisfaction by the patient, or the patient’s representative, related to a relatively minor issue that 
can be immediately and effectively identified and addressed on a nursing unit or in the department where it occurred 
by the staff present.  Typically, this includes issues related to a change in bedding, housekeeping a room, and serving 
preferred food or beverage. Staff present includes any hospital staff present at the time of the complaint or who can 
quickly be at the patient’s location (i.e., nursing, administration, nursing supervisors, patient advocates, etc.) to 
resolve the patient’s complaint. 
Grievance: 
A patient grievance is a formal or informal written or verbal expression of dissatisfaction that is made to the hospital 
by a patient, or the patient’s representative, regarding the patient’s care (when the concern is not resolved at the time 
reported by staff present), abuse or neglect, issues related to the hospital’s compliance with the CMS Hospital 
Conditions of Participation (CoPs), or a Medicare beneficiary billing issue.   (See Suspected Abuse or Neglect, 
Reporting of Child/Adult Policy OrgClin-027) 
According to CMS Hospital CoPs the following are considered a grievance: 
• A Medicare beneficiary billing complaint. 
• A written complaint is always considered a grievance.  This includes written complaints from an inpatient, an 
outpatient, a released or discharged patient, or a patient’s representative regarding the patient care provided, 
abuse or neglect, or the hospital’s compliance with CoPs.  An email or fax is considered “written.” 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/29/2023 3:50 PM 
 
 
PH.2464_Pateint Complaint Process 
2 
• If an identified patient writes or attaches a written complaint on a patient satisfaction survey and requests 
resolution. If an identified patient writes or attaches a complaint to the survey but has not requested resolution, 
the hospital must treat this as a grievance if the hospital would usually treat such a complaint as a grievance. 
• When a patient or a patient’s representative telephones the hospital with a complaint regarding the patient’s care 
or with an allegation of abuse or neglect, or failure of the hospital to comply with one or more CoPs or other 
CMS requirements. 
• Any complaint related to a patient right. 
According to CMS Hospital CoPs the following do not meet the criteria to be considered a grievance, and should 
be handled relatively quickly by staff, and do not require a written response: 
• General billing issues unless there are service, or care issues included in the communication received from the 
complainant. 
PROCEDURE: [URAC CPE 2-3] 
A. At the time of first dispense, the patient is informed in writing of OLOLH pharmacies’ mechanism for receiving, 
reviewing, and resolving patient complaints. “Welcome Packets” provided to each patient include details on how 
to notify OLOLH pharmacies of their complaint and the process for handling.  
B. The employee receiving the complaint will document the complaint, record the date, name of the patient/caregiver 
or provider, description of complaint, and information about the individual(s) and/or product(s) involved. The 
employee will determine what actions the patient feels should be initiated to resolve the complaint and attempt to 
resolve the complaint to the patient's satisfaction. If resolution is accomplished, the documented complaint will be 
filed in the designated file for review by the Quality Management Committee (QMC). [URAC CPE 2-3 (a, b)] 
C. When the complaint is not resolved at this level, the complaint will then be considered a grievance and will be 
addressed according to the organizational grievance policy OrgClin/020. 
D. The pharmacy’s timeframe to resolve complaints is seven (7) calendar days. [URAC CPE 2-3 (a)] Within seven 
(7) calendar days of receiving a complaint, OLOLH pharmacies will notify the patient that it has received the 
complaint and that it is investigating or provide the patient with a resolution. OLOLH pharmacies will provide 
verbal notification to the patient as to the nature of the complaint, results of its investigation, steps taken by the 
organization to resolve the complaint and its response to the complaint.  
E. Patients are also provided with external contact information for escalating complaints in the Welcome Packet given to 
patients at the start of therapy.  
F. All complaints will be held in strictest confidence. Information, including the patient’s name, will be disseminated 
on a need-to-know basis only. 
G. A summary of all complaints will be reviewed by the pharmacy manager at least quarterly. Information from 
these complaints will aid in addressing areas for improvement as well the time frame required to resolve the 
complaints effectively. 
H. The summary of all complaints and Complaint Log will be included for review at the quarterly QMC meetings and 
Governing Body meetings. [URAC CPE 2-3 (b)] 
I. The Complaint Log will be utilized to track, trend, and generate reports for the complaint activity to include: 
1. Compliance with established timeliness standards surrounding the complaint/appeal resolution processes  
2. Types of complaints 
3. Involved providers 
4. Analysis of complaints to identify trends and ensure the root causes that led to the complaint are identified 
and quality improvement activities are developed to correct deficiencies 
5. Resolution 
  
PH.2464_Pateint Complaint Process 
3 
J. Should the patient feel their privacy rights have been violated, they may contact OLOLH pharmacies’ Privacy 
Officer in accordance with Policy PH.2466. Should the patient feel their civil rights have been violated, they may 
contact the organization’s Civil Rights Coordinator in accordance with Policy Org/Clin 059. 
K. All complaints will be documented and copies of Complaint Forms, communication to customers, investigations, 
and written responses shall be maintained by the OLOLH pharmacies. 
L. OLOLH pharmacies maintains records of grievances/complaints and their outcomes. This information is included 
in the PI annual report. 
M. Personnel are oriented and familiar with the client/patient grievance/complaint/concern policies and procedures. 
Personnel assist in implementing the resolution process when needed. 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC Standards: DRX2-4A, DRX5-5A, DRX6-1A, DRX6-3F, DRX2-4C 
• URAC Standards: CPE 2-3 
• OrgClin020 
• OrgClin027 
• OrgClin059 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  