 
1 
PH.2422_Immunization Services Policy 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Immunization Services  
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 11/25/2024 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE:  POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2422 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines immunization services offered by participating Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) 
retail/community pharmacies. 
POLICY: 
Participating Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community pharmacies will offer vaccines to 
eligible patients as defined by state and federal regulations.   
DEFINITIONS: 
ACIP - United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Advisory Committee on Immunization Practice 
Vaccine Administration Record (“VAR”): This form is available in print and electronic version.  Print version is 
acceptable if the electronic version is not available; but should be electronically scanned into the patient’s pharmacy 
record. 
Vaccine Information Statement (“VIS”): This form is available in print and electronic version.  Print version is 
acceptable if the electronic version is not available; but should be electronically scanned into the patient’s pharmacy 
record. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”):  a federal agency that conducts and supports health 
promotion, prevention, and preparedness activities in the United States, with the goal of improving overall public 
health. 
Basic Life Support (“BLS”) - is a level of medical care which is used for victims of life-threatening illnesses or 
injuries until they can be given full medical care. 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Medication Administration (V) credentials are no longer required by the Louisiana Board of Pharmacy.   
Pharmacists shall retain evidence of their education, training, and continuing competencies.  In addition, 
pharmacists or pharmacy technicians must meet the federal requirements of the PREP Act to administer FDA 
authorized COVID 19 vaccines. 
B. Vaccines will be administered in conformance with the most current immunization administration protocol as set 
forth by the ACIP.  
1. Patients must be provided with a Patient Consent, VAR and a VIS.  
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
 
11/25/2024 4:55 PM 
 
 
2 
PH.2422_Immunization Services Policy 
2. Pharmacists must screen all patients for eligibility to receive vaccines.  Pharmacist s will review Patient 
Consent, VAR, and VIS forms for accuracy and completion then determine the patient’s eligibility for 
vaccination using the screening questions from the VAR.  Pharmacists will use appropriate clinical judgment 
and refer any patient to his/her primary care physician should the answers to the screening questions indicate 
the potential for an adverse event or reaction to the vaccine.   
3. Pharmacists shall request the name of a patient’s primary care provider prior to the administering of any 
vaccine. If the patient identifies such primary care provider to the pharmacist, the pharmacist shall notify the 
primary care provider, by written or electronic communication, as soon as reasonably possible thereafter that 
the vaccine was administered. 
4. Patients will be provided with the most current version of the VIS for each vaccine prior to receiving the 
vaccine.  Pharmacists will answer any questions or concerns the patient may have. 
5. Pharmacists must wear gloves while administering vaccines.  Prior to donning gloves and immediately after 
removing gloves, Pharmacists must wash their hands with soap and water or an alcohol-based hand rub.   
6. Used needles will never be bent, broken, recapped or removed from disposable syringes before disposal in the 
Sharps container.  Pharmacists must never attempt to recap a used needle. 
7. Pharmacists who are certified to give vaccines may make recommendations to patients based on CDC/ACIP 
immunization schedules. 
8. In the event of an emergency, pharmacy staff administering vaccines: 
i. Onsite will follow the emergency policy of the hospital or clinic for their specific geographic location. 
ii. Offsite – 
1. will initiate intervention at the first sign of symptoms 
2. notify 911 of the emergency and give location of the emergency. 
3. initiate BLS if medically appropriated until the arrival of emergency personnel. 
9. Participating Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community pharmacies  shall maintain and 
have readily available supplies that are in-date and in good working order.  Such supplies may include, but not 
be limited to: 
i. Required Vaccines 
ii. Syringes and or needles of appropriate gauge and length 
iii. Gloves (non-latex preferred) 
iv. Alcohol pads 
v. Sterile cotton or gauze 
vi. Adhesive bandages 
vii. Epinephrine for injection 
viii. Sharps container 
ix. Biohazard spill kit 
x. CPR mask /shield 
xi. VAR 
xii. VIS 
C. Vaccines offered will include, but not be limited to: influenza; pneumococcal; zoster; meningococcal; tetanus, 
diphtheria, pertussis; measles, mumps, rubella. 
D. Vaccines will be stored in accordance with CDC/ACIP recommendations.  Temperature logs will be maintained in 
order to ensure vaccine safety.  
E. All adverse events observed or reported shall be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System, the 
cooperative program of the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the United States Food 
and Drug Administration for vaccine safety, or its successor program; and further, the pharmacist shall refer the 
patient with an adverse event to a vaccine for appropriate medical care. 
F. Each immunization will be reported to the Department of Health, Office of Public Health’s Louisiana 
Immunization Network for Kids Statewide (LINKS) at the time of the vaccine or as soon as reasonably practicable 
thereafter, as this is the official state vaccination record.   
G. A record of each immunization administered as documented on the VAR shall be maintained for at least two years. 
  
3 
PH.2422_Immunization Services Policy 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Louisiana State Board of Pharmacy -  http://pharmacy.la.gov 
• CDC/ACIP - https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/index.html 
• Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center – OrgClin-003 Code Blue / Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 
• U.S. Department of Health & Human Services Guidance for Licensed Pharmacists and Pharmacy Interns 
Regarding COVID 19 Vaccines and Immunity under the PREP Act 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 