 
PH.2414_Patient Counseling 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Patient Counseling 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2414 (03/12/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 09/23/15 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/22/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2414 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure that all patients receiving specialty and/or retail services are offered counseling. 
POLICY: 
The pharmacy shall ensure that pharmacists offer interactive and meaningful consultation to patients, or caregivers. The 
pharmacist will also participate in the treatment decision making with the prescriber. [URAC P-PSC 3-4 (a-i, a-iii)] 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Auxiliary Personnel: Personnel that support patient and liaison workflows.  This may include the following: 
Engagement Center personnel, Patient Support Center (PSC) personnel, and/or pharmacy technicians. 
PROCEDURE: [URAC P-PSC 3-4 (a-i, a-iii)]  
1. During the initial prescription fill or specialty patient Welcome Call (if applicable) and on each refill, a 
pharmacist, liaison, or Auxiliary Personnel will make the offer for pharmacist counseling and inform the 
patient that they have the right, at any time, to speak with a pharmacist if they have drug therapy 
questions. Prior to purchasing medications, patients must sign attestation of their request or refusal of 
counseling by a pharmacist.   
 
2. Patients enrolled in medication synchronization programs will be offered the opportunity to receive 
counseling at the time of the medication synchronization appointment or at the time of pickup. 
 
3. Medication Therapy Management (MTM) patients will receive counseling during their appointment 
either via face-to-face encounter with a pharmacist or via telephone.   
 
4. Patients receiving specialty medications are required to be enrolled in MTM and Medication 
synchronization programs and will receive pharmacist counseling prior to the initiation of therapy. 
 
5. Counseling will include but is not limited to  
a. explanation and verification of patient understanding of: 
i. medication dosing, side effects, and drug-drug or drug-food interactions 
ii. importance of adherence 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
 
3/22/2023 1:01 PM 
 
 
PH.2414_Patient Counseling 
2 
iii. contact information for pharmacy during and after normal business hours. 
 
6. The pharmacy shall comply with Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) and Medicare 
requirements for patient counseling. 
 
7. Every dispensed medication that a patient receives for the first time shall contain a drug monograph. 
 
8. Counseling shall also occur upon the request of the patient, patient’s legal guardian, medical 
representative, caregiver, prescriber, or as deemed necessary by the professional judgment of the 
pharmacist. 
 
9. Strict patient confidentiality will be maintained with deference to patient’s protected health information 
(PHI) under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) privacy requirements. 
 
10.  Specialty pharmacies will have a pharmacist available 24/7 for counseling. (see policy PH.2431) 
 
11. Pharmacists have access to Lexicomp as a clinical resource both during and after business hours. 
 
12. Pharmacists participate in treatment decision making by communicating regularly with the patient and 
relaying any pertinent information to the prescriber. Such as drug to drug interactions, adverse drug 
reaction or any change in the status of the patient that would require a change to the plan of care. 
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• PH.2431 Ongoing Patient Support and On-Call Services 
• URAC Standards: P-PSC 3-4 
• ACHC Standards: DRX4-9D 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  