 
PH.2466_Regulatory Compliance Program 
1 
 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Regulatory Compliance Program 
PAGES: 
9 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2466 (03/12/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 03/29/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/31/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2466 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that OLOLH pharmacies are in compliance with all federal, state and local regulations.  
POLICY: 
A. To ensure overall compliance with all federal, state, local and private health insurance plan regulations, OLOLH , 
which includes OLOLH pharmacies, follow the Corporate Compliance Program, as stated in COMP 08 001. 
OLOLH’s Governing Body provides oversight of the program and has designated a Corporate Compliance 
Officer (CCO). [URAC RM 1-1 (d)] 
B. The Compliance Pr ogram has been established to ensure that each employee has a clear understanding of their 
responsibilities and acts accordingly. Each employee has an obligation to know and to abide by the laws, rules, 
regulations, policies and procedures that are specific to their jobs and to abide by Ethics Policies established by 
OLOLH.  
C. OLOLH pharmacies follows all applicable laws and regulations, and in the case of a conflict in laws/regulations, 
the more stringent law or regulation will be followed.  
D. The Pharmacy Compliance Officer (P CO) is responsible for compliance monitoring and has responsibility for 
identifying methods and accountabilities to track and review applicable state and federal laws and regulations 
applicable to the OLOLH pharmacies. [URAC RM 1-1 (a)] 
E. The goal o f this Regulatory Compliance Program is to provide reasonable assurance that the OLOLH pharmacies 
conduct its business activity in full compliance with all federal, state and local laws and regulations by identifying 
methods and accountabilities to track and review applicable state and federal laws and regulations, including those 
related to: [URAC RM 1-1 (a)] 
1. Privacy and security, including HIPAA;  
2.
 Fraud, waste and abuse; and 
3. Functions covered by URAC and ACHC accreditation. 
F. The elements of the Regulatory Compliance Program include: 
1. Implem ent ation of adherence to all applicable laws, regulations, written policies, procedures and the Code 
of Conduct. [URAC RM 1-1 (a)] 
2. Tracking app licable laws and regulations in the jurisdictions where OLOLH pharmacies conduct business. 
[URAC RM 1-1 (a)] 
3. Ensuring compliance with applicable laws and regulations through: [URAC RM 1-1 (a)] 
a. Designation of a PCO to manage the compliance program and activities. 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/31/2023 9:28 AM 
 
 
PH.2466_Regulatory Compliance Program 
2 
b. Monitoring of changes in applicable laws and regulations and adapting practices as necessary. 
c. Development and implementation of effective training and education programs for all employees. 
d. Enforcement of the expected Code of Conduct and publicized disciplinary actions. 
4. Development of effective lines of communication throughout the compliance process 
5. Establishment of procedures that allow for prompt, thorough investigation of possible misconduct or non-
compliance and prompt implementation of corrective action of detected problems. [URAC RM 1-1 (c)] 
G. Each employee has a personal obligation to:  
1. Uphold OLOLH’s mission and values. 
2. Become familiar with OLOLH’s Code of Conduct and how it pertains to the laws and regulations, policies 
and procedures relative to each employee’s job. 
3. Conducts all activities in accordance with the highest ethical standards and in a manner, which shall uphold 
the reputation and standards of OLOLH. No employee will make false or misleading statements to any 
patient, person or entity doing business with OLOLH pharmacies. 
4. Report known or suspected violations of the Code, law or regulations or any other OLOLH pharmacies 
policy or practice (whether intentional, inadvertent or accidental) using the chain of command. If 
uncertainty exists, individuals will report the issue to their supervisor so that the violation can be 
investigated and resolved. 
5. P artici pate in the investigation of the alleged violation and where appropriate provide solutions to prevent 
further occurrences of violations. 
H. The pharmacy is an equal opportunity employer and promotes diversity, equity, and inclusion in its employee 
population.  Diversity promotes a balanced representation of employees.  Equity promotes opportunity for all 
employees.  Inclusion fosters a sense of belonging among employees. [URAC OPIN 2-5 (a-i, a-ii, a-iii)] 
DEFINITIONS: 
Pharmacy Compliance Officer (PCO) is an employee in charge of overseeing and managing compliance issues 
within the OLOLH pharmacies. 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Federal, State and Local Laws and Regulations 
1. The PCO is responsible for acquiring and maintaining required licensing or certification and ensuring 
compliance to federal, state, and local laws governing the business. The PCO takes action on any reports or 
recommendations of authorized planning, regulatory, and inspection agencies.  The PCO receives federal 
regulatory updates from the health system’s compliance department when changes occur that are 
applicable to the pharmacy.  The PCO or designee checks for changes to state laws for each state license 
on the Board of Pharmacy (BOP) websites on at least a quarterly basis.  Notification from the health 
system’s compliance department, BOP website checks, and changes are tracked, and changes are reviewed 
during the Quality Management Committee (QMC) meeting quarterly.  These laws and regulations 
include, but are not limited to: [URAC RM 1-1 (a, b)] 
a. OSHA 
b. FDA 
c. State Board of Pharmacy 
d. Professional Certifications 
e. ADA 
f. Equal Opportunity Act 
g. Fair Labor Standards Act 
h. Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 
i. Medicare Regulations 
j. Medicaid regulations and policies 
k. Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 
l. Balance Budget Act of 1997 
m. Public Health Regulations related to infectious disease  
PH.2466_Regulatory Compliance Program 
3 
n. HIPAA, HITECH, and state privacy statutes and regulations 
o. Fraud, waste, and abuse (e.g., Anti- Kickback Statute, Stark Law, False Claims Act, Health Care 
Fraud, and Payment Integrity and Identity Fraud) 
p. Applicable state clinical practice statutes and regulations. 
q. Health care consumer protection laws and regulations. 
r. Informed consent requirements 
s. Laws and regulations governing the functions covered by the URAC accreditation or certification 
program for this application. 
t. Other laws and regulations as applicable to the care/service provided 
2. Initial review of BOP regulations upon issuance of a permit by each respective BOP. 
3. All applicable licenses will be posted at each location for the general public to easily review. 
4. All rules and regulations and laws that require posting by federal and state mandate will be posted for easy 
review by all employees. (5 in 1 Poster). 
5. PCO will maintain or have ready access to current copies of applicable rules and regulations for all 
services provided such as state licensure regulations, care regulations, and acceptable industry standards. 
6. All outcomes from reviews and/or audits from a regulatory organization that might affect operation or 
accreditation will be reported to the Governing Body and to ACHC and URAC within 30 days or as 
required by applicable law. 
a. Negative outcomes affecting accreditation, licensure, or Medicare/Medicaid certification are 
reported to ACHC and URAC within 30 days. The report includes all actions taken and plans of 
correction. 
b. Incidents that are reported to ACHC include, but are not limited to: 
(1) License suspension 
(2) License probation; conditions/restrictions to license 
(3) Non-compliance with Medicare/Medicaid regulations identified during survey by another 
regulatory body 
(4) Revocation of Medicare/Medicaid/third-party provider number 
(5) Any open investigation by any regulatory or governmental authority 
c. All requests for information from a regulatory organization will receive a full report by the 
Governing Body.  
B.  Regulatory Compliance Program 
1. Elements of the Pharmacy Compliance Program include: [URAC RM 1-1 (b)] 
a. R eview and analysis of its pharmacy organizational structure, written policies, and documented 
procedures to determine if there are any changes that impact compliance. [URAC RM 1-1 (b)] 
b. Maintaining policy and procedures used to detect non-compliant conduct by employees. 
c. Promoting pharmacy organizational culture to encourage ethical conduct and a commitment to 
compliance with the law. 
d. Internal monitoring and auditing to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
[URAC RM 1-1 (b)] 
e. R eview and as needed, update of the pharmacy Regulatory Compliance Program training and 
education. [URAC RM 1-1 (b)] 
(1) C ompliance training modules and materials, such as HIPAA training, are reviewed and 
updated as needed on an annual basis or earlier due to changes in laws and regulations. 
[URAC RM 1-1 (b)] 
f. Communication with delegated entities, if applicable, regarding changes impacting compliance.  
g. Review of all newsletters and other communications received by BOP. 
h. Designation of individuals accountable for the Pharmacy Regulatory Compliance Program. 
i. Mechanism for the appropriate reporting and disciplinary mechanisms for instances of misconduct. 
j. Ongoing training of employees and management on OLOLH pharmacies standards.  
k. Monitoring and auditing to detect misconduct. 
l. Yearly evaluation of the Regulatory Compliance Program. The compliance officer reviews the 
training on an annual basis and as needed based on team member performance or on changes to 
applicable laws and regulations.  Documentation of all compliance is recorded electronically.   
PH.2466_Regulatory Compliance Program 
4 
2. The primary responsibilities of the PCO are: [URAC RM 1-1 (b)]  
a. Overseeing and monitoring the implementation of the compliance program. 
b. Maximizing efficiency and quality of service, while reducing the company’s vulnerability to fraud, 
abuse, and waste. 
c. Periodically revising the program with consideration to organizational changes, regulatory changes, 
and changes in payer health plans. 
d. Reviewing employees’ certifications and their agreement to abide by the Code of Conduct. 
e. When needed, assisting Human Resources in investigating applicants and potential employees who 
have been excluded from participation in the Medicare program on a monthly basis. (OIG Exclusion 
List). 
f. Promptly responding to all allegations of illegal/improper activities. 
g. Ind ependently acting on information from investigations, complaints, and suspected violations. 
h. Strengthening lines of communication to encourage trust and a corporate culture of openness. 
i. Maintaining the momentum and adherence to the objectives of the corporate compliance plan. 
j. The PCO will have access to all patient files, billing records, supplier documents, marketing 
literature and brochures, contractual relationships, and employee records.  
C. Auditing and Monitoring [URAC RM 1-1 (b)] 
1. An o ngoing e valuation process is critical to a successful compliance program. Compliance reports are 
created by internal monitoring and auditing. [URAC RM 1-1 (b)] The PCO is responsible for the ongoing 
maintenance of these auditing functions and the resulting reports.  Claims are audited monthly for 
compliance and internal monitoring and documentation.  BOP websites are reviewed at least quarterly & 
real-time electronic notification of any changes are received through notification from pharmacy associates 
such as the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy (NABP).  Employees have access to BOP 
websites, NABP and other resources, such as newsletters, to ensure access to regulatory requirements 
related to their job functions.  Changes in laws and regulations are reviewed and operation changes are 
made to ensure our organization is in compliance.  Our organization uses the QMC meeting to discuss and 
document changes and ongoing compliance.  In the event of an audit that resulted in our organization being 
non-compliant to changes in laws and regulations our organization will create a corrective action plan and 
include appropriate key stakeholders in our organization to expedite the completion of the corrective action 
plan and ensure compliance. [URAC RM 1-1 (a)] [URAC RM 1-1 (b)] 
a. The audits are designed to address the pharmacy’s compliance with all state and federal laws and 
regulations 
2. Further, audits should be conducted to monitor the ongoing adherence to the specific rules and policies of 
the Medicare DMERC, as well as any other federal, state or private payer. 
3. Monitoring techniques at the pharmacy will include sampling protocols that permit the PCO to identify and 
review variations from an established baseline, or a pre-determined snapshot.  Significant variation from the 
baseline is reason to conduct a reasonable inquiry to determine the cause of deviation. 
4. If the deviation is caused by improper procedures, misunderstanding of rules, or fraud and abuse systematic 
problems, the CCO will take immediate and deliberate steps to remediate the situation. [URAC RM 1-1 (c)] 
5. Any overpayments found as a result of an audit will be returned to the payer immediately.  
6. All efforts by OLOLH pharmacies will be documented and retained as part of the Regulatory Compliance 
Program. 
7. All employees will train on ways in which to identify, report and prevent Fraud, Waste and Abuse (FWA) 
in pharmacy claims. Employees must  retrain at least a nnually. Additionally, this training will in clude a 
discussion of the Fa lse Claims Act (FCA) and their right and responsi bility to report fraud to the CCO 
without recourse.  Records of both will be maintained.  Employees can access the Louisiana State BOP 
website for information regarding regulatory requirements related to their job. Information regarding 
changes to pharmacy law are provided through daily staff meetings.  Examples of fraud include: 
a. Billing for services not rendered 
b. Requesting, offering, or receiving a kickback, bribe, or rebate 
c. Using an incorrect or inappropriate provider number to be paid 
d. Selling or sharing patients’ Medicare numbers so false claims can be filed  
PH.2466_Regulatory Compliance Program 
5 
e. Falsifying information on applications, medical records, billing statements, and/or cost reports or on 
any statement filed with the government 
8. Regulatory Compliance Program Audit Metric [URAC RM 1-1 (b, c)] 
a. The pharmacy uses a compliance audit tool to measure the organization's compliance as well as 
response to detected risk, problems and incidents related to regulatory compliance.  The compliance 
audit tool is used on a quarterly basis to assess risk and audit compliance with applicable 
jurisdictional laws and regulations.  Results of the audit will be reviewed during quarterly QMC 
meetings. Our organization seeks to be in 100% compliance with each audit.  Any identified risks 
and noncompliance resulting from the audit will be addressed immediately.  The QMC may elect to 
approve a QIP or Action Plan as a result of any identified risk. 
9. The pharmacy responds to detected risks, problems and incidents related to regulatory compliance [URAC 
RM 1-1 (c)] 
a. Patient harm events are responded to within 1 business day from date of discovery. 
b. Non-patient harm events are responded to within 7 business days from date of discovery. 
D. Corrective Action [URAC RM 1-1 (c)] 
1. Po l icy: OLOLH pharmacies employees are expected to adhere to the established policies and procedures 
and perform their duties in accordance with OLOLH’s Code of Conduct. Violations of OLOLH’s policies 
and procedures or Code of Conduct will be investigated by the PCO and if warranted, violators will be 
sanctioned.  See HR.06.008_Corrective Action Policy. 
E. Ethical Healthcare Practices [URAC OPIN 2-4 (a-i, a-ii, a-iii)] 
1. Reporting of impaired, incompetent or unethical practice  
a. Individuals who believe they have been the victims of conduct prohibited by this policy or who 
believe they have witnessed such conduct should discuss their concerns with their immediate 
supervisor, Human Resources, or any member of management.  The pharmacy encourages the 
prompt reporting of complaints or concerns so that rapid and constructive action can be taken.  Any 
reported allegations of harassment, discrimination, or retaliation will be investigated urgently. 
2. The following are definitions and examples of impaired, incompetent, or unethical practices that require 
reporting: 
a. Impaired Practice: The pharmacy provides a safe working environment free of drugs and alcohol 
that may adversely affect the workplace.  Consequently, the following are strictly prohibited and 
will result in immediate corrective action, including being placed on investigative leave or discharge 
depending upon the facts and circumstances: 
(1) Reporting to work or being at work, while physically or otherwise manifesting any indication 
of usage of alcohol or the illegal use of drugs; 
(2) Unlawful use, possession, sale, manufacture, purchase or transfer of drugs by an employee 
on the pharmacy’s premises or property during work time, of drugs; unlawful use, sale, 
manufacture, purchase, or transfer of alcohol by an employee on the pharmacy’s premises or 
property; or use of any drug or alcohol which impairs the employee’s ability to perform 
safety consequential job duties or poses a hazard to the safety and welfare of the employee, 
patient, visitors, or other employees. 
(3) The pharmacy promotes and maintains a drug free workforce by emphasizing education of 
employees and the rehabilitation of chemically dependent individuals. 
b. Unethical Practices are violations of policy and procedures, laws and regulations, and/or the Code of 
Conduct and are required to be reported. 
c. Incompetent Practice: Competence is possessing the requisite abilities and qualities to perform 
effectively in the scope of professional practices while adhering to ethical standards. 
(1) Examples are as follows but not limited to: 
(a) Not following good faith and honesty in business transactions 
(b) Not maintaining confidentiality 
(c) Violating the anti-kickback law and antitrust laws 
(d) Not respecting a patient’s wishes and cultural/religious beliefs 
(e) Providing clinical advice in contrast of clinical practice guidelines and protocols 
(f) Not avoiding conflict of interest  
PH.2466_Regulatory Compliance Program 
6 
3. The pharmacy ensures individuals are not subject to retaliation when reporting, in good faith, violations of 
legal, regulatory, or ethical requirements. 
F. Reporting to Accreditation Bodies 
1. The below information, and any other information deemed reportable by the pharmacy, will be monitored 
on a regular basis and changes will be reported to the accreditation bodies within 30 days: 
a. Change in Primary Contact 
b. Change in Clinical Staff  
c. Change in Ownership 
d. New Company Name 
e. New Company Name - DBA (Doing Business As) 
f. Change in accredited sites – closure of site 
g. Change in site - addition of site 
h. Change in site - site relocations 
i. Change in site - site consolidations 
j. Change in books of business included in the scope of the survey - addition or deletion of book of 
business 
k. License Suspension 
l. License Probation; conditions/restrictions to license 
m. Non-compliance with Medicare/Medicaid regulations identified during survey by another regulatory 
body 
n. Revocation of Medicare/Medicaid/third party provider number 
o. Any open investigation by any regulatory or governmental authority to the extent the investigation 
relates to matters implicating accreditation standards. 
G. Professionalism in the use of digital media 
1. Use of the pharmacy’s electronic resources 
a. The pharmacy’s electronic resources, including all: servers, computers, printers, copiers, mobile 
devices, email, telecommunications, mobile applications, facsimile, software, on-line service 
accounts and the internet, are provided at the pharmacy’s expense, are the property of the pharmacy, 
and are to be used only for the purpose of conducting pharmacy business and the pharmacy-
approved uses. 
b. The use of social media, social networking, online gaming, online dating apps, streaming music, 
online TV/radio, and video sites inappropriately consume extensive resources, leaves our networks 
susceptible to viruses and spyware, and its use from the pharmacy’s provided resources is 
prohibited.  Additionally, these resources may not be used for commercial ventures, religious, 
charitable, or political causes, outside organizations, or other such non-job-related solicitations.  
These resources must not be used to advocate, further, or otherwise support any non-business 
activities, or illegal activities. 
c. The use of the pharmacy’s electronic resources to download, transmit, access, disseminate, display, 
store, publish, solicit, or purposely receive any inappropriate materials or engage in inappropriate 
conduct of any kind is prohibited.  The use of the pharmacy’s electronic resources to convey 
messages or information that could constitute unlawful harassment or discrimination of any kind, 
including sexual harassment or any unlawful activities, is prohibited. 
d. If the pharmacy provides an employee remote access to corporate systems through a provided means 
of remote access in a secure fashion, the following shall be prohibited with respect to such access: 
(1) Installing a modem, router or other remote access device on the pharmacy’s system without 
the approval of the IT Manager 
(2) Using remote access software not provided by the pharmacy 
(3) Split Tunneling to connect to an insecure network in addition to the corporate network or to 
bypass security restrictions 
e. Using non-OLOLH provided machines to access the corporate network.  All information processed 
on or through OLOLH’s electronic resources and infrastructure is to be treated as OLOLH’s 
property.  The confidentiality of sensitive information, including intellectual property or proprietary 
data, patient information, Human Resource information, complaints/investigations, and information  
PH.2466_Regulatory Compliance Program 
7 
subject to attorney-client or other legal privilege is to be securely maintained.  All users have a duty 
to maintain, protect, and respect the confidentiality of such sensitive information. 
f. It is not possible to identify every type of inappropriate or impermissible use of OLOLH’s electronic 
resources.  As a result, an employee must exercise their best judgment and common sense when 
using or accessing OLOLH’s electronic resources, contacting their manager if they are unsure.  
Misuse of OLOLH’s electronic resources, or the electronic resources of any of our hospital/business 
partners, may result in discipline, up to and including termination of employment. 
g. Use of personal electronic devices such as cell phones, smart phones/watches, music players, etc. 
should be used in a limited fashion for non-work-related reasons at the discretion of management 
and location personnel.  Use of personal devices should comply with all other aspects of the 
pharmacy’s policy, including but not limited to, inappropriate material and conduct as well as 
confidentiality of sensitive information. 
h. Employees should not expect privacy with respect to any of their activities while using any of 
OLOLH-provided electronic resources.  OLOLH reserves the right to monitor, inspect, or record, 
without notification, any files, sites, data, messages, or communications created, sent, received, 
deleted, downloaded, browsed, or stored through or on OLOLH-provided electronic resources. 
i. Please refer to Comp 08 001 Compliance Program for details.  Employees should contact their 
manager/supervisor if there are any further questions or contact the Compliance Officer directly. 
2. Social Media  
a. Below are guidelines for acceptable social media use.  Please note that this list is not all-inclusive 
and other social media issues may be addressed as needed at the discretion of management: 
(1) Post only appropriate and respectful content. 
(2) Maintain the privacy and confidentiality of patient health information in accordance with 
HIPAA laws.  PHI should never be shared on any social media platform. 
(3) Maintain the confidentiality of OLOLH’s trade secrets and private or confidential 
information.  Trade secrets may include information regarding the development of systems, 
processes, products, expertise, and technology.  Do not post internal reports, policies, 
procedures, or other internal business-related confidential communications. 
(4) Respect financial disclosure laws.  It is illegal to communicate or give a “tip” on inside 
information to others so that they may buy or sell stocks or securities.  Such online conduct 
may also violate the Conflict of Interest and Confidentiality Policy. 
(5) Do not create a link from your blog, website, or other social networking site to our website 
without identifying yourself as an OLOLH associate. 
(6) Express only your personal opinions.  Never represent yourself as a spokesperson for 
OLOLH.  If OLOLH is a subject of the content you are creating, be clear and open about the 
fact that you are an associate and make it clear that your views do not represent those of 
OLOLH, fellow associates, members, hospital partners, customers, suppliers, or people 
working on behalf of OLOLH.  If you do publish a blog or post online related to the work 
you do or subjects associated with OLOLH, make it clear that you are not speaking on behalf 
of OLOLH and make sure that you are not in violation of HIPAA or PHI requirements.  It is 
best to include a disclaimer such as: “The postings on this site are my own and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of OLOLH.” 
(7) Violation of any policy on social media will be considered a policy violation subject to 
disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
b. Employees should contact their manager/supervisor if there are any further questions or contact the 
Compliance Officer directly. 
3. Secure Electronic Communication with a Patient 
a. The pharmacy employees will communicate with patients using approved secure mechanisms to 
minimize the risk of disclosing PHI.  Communication definitions are as follows: 
(1) Verbal communication – Any form of verbal communication including in-person, phone, or 
cellular phone.  
PH.2466_Regulatory Compliance Program 
8 
(2) Electronic communication – Any form of communication with a patient using any electronic 
or digital device (excluding verbal communication).  Electronic communication would 
include, but not be limited to, e-mail or texting. 
(3) Approved electronic communication methods: 
(a) Use of any communication feature provided by OLOLH for OLOLH-provided phone 
applications; and 
(b) No other forms of electronic communication are approved for use with patients at this 
time. 
(4) Protected health information (PHI) – Under US law, PHI is any information about health 
status, provision of health care, or payment for health care that is created or collected by a 
"Covered Entity" (or a Business Associate of a Covered Entity) and can be linked to a 
specific individual.  This is interpreted broadly and includes any part of a patient's medical 
record or payment history. 
(5) Under HIPAA, PHI that is linked based on the following list of eighteen (18) identifiers must 
be treated with special care: 
(a) Names 
(b) All geographical identifiers smaller than a state, except for the initial three digits of a 
zip code if, according to the current publicly available data from the Bureau of the 
Census: the geographic unit formed by combining all zip codes with the same three 
initial digits contains more than 20,000 people; and the initial three digits of a zip code 
for all such geographic units containing 20,000 or fewer people is changed to 000 
(c) Dates (other than year) directly related to an individual 
(d) Phone numbers 
(e) Fax numbers 
(f) E-mail addresses 
(g) Social security numbers 
(h) Medical record numbers 
(i) Health beneficiary numbers 
(j) Account numbers 
(k) Certificate/license numbers 
(l) Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers 
(m) Device identifiers and serial numbers 
(n) Web Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) 
(o) Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers 
(p) Biometric identifiers, including finger, retinal, and voice prints 
(q) Full face photographic images and any comparable images 
(r) Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code except the unique code 
assigned by the investigator to code the data 
4. General Procedures include the following: 
a. Electronic communication (e.g., text or e-mail) with a patient is prohibited, including but not limited 
to, prescription refill requests, delivery coordination, benefits investigation, or care management. 
b. If a patient contacts the pharmacy employee by any unapproved form of electronic communication, 
the pharmacy employee must inform the patient that such communication is prohibited because it is 
not secure.  Alternate forms of communication should be offered including verbal communication or 
using an approved electronic communication method. 
c. If the electronic communication from the patient includes any PHI, it must be deleted immediately. 
5. Failure to comply with this policy may lead to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
H. All employees have access to the Code of Conduct. [URAC OPIN 2-4 (b)] 
1. All employees receive training on the Code of Conduct. 
a. Employees confirm understanding by completing an acknowledgement of Code of Conduct in the 
pharmacy Learning Management System. 
  
PH.2466_Regulatory Compliance Program 
9 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC Standards: DRX1-7A, DRX1-11A, DRX2-5A, DRX2-9A, DRX4-2I 
• URAC Standards: RM 1-1, OPIN 2-4, 2-5 
• Code of Conduct 
• HR.06.008_Corrective Action Policy 
• COMP 08 001 Compliance Program  
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  