 
PH.2453.001_Prescription Deliveries 
1 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Prescription Deliveries 
PAGES: 
7 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2453 (10/26/2021) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/31/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2453.001 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines the procedures to ensure that specialty prescriptions are packaged and delivered to patients 
appropriately as implemented on December 9, 2019. 
POLICY: 
A. The pharmacy ensures that a quality pharmaceutical product is received by the patient in a timely manner under 
controlled conditions. 
B. The pharmacy will provide optional prescription delivery service to specialty pharmacy patients.  
C. Prescriptions will only be delivered to patients residing in the State of Louisiana. 
DEFINITIONS: 
Authorized Designee – Patient selected and approved person to receive delivery of prescriptions on behalf of the 
patient.  
Cold Chain - a temperature-controlled supply chain.  An unbroken cold chain is an uninterrupted series of storage and 
distribution activities which maintain a given temperature range.  It is used to help extend and ensure the shelf life of 
products such as fresh agricultural produce, seafood, frozen food, photographic film, chemicals and pharmaceuticals. 
Such products, during transport and when in transient storage, are called cool cargo.  Unlike other goods or merchandise, 
cold chain goods are perishable and always in route towards end use destination, even when held temporarily in cold 
stores and hence commonly referred to as cargo during its entire logistics cycle. 
Specialty Prescriptions – medications that are high cost, high complexity, or require special handling or administration. 
Undue delay means that someone has to wait longer than a usual and customary time.  
Auxiliary Personnel: Personnel that support patient and liaison workflows.  This may include the following: 
Engagement Center personnel, Patient Support Center (PSC) personnel, and/or pharmacy technicians. 
PROCEDURE: 
A. The pharmacy is committed to providing its patients with accurate delivery of their prescriptions and educational 
materials through the use of barcodes as well as visual inspection and verification of information prior to delivery. 
The pharmacy will continually evaluate the effectiveness and accuracy of its delivery through monitoring of 
timeliness, delivery errors, turnaround time and payment responsibilities.  
B. The pharmacy makes every attempt to ensure prescriptions are delivered by the pharmacy, and received by the 
patient, as planned. Prior to delivering prescriptions or products to the patient, a pharmacy staff member will 
contact the patient to confirm the delivery date. The pharmacy will maintain a copy of the patient’s signatures, 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/31/2023 2:53 PM 
 
 
PH.2453.001_Prescription Deliveries 
2 
indicating receipt of the prescription. The signatures may be obtained through the delivery driver, on the delivery 
tickets, and by any written correspondence. [URAC P-MD 2-2 (a)] 
C. Delivery 
1. Delivery of prescriptions will be offered to patients during the initial intake process and with subsequent 
refills. 
a. Every attempt shall be made to expedite delivery of prescriptions. 
b. Patients, caregivers, Authorized Designees and/or prescribers are notified when medications and 
applicable equipment/supplies will be delivered. 
c. The pharmacy is focused on ensuring the patient receives their prescriptions and supplies, if applicable, 
prior to administration date. 
D. Evidence-Based Distribution Criteria  
1. Based on U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP) guidelines and manufacturer’s recommendations, medications are 
shipped in approved insulated containers with sufficient artificial ice and/or gel packs (based on vendor’s 
product stability guidelines with consideration of seasonal temperature and geographical location) and via 
same day or expedited (next day) delivery to maintain product integrity.  Patients will be advised of and 
consent to the anticipated delivery date prior to shipment. 
a. USP evidence-based distribution criteria unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer [URAC P-MD 
1-1]: 
(1) Ref rigerated products will be packed and shipped to maintain an appropriate temperature range 
between 2° and 8° C (36° and 46° F) [URAC P-MD 1-1 (a-i)] 
(a) Excursion data will be requested from the manufacturer, as necessary, if not already listed in 
the package insert. 
(2) Frozen products will be packed and shipped to maintain an appropriate temperature range 
between -25° and -10° C (-13° and 14° F) [URAC P-MD 1-1 (a-ii)] 
(a) The pharmacy does not dispense frozen products. 
(3) Controlled room temperature products will be packed and shipped to maintain an appropriate 
temperature range between 20° and 25° C (68° and 77° F) [URAC P-MD 1-1 (a-iii)] 
(a) The pharmacy uses evidence-based criteria to determine which room temperature 
medications are shipped under controlled room temperature. 
(b) Excursions between 15° and 30° C (59° and 86° F) are allowed; Provided the mean kinetic 
temperature does not exceed 25° C, transient spikes up to 40° C are permitted if they do not 
exceed 24 hours; Above 40° C only if specified by the manufacturer. 
E. The pharmacy ensures prescriptions are maintained under appropriate conditions of sanitation, light and 
temperature in the course of deliveries. All items are packaged as appropriate to size, security and convenience to 
patients.  Packaging methods ensure that drug stability, potency, integrity and proper temperatures are maintained 
throughout the delivery process.  
1. All products are delivered in an appropriately sized container, disposable insulated cooler, or sufficiently 
padded package. 
2. Light sensitive prescriptions are packaged in light resistant containers. 
3. Liquids are shipped in manufacturer sealed bottles or sealed in a zip top bag to prevent spillage. 
4. Prescriptions are packaged with tamper evident seals to deter potential theft.  
F. Tracking shipments: 
1. The pharmacy will track delivery through the use of delivery tickets. At any time during the delivery 
process, the pharmacy staff can contact the courier to obtain the location of the package.  Deliveries will not 
remain with the driver overnight. [URAC P-MD 2-2 (a)] 
G. P atients, Authorized Designees and prescribers, if necessary, are proactively alerted in the event their delivery will 
be delayed. Should the pharmacy staff or patient determine that a package has not arrived within the anticipated 
delivery window; the pharmacy staff will contact the patient and provider. [URAC P-MD 2-2 (a)] [URAC P-MD 
2-3 (b)]  
PH.2453.001_Prescription Deliveries 
3 
H. Patients/caregivers and prescribers, if necessary, are proactively alerted when an exception notice is received from 
FedEx or the courier. In the event of a delivery delay, the pharmacist will use available information from the drug 
manufacturer to determine if the product integrity has been compromised.  If so, the pharmacist will assist the 
patient with obtaining replacement product through an early refill approval by the payer, through manufacturer 
product replacement or through product replacement the pharmacy. Should the patient require immediate 
prescription service that cannot be fulfilled by the pharmacy for any reason, the pharmacist is responsible for 
assisting the prescriber and/or patient with locating a local pharmacy that can immediately dispense the needed 
prescription. If the delivery is lost, the pharmacy will expedite redelivery of the prescription or transfer the 
prescription to a pharmacy that can provide the prescription prior to the missed dose. [URAC P-MD 2-2 (b)] 
[URAC P-MD 2-3 (b)] 
I. Process Controls 
1. The pharmacy has implemented a program to manage its distribution process and uses a qualification testing 
plan to validate distribution criteria is met. 
2. The pharmacy is focused on ensuring the patient receives their medication and supplies, if applicable, in a 
timely manner to ensure the patient receives their medication prior to administration date.  The pharmacy 
liaison or auxiliary personnel will determine, upon receipt of a new order or a refill, the degree of need.  This 
will be assessed by: 
a. Therapy start date specified by the prescriber 
b. The quantity of medication the patient has on hand 
c. Any additional information from the prescriber 
d. Pharmacy liaison or auxiliary personnel will contact pharmacist if there are any questions regarding 
degree of need based upon clinical condition 
J. Packing and Shipping Procedures: [URAC P-MD 1-3 (a)] 
1. The pharmacy designs and implements packing and shipping procedures based on the distribution criteria 
and qualification testing results for each medication type and shall ensure the correct packaging is used for 
distribution of medications.  The correct process for packing will be based on vendor/product guidelines. 
a. Please see the Supply Chain Testing Log for current packaging instructions for medications. 
2. The pharmacy will package prescriptions to ensure stability during transit based on evidence-based USP 
guidelines and the manufacturer’s recommendation for temperature stability ranges. The pharmacy selects 
packaging products based on their ability to maintain the appropriate temperature range for 10 hours when 
shipped same day via courier and for 36 hours when shipped via FedEx to ensure that the prescription is 
stable during the delivery process.  
a. USP evidence-based distribution criteria [URAC P-MD 1-1]: 
(1) Refrigerated packaging is tested to maintain temperatures between 2° and 8° C for a minimum of 
10 hours when shipped same day via courier and for 36 hours when shipped via FedEx. 
(2) Room temperature packaging is tested to maintain temperatures between 20° and 25° C for a 
minimum of 10 hours when shipped same day via courier and for 36 hours when shipped via 
FedEx (see allowable excursions noted above in section D). 
K. The pharmacy will select modes of delivery based on the following factors: geographic area, weather conditions, 
temperature stability ranges of the prescriptions, delivery services available in their area, and patient, Authorized 
Designee or prescriber preference. The pharmacy will also keep reports on the delivery service via the complaint 
log.    
L. Qualification Testing 
1. The pharmacy has a validated distribution process that confirmed the truth or accuracy of the results can be 
proven or demonstrated and includes the following: 
a. Before new package use or current package modifications are implemented qualification testing will 
occur: 
(1) When the pharmacy elects to start using a new packaging product or a modification occurs with 
current packaging (e.g., when the shipping container or types and/or amounts of packing materials  
PH.2453.001_Prescription Deliveries 
4 
changes) for medication distribution, the pharmacy will conduct true ship qualification tests to 
validate the packaging products ability to maintain the appropriate temperature ranges per 
evidence-based USP guidelines and drug manufacturer’s recommendations. The pharmacy will 
follow the vendor’s packaging guidelines and packaging instructions to create the selected 
number of test packages.  [URAC P-MD 1-2 (a-i)] 
(a) At  least two (2) passing ship tests for each packing and shipping procedure will determine 
consistency and accuracy of the packing and shipping procedures used to meet the 
distribution criteria.  [URAC P-MD 1-2 (a-iii)] 
(b) Testing shall be conducted on all packaging products and sizes under different temperature 
profiles to ensure temperatures are maintained for the anticipated duration of shipment. 
(i) Testing for each temperature profile where medications are shipped will represent 
the extreme temperatures experienced at given locations. [URAC P-MD 1-2 (a-
ii)] 
(c) Q ualification testing will be monitored using continuous temperature monitoring devices.  
[URAC P-MD 1-2 (a-iv)] 
(2) Qualification testing plan [URAC P-MD 1-2]: 
(a) The pharmacy will place a continuous digital temperature data logging device inside each 
test package. As medications have different, appropriate temperature ranges (e.g., 
refrigerated, room temperature) the pharmacy will test different temperature profiles to 
ensure stability of the medications being shipped. See section D for temperature range 
definitions. 
(b) The pharmacy will then have these packages picked up by the shipping vendor(s) and will 
send the packages to preselected locations based on the temperature profiles the pharmacy is 
currently shipping to.  [URAC P-MD 1-2 (a-ii)] 
(c) Once the test packages reach their intended location(s) they will be shipped back to the 
pharmacy to be opened and the continuous data logging device will be checked, and the 
temperatures recorded. 
(d) If the temperatures are in the appropriate ranges per evidence-based USP guidelines and 
drug manufacturer’s recommendations, then the packaging test will be considered 
successful, and the pharmacy will move forward using the new or modified packaging 
products.  Qualification testing will be documented and will include [URAC P-MD 1-2 (a-
i)]: 
(i) Date shipped 
(ii) Package type/size 
(iii) Pack-out 
(iv) Time in distribution 
(v) Temperature results throughout shipment 
(vi) Location shipped to 
(vii) Outside temperature 
(viii) Delivery methods 
(e) As medications have different appropriate temperature ranges per manufacturer’s guidelines 
the pharmacy shall test each different temperature profile to ensure stability of the 
medications it is shipping. 
(3) Results of qualification tests will be reviewed and used to modify packing and shipping processes, 
as appropriate.  [URAC P-MD 1-2] 
(a) Successful tests are those which maintain the appropriate temperature range for the 
expected timeframe. Successful tests are documented, and results are officially approved in 
the next Quality Management Committee meeting (QMC). 
(b) Unsuccessful tests are those that did not maintain the appropriate temperature range for the 
expect time frame. When an unsuccessful test occurs the pharmacy will review the data, 
notes and/or pictures taken on the pack out prior to the test as well as any other factors that  
PH.2453.001_Prescription Deliveries 
5 
could have led to an unsuccessful test (ex. weather changes, user error, data logger 
calibration issues). The pharmacy will repeat the test using the same pack out. If a second 
unsuccessful test occurs the pharmacy can consult with the packaging vendor for tips and/or 
updated packaging procedures as well as adjust the pack out for additional tests (ex. add ice 
packs if the data showed the test package was too warm, bench warm ice packs longer is test 
showed the package was too cold). The pharmacy will continue to modify the pack out until 
several successful tests are achieved to determine consistency and accuracy. Employees will 
be trained on changes in pack outs and updated pack out guides will be posted in the 
pharmacy. 
(4) The pharmacy shall ensure successful qualification testing is completed prior to using any new or 
modified packing product. 
M. Distribution Auditing & Periodic Validation Testing [URAC P-MD 1-4 (a, b)] 
1. T he pharmacy will conduct audits on each packing and shipping procedure that has passed qualification 
testing at least annually for each temperature profile (i.e., winter, summer, spring/fall).  [URAC P-MD 1-4 
(a)] 
2. The pharmacy performs periodic ongoing testing following the same processes outlined in the qualification 
testing section. 
3. The results of the distribution audits will be documented in the Supply Chain Log. 
4. The pharmacy will review at least annually, and update as needed, packing and shipping procedures based 
on: [URAC P-MD 1-4 (b-i, b-ii)] 
a. Distribution auditing results 
b. Shipping complaints 
5. The pharmacy manager, or designee, will be responsible for reviewing both audit results and shipping 
complaints to determine if packing and shipping procedures need to be updated. Audit results and 
complaints will also be reviewed, at least annually, by the QMC. 
6. If updates are determined to be necessary 
a. Qualification testing on new or modified packages will be completed. 
b. Employees will be trained on new or modified packages [URAC P-MD 1-3 (b)] 
7. To maintain compliance with ACHC DRX7-9B ongoing periodic validation testing will continue to be 
performed. 
N. Training [URAC P-MD 1-3 (b)] 
1. The pharmacy will train employees that package and ship medications to ensure the correct process is 
followed.  Pack-out guides with the current packaging instructions are readily available in the area that 
packing, and shipping is completed and can also be found in the Supply Chain Testing Log 
a. Please see the Supply Chain Testing Log for current packaging instructions for medications. 
O. The pharmacy shall only use validated items listed on the Approved Packaging tab in the Storage and Shipping 
Log found on the Lake T Drive/Specialty Pharmacy/Proactive Risk Assessment/Storage and Shipping Log.  Items 
will be packaged according to the standard operating procedure (SOP) found on the Lake T Drive/Specialty 
Pharmacy/SOP folder.  
P. The pharmacy will train staff that package prescriptions to ensure the correct process is followed. The instructions 
for packaging are found in the SOP for shipping and packing schematics are posted at the packing station.     
Q. The pharmacy ensures packages maintain the appropriate temperature within drug manufacturer’s guidelines 
throughout the entire delivery process (i.e., not too cold and not too hot). This is achieved through periodic 
monitoring/testing of cold chain distribution process.  
R. Holding Shipments: [URAC P-MD 2-1 (a, b)] 
1. The pharmacy makes every effort to ensure patients and prescribers receive prescriptions orders on time. In 
certain occasions it is necessary for the pharmacy to hold the delivery of prescriptions as the prescriptions 
likely to arrive late and be unstable.   
PH.2453.001_Prescription Deliveries 
6 
a. Such cases are in the event of extreme weather and other expected delivery delays. The supervising 
pharmacist shall be responsible for checking forecasts weekly.  
b. The pharmacy shall consider the timing of expected weather, alternate delivery routes available as well 
as other available options when delaying shipments. A supervising pharmacist along with consultation 
of the courier will make the final decision to hold shipments if the expectation is the shipment will be 
delayed due to weather.   
c. In the rare case the pharmacy elects to hold the delivery, pharmacy staff will contact affected patients 
and prescribers to inform of the delay, determine if the patient will run out of prescription prior to the 
expected delivery date and, if so, arrange for the patient to receive prescriptions from a local pharmacy 
to ensure their therapy is not interrupted.  
S. Breakdown in the Distribution Process: [URAC P-MD 2-3 (a, b)] 
1. Occasionally, there is a breakdown in the distribution process that results in lost or stolen packages, delays 
in delivery causing the prescriptions to be unstable, damaged prescriptions and so on. It is the pharmacy’s 
priority to ensure the patient’s therapy is not interrupted if there is a breakdown in the distribution process.  
Should the pharmacy employees (or patient) determine that a package has not arrived within the anticipated 
delivery window, the pharmacy employees will contact the patient and provider, if necessary, and follow the 
below processes. 
a. Lost or Delayed Packages: The pharmacy will work with the shipping vendor to try to recover lost 
packages and resolve delays in delivery; a pharmacist is consulted to determine if the medication would 
still be stable if the package is recovered and delivered to the patient. If the pharmacist determines the 
prescription would be unstable, the pharmacy will have the package returned to sender and process a 
redelivery to ensure the patient receives stable prescriptions.  
(1) It is important to ensure records are maintained for medications or products dispensed with an 
incorrect address as well as those delivered to the wrong location despite having the correct 
address on the package.  Records will be reviewed to determine the dispensing accuracy rate for 
the pharmacy. 
2. Stolen Packages: The pharmacy processes a redelivery to ensure that the patient does not have an 
interruption in their therapy. The pharmacy will work with the patient’s insurance to receive reimbursement 
for the replacement prescription.  
3. U nstable Prescriptions: When the pharmacy receives a call from a patient or prescriber stating that they feel 
their prescriptions are not stable, the call will be immediately transferred to a pharmacist. The pharmacist 
will determine if the prescription is stable. If the pharmacist determines the prescription is unstable, the 
pharmacy will process a delivery as well as send out packaging to have the unstable prescription returned to 
the pharmacy.  
a.  Any shipping error, damage to the drug due to shipping, or any rejection of the specialty drug due to its 
condition on arrival or due to the timeliness of its arrival are at the Pharmacy’s sole risk.  
4. For all the above situations, the pharmacist consults available published literature and/or the manufacturer 
guidelines to determine stability. [URAC P-MD 2-3 (a)] 
5. Th e pharmacist will counsel a patient affected by lost, delayed, stolen, or unstable medication if needed to 
advise patient if it is possible to obtain the medication from an alternate pharmacy, what to do if a dose will 
be missed, or any other concerns the patient has. [URAC P-MD 2-3 (b)] 
a. Prescribers will be notified, as appropriate, of any resulting missed doses. 
T. Reviewing and Documentation: 
1. The QMC shall review the following on at least an annual basis unless other updates are necessary or when 
the packaging product is modified: 
a. Distribution auditing results 
b. Complaints, errors, or concerns related to shipments raised by patients or prescribers 
2. The results of testing and audits shall be documented, and the documentation retained for a minimum of five 
(5) years for accreditation purposes.  
PH.2453.001_Prescription Deliveries 
7 
3. Trends recognized from review of shipping complaints will be used to modify packing and shipping 
processes, as appropriate. [URAC P-MD 1-4 (b-ii)] 
a. The QMC reviews shipping complaints quarterly during QMC meetings.  If trends in shipping 
complaints are identified the QMC will work with pharmacy employees to update packing and/or 
shipping processes following the unsuccessful test guidelines above. 
4. Packing and shipping process instructions are reviewed based on distribution audits and shipping 
complaints. [URAC P-MD 1-4 (b-i, b-ii) 
a. The QMC reviews packing and shipping processes as well as complaints during quarterly QMC 
meetings. 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC Standards: DRX5-11B, DRX7-9A, DRX7-9B  
• URAC Standards: P-MD 1-1, 1-2, 1-3, 1-4, 2-1, 2-2, 2-3 
• Approved Delivery Materials and Delivery Standard Operating Procedure located in the Retail Pharmacy 
Teamlink folder>Delivery Packaging Requirements 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Sr. Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 