 
PH.2407_Controlled Substances and Drugs of Concern 
1
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Retail Pharmacy Controlled Substances and Drugs of 
Concern 
PAGES: 
8 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2407 (02/04/2019) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 10/21/2013 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/12/2020 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2407 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish controls related to ordering, receiving, prescribing, and dispensing controlled substances and drug of concern 
and documenting such activities. The pharmacies will continue t o follow federal and state-controlled substance laws and 
regulations. 
 
POLICY: 
In order to detect an intentional or unintentional breach of procedure in controlled substance handling, the pharmacies 
must establish a process for monitoring compliance with its pol icies and procedures that relate to ordering, receiving, 
prescribing, dispensing and administering controlled substances and drugs of concern and documenting such activities. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Controlled Substance or Controlled Dangerous Substance – any drug determined by the Louisiana State Board of 
Pharmacy and/or Federal Drug Enforcement Administration to have a potential for abuse and classified in drug schedule 
CI, CII, CIII, CIV, CV 
 
Drugs of Concern – any drug determined by the Louisiana State Board of Pharmacy and/or Federal Drug Enforcement 
Administration to be of concern due to potential to pose risks for those who abuse them. 
 
LIP – Licensed Independent Practitioners (physician, dentist, podiatrist, with a valid DEA registration specific to the 
State of which the facility is located and a State controlled substance registration is applicable). 
 
APP – Advance Practice Professional (physician assistant [PA] or advanced practice registered nurse. [APRN, CRNA, 
CNM]) 
 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
3/12/2020 2:33 PM 
 
PH.2407_Controlled Substances and Drugs of Concern 
2
PROCEDURE: 
Orders, Generally. Pharmacy acquiring controlled substances in Schedules I and II shall maintain a file of the duplicate 
copies of all order forms used to obtain controlled substances within these schedules. Each duplicate copy of any order 
form used to order controlled substances shall be kept in this file a minimum of two years from the date the order form 
was completed. This file shall be kept separate from the licensee's other business or professional records. These records 
shall contain the full name, address and license number of the supplier, the common or established name of the 
controlled substance, its dosage form and strength, the amount, and the date of receipt. The pharmacy does not purchase 
or dispense drugs in controlled substance class CI. 
 
Either a DEA Form 222 or its electronic equivalent is required for each distribution of a Schedule I or II controlled 
substance (except in certain circumstances), as outlined below: 
 
A. Ordering and Receiving Controlled Substances, Schedule II  
Ordering and receiving of C-II cont rolled substance may be comp leted by either of the two processes outlined in 
Section 1 (preferred) or Section 2 or a combination of both processes.   
 
 
Section 1: Use of the Controlled Substance Ordering System to Purchase Controlled Substances, Schedule II.  
Effective May 2005, the Drug Enfo rcement Agency (DEA) implement ed the Controlled Substance Ordering System 
(CSOS) which allows for a secured electronic transmission of co ntrolled substance orders (e222) without the 
supporting paper DEA Form 222.  Pharmacies will use the CSOS pr ocess for ordering controlled substances.  The 
efficiencies of the electronic ordering system make the system easy to use for most Schedule II (C-II) transactions 
while maintaining security requirements.  Use of the paper DEA Form 222 is allowed in emergency situations where, 
at the discretion of the pharmacist in charge, the use of Form 222 is necessary. 
a. The DEA Registrant, authorized CSOS Coordinator(s), and Powers o f  A t t o r n e y  ( P O A )  w h i c h  g r a n t  o r d e r i n g  
authority by the DEA Registrant may apply for CSOS Certificates . A CSOS Coordinator is required for each 
organization as the main point of contact for CSOS. The CSOS Co ordinator must be enrolled in CSOS before a 
POA application is processed; however, the CSOS Coordinator and  POA applications may be submitted at the 
same time.  
 
b. The CSOS regulations require the following persons to be identified: 
1) DEA Registrant – This is defined as the physical location applying for CSOS access and is represented by the 
individual who last signed/renewed a DEA 224 application. Hence f o r t h ,  t h e  t e r m  “ D E A  R e g i s t r a n t ”  o r  
“Registrant” refers to the aforementioned individual.  
2) CSOS Coordinator – A CSOS coordinator is required for each DEA Registration number enrolled in the CSOS 
program. The role of the CSOS Coordinator may be served by the Registrant, as mentioned above. If the 
Registrant does not serve the role of CSOS Coordinator then the CSOS coordinator may be any individual in 
the DEA Registrant’s organizati on and must have his/her CSOS ap plication signed by the Registrant. Only 
one Principal CSOS Coordinator and one Alternate CSOS Coordinator may be enrolled in CSOS for any one 
DEA Registration number.  Each DEA Registrant identifies a person to hold the DEA number, monitor license 
renewal, designate those employees eligible to order controlled  substances electronically, retain all digital 
certificates, and to manage these activities.  The DEA Registra nt shall convey this responsibility through a 
POA. 
3)  POA Designees – The DEA Registrant or CSOS Coordinator may ass ume this duty of ordering C-I and C-II 
controlled substances.  Alternativ ely, the CSOS Coordinator may  identify another employee as the primary 
designee. The primary designee must have a POA submitted to the  DEA for final authorization to order C-II 
controlled substances.  Additional staff may also be identified  to order C-II controlled substances in the 
absence of the primary designee, but the number of POAs will be limited based on the need of the pharmacy.   
PH.2407_Controlled Substances and Drugs of Concern 
3
Such ‘secondary designees’ must also have a POA submitted to th e DEA to be fully authorized to submit 
orders. 
 
c.   The CSOS Coordinator must submit all required documents to  the DEA for issuance of digital signatures to the 
individuals granted POAs and maintain a copy of each document submitted in a secure area in the Pharmacy or a 
secured location in areas without a Pharmacy. 
 
d.   Each individual granted a POA will be e-mailed his or her access code and the password delivered by U.S. mail.  
POA access codes and passwords must not be shared with any other persons.  
 
e.   With the digital signatures, the CSOS Coordinator must download the digital certificates from the DEA website to 
the facility-based computer.  One computer should be used for p lacing and receiving all CSOS orders.  This is 
important as records will be downloaded from the drug supplier website to the facility-based computer. This will 
include the order placed for the C-II controlled substances and  the receipt acknowledgment of the order.  The 
digital certificate files, order acknowledgment files, and rece ipt acknowledgment files must be saved to a secure 
server with limited access.     
 
f.   The CSOS Coordinator is res ponsible for notifying the facility’s drug supplier that the fa cility will place orders 
electronically for C-II controlled substances.  This includes a ccount setup for CSOS ordering at the drug supplier 
website.  It includes the creation of access to the drug supplier website for all staff with POA privileges. 
 
g.  Separation of Ordering/Receiving Functions – Ordering and receiving of controlled substances must be performed 
by different individuals unless mitigating circumstances preven t this from occurring.  In such instances, 
compensating controls shall be implemented (e.g., additional independent reviews, outside audits).  The pharmacy 
shall consider limiting the ordering and receiving authority of any controlled substance product to designated staff 
members, not all Pharmacy Department staff members. As part of CSOS use, both ordering and receiving must be 
done in the drug supplier website where available/ applicable.  
 
h.  The receiving process must include a reconciliation of cont rolled substances received against the packing slip or 
invoice.  The printed invoice must be signed and dated by the receiver indicating completion of this phase of receipt 
of product.  With the invoice signed and dated, the receiver or another staff member with POA access must receive 
the C-II controlled substances in the wholesale vendor website system when available. Completion of this activity 
will allow downloading of the receipt record into the facility computer for permanent storage.  A backup must be 
performed after each C-II controlled substance receipt into the facility pharmacy.  Note:  The receiver’s signature 
and dating of the invoice must be a separate action from the si gning of the invoice by the Director or authorized 
person approving payment for Accounts Payable. 
i. Record Keeping –the following four documents must be saved.  
1. e222 - When placing the CSOS order requisition (electronic 222)  print and save the form to the server 
before closing out  
2. Receipt of Invoice - When product is received in CSOS print and  save to server the Receipt of Invoice to 
the server  
3. Vendor Invoice - Save a copy of the vendor invoice to the server.  
4. Printed copy of Invoice with e222 
 
Section 2: Use of DEA Form 222 to Purchase Controlled Substances, Schedule I & II  
Authority to Purchase Controlled Substances.  Company-affiliate d facilities are required to specify the CEO, 
Administrator, or Practice Manager of the facility as the DEA r egistrant.  Duties associated with controlled substance 
ordering/management may be delegated by the Pharmacist in Charge.  
 
a. Control of and Access to DEA Form 222 (Schedule I & II Order Forms) – DEA Form 222 is the official form 
used to order controlled substances in Schedules CI & II from manufacturers, drug suppliers, or other sources.  
Upon receipt of DEA Form 222 ordering forms from the Drug Enforcement Agency, the Pharmacist in Charge  
PH.2407_Controlled Substances and Drugs of Concern 
4
must record each DEA Form 222 number onto a control log to docu ment all forms received into the facility.  
Unused DEA 222 forms shall be stored in a secured area, ( e.g., in the controlled substances vault or a locked 
drawer) accessible only by those individuals authorized to order controlled substances in Schedules I & II.  By 
Federal regulation, controlled substances in the Schedules III,  IV, and V do not require a DEA Form 222 for 
ordering.    
 
b. Pre-Signing DEA Form 222 – DEA Form 222 shall be signed by the authorized agent/attorney only as orders 
are placed.  Blank forms shall never be pre-signed in anticipation of future use. 
 
c. Execution of DEA Form 222 – In completing DEA Form 222, care sh ould be taken so that no erasures or 
alterations are made anywhere on the form.  If a mistake is made, void all copies of the form and maintain the 
voided copy in your records.  Only one item shall be ordered on a single line and the number of different items 
ordered shall always correspond to the “number of items ordered” entry on the form.  The Supplier’s Copy 1 
and DEA Copy 2 are sent to the drug supplier and Purchaser’s Copy 3 shall be retained in the pharmacy. 
 
d. Separation of Ordering/Receiving Functions – Check and balance systems shall be in place so that the ordering 
and receiving of controlled substances is performed by differen t individuals unless mitigating circumstances 
prevent this from occurring.  In  such instances, compensating c ontrols shall be implemented ( e.g. additional 
independent reviews, outside aud its).  The pharmacy should cons ider limiting the ordering and receiving 
authority of any controlled substance product to designated staff members, not all staff members.  
 
e. Reconciliation of Invoices/Packing Slips for Controlled Substan ces – The receiving process must include a 
reconciliation of controlled substances received against the packing slip or invoice accompanying the order as 
well as the DEA Form 222 ordering form.  On the “blue” copy (Pu rchaser’s Copy 3) of the DEA Form 222, 
the number of packages (sale unit of measure) received and date  received must be filled in.  Both the DEA 
Form 222 and the invoice must be signed and dated by the receiver.  Stapling the DEA Form 222 to the invoice 
or packing slip is permitted, if stapled together, the attached  documents must be stored together in a different 
location from all other DEA 222 ordering forms.  If the DEA Form 222 is not affixed to the invoice or packing 
slip, store the DEA Form 222 in a separate and independent loca tion from the invoice copy signed and dated 
by the receiver, and the packing slip signed by the receiver fo r Schedule II controlled substances.  Note:  The 
receiver’s signature and dating of the invoice must be a separa te action from the signing of the invoice by an 
authorized person approving payment for Accounts Payable. 
 
Section 3: Receiving of Controlled Substances [PHARM-OP 4b] 
a. Direct Delivery of Controlled Substances – All controlled subst ances shall be delivered directly to the 
Pharmacy Department in an area with camera surveillance. In areas that are not under camera surveillance, the 
receiving area must be accessible only to those authorized to h andle controlled substances. Controlled 
substances shall never be delivered through an intermediary, such as the Purchasing Department.   
 
b. Only authorized personnel shall be allowed to “receive” such or ders.  Exception: non-DEA designated 
controlled substances can be delivered with other non-controlle d substance medications.  Once the delivery 
reaches the pharmacy it must be received and entered into the n on-DEA designated controlled substance 
inventory. 
 
c. Immediate Resolution of Order Discrepancies/Shortages/Breakage – In case of any order discrepancy, shortage 
or breakage, the drug supplier must be notified immediately and  the incident documented on the packing 
slip/invoice. 
 
d. Inventory System for Controlled Substances – A perpetual invent ory system that assures accuracy of all 
controlled substances is required.  The inventory system will be computerized with manual system as a backup 
at the discretion of the Pharmacist in Charge. The Pharmacist i n Charge is responsible for the disposition of  
PH.2407_Controlled Substances and Drugs of Concern 
5
all controlled substances (e.g., all controlled substances received, dispensed to nursing units (if applicable), or 
returned to reverse distributors) is accurately tracked. 
 
e.  Annual Physical Inventory – the Louisiana Board of Pharmacy re quires a minimum annual inventory. For 
controlled and non-DEA designate d controlled substances, a full  manual inventory must be conducted. The 
inventory shall be signed and dated by the person conducting the inventory this annual inventory can be used 
for the DEA biennial inventory requirement.  
 
a. Monitoring Procedure for Ordering and Receiving Controlled Subs tances – The Pharmacist in Charge is 
responsible for monitoring the ordering and receipt of controlled substances. 
 
B. Transferring Controlled Substances 
a. A DEA Form 222 is required for each transfer of a schedule II controlled substance.   
 
b. Schedule III-V controlled substances must be documented in writing to show the drug name, dosage form, strength, 
quantity, and date transferred.  T he document must include the names, addresses, and DEA registration numbers 
of the parties involved in the transfer of the controlled substances.   
 
c. Non-DEA designated Controlled Substances must be documented in writing to show the drug name, dosage form, 
strength, quantity, and date tra nsferred.  The document must in clude the names and addresses of the parties 
involved in the transfer of the controlled substances. 
 
d. Transfer can occur only for the purpose of general dispensing to patients.   
 
e. The receiving facility/practitioner must be registered with the DEA.  
 
f. The distribution is recorded by the distributing party and by the receiving party.   
 
g. The total number of dosage units of all controlled substances d istributed by the facility/practitioner during each 
calendar year does not exceed five percent of the total number of dosage units of all controlled substances 
distributed/dispensed by the facility/practitioner during the same year. 
 
C. Prescribing Controlled Substances 
Prescribing of controlled substances is limited to a Licensed Independent Practitioner (LIP) or APP (Advanced Practice 
Professional) with controlled substance prescribing privileges that have been granted only if the practitioner has a 
verified and current DEA registration with an in-state address, as defined in Compliance Alert #028.  Additionally, an 
LIP or APP with controlled substance prescribing privileges must have verified and current state controlled substance 
registration when practicing in a State that requires registration. 
 
The pharmacy’s prescription forms for controlled substances adhere to the applicable requirements under Louisiana state 
law and are reviewed for compliance during the Board of Pharmacy’s annual onsite inspections. 
 
D.   Controlled Substance Distribution and Dispensing  
Ordering, distributing, and dispensing controlled substances will conform to all Policies and Procedures as well as all 
State and Federal regulatory requirements. 
 
a. Automated Dispensing Cabinet (ADC) System Monitoring [ PHARM-OP 4b] [PHARM-OP 8(a1,a2)] 
[PHARM-OP 14 (a3,a4)] 
1. A process must exist for matching controlled substances distrib uted to the ADCs with the inventory.  For 
example, the quantity of controlled substances distributed to each ADC, as documented in the cabinet system 
reports, shall be reconciled with the amount signed out on the Controlled Substance Perpetual Log.  
PH.2407_Controlled Substances and Drugs of Concern 
6
Monitoring of this process must be performed on two randomly se lected days each month. Reconciliation of 
the controlled substances ADC removal report with the ADC loaded/stocked report will suffice. In the case of 
facilities utilizing an automated controlled substance vault, this step would be replaced with daily monitoring 
of the ADC comparison report (e.g. Pyxis C-II Compare Report).   
2. Nursing must perform a weekly physical inventory of all control led substances in all ADCs including those 
pockets that were not accessed, or for cause.  
 
b. Security of ADCs 
ADCs can be accessed electronically through logon, BioID, and passwords and also physically through traditional 
locks and keys.   
 
1. Electronic Access – Only patient care staff members who have completed an authorization/access form and have 
had the form approved by the individual designated to approve such forms may remove controlled medications 
from the ADC.  The following healthcare providers may request a ccess to controlled substances based on their 
job description and competencies: LIPs, APPs, RNs, LPNs/LVNs, R egistered Pharmacists, Pharmacy 
Technicians, and other qualified staff as authorized by the fac ility.  Access shall be limited to areas that are 
needed to perform assigned duties and for the designated time period of the contract.  Any access to medications 
may be terminated at any time if policy infractions occur.   
2. Security of ADC (Strap Lock/Padlock): In addition to the ADC lo cks provided by the manufacturer, a padlock 
secures the rear of the cabinet.   
3. Physical Key Access –The existence and current location of all physical keys shall be determined and an 
inventory log must be maintained. Full key inventory shall be performed on a monthly basis.  
a. Pharmacy Management team shall retain all physical keys and log to the ADCs in a locked/secured location 
within the pharmacy. 
b. The physical keys shall only be issued to a staff member of the  pharmacy department at the time of need 
for the purpose of opening the ADC for department use or maintenance by authorized personnel.  
c. Pharmacy staff shall remain with  the ADC during the entire time  the cabinet is unlocked, unless all 
medications have been removed.  At no time is the pharmacy staff to relinquish possession of the key(s) to 
any other person outside of those staff within the pharmacy aut horized to use the key.  Keys shall not be 
given to maintenance/service personnel.   
d. Pharmacy shall take appropriate action to take possession of an y ADC keys found to be in the possession 
of anyone other than authorized pharmacy personnel immediately.  In addition to the ADC locks provided 
by the manufacturer it is recommended that strap locks/Padlock be placed on any ADC not physically 
attached to a wall.  
 
Theft or significant loss of Controlled Substances  
a.  Theft –Discovery of any theft regardless of amount must be rep orted to DEA, local law enforcement, and State 
regulatory agencies (e.g., board of nursing, board of pharmacy, board of medicine, etc.) immediately. 
 
b. Where circumstances of the theft are immediately known, a DEA Form 106, Report of Theft or Loss of Controlled 
Substances, shall be used to detail the circumstances of that t heft. When details concerning the specific 
circumstances surrounding the theft are unknown at the time of discovery, initial notice should be provided by 
faxing a short statement to local DEA advising of the theft. 
  
PH.2407_Controlled Substances and Drugs of Concern 
7
Significant Loss  
c. Where circumstances of significant loss are known, a DEA Form 1 06, Report of Theft or Loss of Controlled 
Substances, must be used to detail the circumstances of that significant loss. When details concerning the specific 
circumstances surrounding the loss are unknown at the time of discovery, initial notice must be provided by faxing 
a short statement to local DEA advising of the significant loss. 
d. When determining a loss is significant a registrant must consid er among others the following factors: the actual 
quantity of controlled substances lost in relation to the type of business, the specific controlled substance(s) lost, 
whether the loss can be associated with access by specific individuals, whether the loss can be attributed to unique 
activities that may take place involving the controlled substance(s), a pattern of losses, the potential for diversion, 
and local trends.  
 
e. Breakage, damage or spillage does not constitute a “loss of con trolled substances.”  In such situations, any 
recoverable controlled substance must be wasted following appropriate wasting procedures.   
 
E.     Prescription Monitoring Program (PMP) 
Each facility will comply with the Prescription Monitoring Program Act by submitting information of all outpatient 
prescriptions filled for controlled substances or drugs of concern in order to improve the state’s ability to identify and 
inhibit the diversion of these substances while not diminishing their appropriate use for legitimate medical purposes. 
a. The information will be submitted electronically through the us e of the pharmacy outpatient dispensing 
software no later than the next business day after the date of dispensing and will include: 
1. Prescriber information 
2. Patient information 
3. Prescription information 
4. Controlled substance or drug information 
5. Dispenser information 
b. The pharmacist in charge or designee is responsible for correct ions to the PMP report and resubmission of 
those corrections through the pharmacy outpatient dispensing software. 
c. A facility may apply for an exemption from submission if the fa cility does not purchase or dispense any 
controlled substances or drugs of concern.  If an exemption is granted by the Louisiana State Board of 
Pharmacy, that facility will post the exemption notice in a visible location and will be exempt from submission 
until the facility begins dispensing controlled substances or drugs of concern or if the exemption is rescinded 
by the board. 
d. The pharmacist in charge (PIC) of a facility may access the records of the PMP after successful completion of 
the required educational courses.   
1. The PIC, acting as supervisor, may authorize pharmacists as delegates to access PMP records. 
2. The PIC as well as all authorized  delegates will maintain indiv idual account credentials which are 
linked to the PIC/supervisor’s account. 
3. The PIC and delegates may review PMP records of patients, at th eir professional discretion, during 
the dispensing process. 
4. All policies regarding PHI will apply to access of the PMP records.  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
 URAC Standards: PHARM-OP 4, 8, 14  
 DRX5-18B 
 La. Admin Code. tit. 46, Pt LIII, § 2701 et seq. 
 Reporting Compliance Issues and Occurrences to the Corporate Office Policy, EC.025 
  
PH.2407_Controlled Substances and Drugs of Concern 
8
 HCA Medication Diversion Prevention Policy, CSG.MM.003 
 Substances Use in the Workplace Policy, CSG.MM.002 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 