 
PH.2433_Access to Services Performance Indicator 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Access to Services Performance Indicator 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2433 (02/07/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/29/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2433 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies.  This policy is required for pharmacies listed with NCPDP as a specialty pharmacy provider.  Pharmacies 
not listed with NCPDP as specialty pharmacy providers are encouraged to track these metrics for the purpose of quality 
improvement. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that the pharmacy has a performance indicator in place that focuses on patient access to services.  
POLICY: 
The pharmacy has processes in place to monitor, measure and collect data on patient access to services metrics.  
DEFINITIONS: 
Average abandonment rate is the percentage of calls offered into a communications network or telephone system – i.e., 
automatic call distribution (ACD) system of a call center – that are terminated by the persons originating the call before 
answer by a staff person. 
Average blockage rate is the percentage of incoming telephone calls “blocked” or not completed because switching or 
transmission capacity is not available as compared to the total number of calls encountered. Blocked calls usually occur 
during peak call volume periods and result in callers receiving a busy signal. 
Average speed of answer is the average delay in seconds that inbound telephone calls encounter waiting in the 
telephone queue of a call center before answer by a staff person. 
PROCEDURE: [URAC P-PSC 3-2 (a, b, c, d)] 
A. Description of Indicator and Threshold: 
1. The pharmacy adheres to the following operating requirements for telephone calls: 
a. Average abandonment rate of 5% or less;  
Interpretive note: Abandonment rate is measured as the percentage of calls that disconnect after 30 
seconds when an individual (live person) would have answered the call. For example, if there is a pre-
recorded message or greeting for the caller, the 30-second measurement begins after the 
message/greeting has ended. (On ACD reports, monitor calls that "drop" after 30 seconds.) 
b. Average blockage rate of 5% or less;  
c. Average speed of answer of 80% by a live person within 30 seconds;  
(1) Interpretive note: The speed of answer is measured starting at the point when an individual 
(live person) would have answered the call. For example, if there is a pre-recorded message 
or greeting for the caller, the time it takes to respond to the call (i.e., average speed of 
answer) begins after the message/greeting has ended. 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/29/2023 3:49 PM 
 
 
PH.2433_Access to Services Performance Indicator 
2 
B. Frequency of Activities:  Data is collected monthly and summarized quarterly. 
C. Responsibility:  The pharmacy manager has been designated the responsibility for collecting, tracking and 
trending data as well as presenting it to the Quality Management Committee (QMC) for review.  
D. Methods of Data Collect: Monthly auto generated report are sent from the telecommunication system to the 
pharmacy manager weekly and quarterly. 
E. Reporting: 
1. The QMC shall receive reports for the quarterly average of each metric at least quarterly.   
2. The QMC shall analyze data and identify performance trends on telephone metrics during quarterly QMC 
meetings.  Documentation of this review shall be found in the QMC meeting minutes. 
a. If the abovementioned goals are not met the QMC shall implement a Quality Improvement Project 
(QIP), or action plan designed to improve or correct identified problems as needed. 
F. Sample Size: 100% of all incoming calls  
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: P-PSC 3-2 
• ACHC Standards: DRX2-10F, DRX6-1A 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 