 
PH.2452_Proactive Risk Assessment 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Proactive Risk Assessment 
PAGES: 
2 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2452 (02/25/2020) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 07/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE:  
03/22/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2452 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies.   
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines the process to complete proactive risk assessments prior to dispensing new specialty devices and 
specialty medications.  This requirement applies to all specialty medications dispensed by pharmacies listed with 
NCDPD as specialty pharmacy providers. This policy applies to all pharmacies when dispensing drugs listed on the 
NIOSH hazardous medication list. 
POLICY: 
The pharmacy maintains an open formulary.  Proactive Risk Assessments are employed to examine the use of new 
products and the design of new services and processes in order to determine points of potential failure and what their 
effect would be before any error actually occurs. 
DEFINITIONS: 
None 
PROCEDURE:  
A. Proactive Risk Assessments URAC P-OPS 3-1 (c)] 
1. The pharmacy completes proactive risk assessments which assess risks associated with 
medications and medical devices before they are dispensed for the first time by the specialty 
pharmacy.  
2. It is the responsibility of the dispensing pharmacist to complete the proactive risk assessments 
on all new specialty medications and specialty medical devices. 
3. The dispensing pharmacist uses the Proactive Risk Assessment Template to document the risk 
assessment and once completed it is presented to the Quality Management Committee (QMC). 
4. Findings from the proactive risk assessment are used to train employees to reduce errors. 
 
B. Safety Literature and Error Prevention  
1. On an annual basis, the Pharmacist In Charge reviews published safety literature for prevention 
recommendations and best practices and is shared with the QMC during one of the quarterly 
meetings.  The intent of the safety literature review is to complement proactive risk assessments 
and collecting of errors in the facility to reduce medication errors and incorporate safety and 
error prevention recommendations into the pharmacy practice. We will review materials from 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
 
3/22/2023 1:03 PM 
 
 
PH.2452_Proactive Risk Assessment 
2 
ISMP (Institute of Safe Medication Practices) for our organization to review the latest 
developments to improve safety at our facility. [URAC P-OPS 3-1 (b)] 
2. The pharmacy shares safety and error prevention recommendations with employees at least 
annually through emails, huddles, safety literature, QMC meeting minutes and/or trainings. 
[URAC P-OPS 3-1 (d)] 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• Cross Reference: 
o https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2016-161/pdfs/2016-161.pdf 
• ACHC Standards: N/A 
• URAC Standards: P-OPS 3-1 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 