 
PH.2421_Scope of Pharmacy Services 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Scope of Pharmacy Services 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2421 (03/09/2023) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 11/11/2013   
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
11/27/2024  
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2421 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines the services offered by the pharmacy and the performance metrics used to evaluate the quality and 
effectiveness of services provided. 
POLICY: 
OLOLH owned pharmacies provide community retail and s pecialty pharmacy services for patients with medical needs 
and services the following disease states including but not limited to HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, Oncology (Oral), 
Dermatological Conditions, Gastrointestinal Inflammatory Conditions, Respiratory Conditions, Growth Hormone Disorders, 
Rheumatological Inflammatory Disorders, Osteoporosis, Blood Modifiers, Hyperlipidemia, Migraines, and Multiple 
Sclerosis. [URAC P-OPS 1-1 (a-ii)] [URAC PM 2-2 (a)] OLOLH owned pharmacies have dispensed medications only 
in Louisiana. [URAC P-OPS 1-1 (a-i)] OLOLH owned pharmacies promote medication accessibility and availability to 
consumers and will adjust its drug formulary and service area as patient eligibility requirements dictate. Continual 
evaluation of the drug formulary and service area will be performed to ensure adequate accessibility for patients. Should 
gaps be identified, the pharmacy will make the necessary improvements/additions to ensure pharmacy operational 
requirements are met and continue in its role as advocate for patient access to drugs. Patient satisfaction surveys and/or 
complaint logs are reviewed for information pertaining to types of pharmacy services offered, geographic area served; 
and promoting medication accessibility and availability to consumers in order to measure performance in these areas. 
OLOLH owned specialty pharmacies will provide all customers a description of services provided by the organization 
through the “New Patient Welcome Packet.” 
 
T
he scope of pharmacy services shall relate to the use of medications and diagnostic testing materials and shall be provided 
in accordance with laws, rules, regulations, contractual agreements and recognized standards and practice guidelines.   
 
DEFINITIONS: 
N/A 
PROCEDURE: 
A. SCOPE OF PHARMACY SERVICES: [URAC P-OPS 1-1 (a-ii)] 
 
• Assuring availability of staff necessary to provide pharmacy services 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
 
11/27/2024 8:35 AM 
 
 
PH.2421_Scope of Pharmacy Services 
2 
• Selection, procurement, and storage of medications (including maintaining an adequate medication supply). 
• Ordering medications based on Consults & verbal orders 
• Preparing/dispensing (including labeling) of medications. 
• Monitoring the effects of medications on patients (including monitoring for appropriate and safe medication 
use and therapy) 
• Monitoring adverse drug reactions 
• Providing medication information and education to patients and caregivers. 
• Participating in orientation, in-service education programs, and advisory role for staff, providers, patients 
and payers. 
• Meeting the needs of patient types and age groups served by the facility 
• Providing patient and family education including but not limited to: 
o Description of geographic service area 
o Information on how to contact the pharmacist 
o How to obtain prescription order status 
o How to obtain claims-related information 
o Whether the pharmacy is in or out of network and the difference in cost 
• Supervising all medication storage and preparation areas within the pharmacy. 
• Patient Management Program that offers consistent patient management, clinical staff that provide patient 
support and focus on patient adherence to therapy. The Patient Management Program will provide the 
appropriate education, support and communication to improve the patient’s self-management/adherence of 
their medication regime. These services will be provided by OLOLH owned specialty pharmacies only. 
 
B. All organizational staff will be instructed on the scope of services during orientation.  They will be provided with 
written descriptions of the service/care with detailed information. 
 
C. When access or availability of a medication is an issue, the pharmacy is able to provide alternative sources for 
patients to obtain their medications in the geographic area served by contacting a local pharmacy in order for the 
patient to receive their medication. [URAC P-OPS 1-1 (b)] 
 
D. The pharmacy measures actual performance compared to performance metrics established for its pharmacy 
operations. Performance metrics are defined in PH.2465_Patient Management Program Description and 
PH.2437_Quality Management Program Description. 
 
E. The pharmacy analyzes processes, patient and client satisfaction, and outcome trends that are directly related and 
relevant to quality and safety of services realized by the patient. Analysis includes review of relevant data to identify 
potential performance improvement opportunities and identification of barriers and potential interventions to address 
the issue. This process is completed during the Quality Management Committee (QMC) Meetings and is 
documented in the meeting minutes.   
 
F. The pharmacy implements action plans as necessary to achieve and maintain its pharmacy operations’ performance 
requirements. Action Plans are documented and monitored by the QMC.  
 
G. On at least a quarterly basis, the pharmacy reports on pharmacy operations performance to the QMC.  
 
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion.  
PH.2421_Scope of Pharmacy Services 
3 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: P-OPS 1-1, PM 2-2 
• ACHC Standards: DRX1-6B, DRX2-1A, DRX2-4A, DRX2-10F, DRX5-5A, DRX6-1A, DRX6-3F 
• PH.2465_Patient Management Program Description 
• PH.2437_Quality Management Program Description 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  
 