1 
PH.2430_Client and Referral Source Satisfaction 
 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Client and Referral Source Satisfaction 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2430 (10/26/2021) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE:  2/07/17 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
03/27/2023 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2430 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy assures that the pharmacy has a defined mechanism to collect client and prescriber satisfaction information 
in regard to services provided by the organization.  
POLICY: 
A. Acceptable means of obtaining client satisfaction information include, but are not limited to, client meetings, 
surveys, audits, credentialing processes and complaint/grievance tracking.   
B. All Client and Provider complaints are handled as deemed appropriate and in a timely manner with ongoing 
action plans if necessary. All complaints are documented on the compliant log. 
C. All complaints will be held in strictest confidence. Information, including the patient’s name, will be 
disseminated on a need-to-know basis only. 
D. A summary analysis of all client complaints are forwarded to Quality Management Committee (QMC) for 
review on at least a quarterly basis and development of corrective action plans when indicated.  
E. This policy applies to OLOLH owned specialty pharmacies only. 
DEFINITIONS: 
Client refers to any business-to-business transaction that involves an outside entity. 
Provider is a term used for health professionals who provide health care services, e.g., prescribers.  
PROCEDURE: [URAC P-PSC 2-2 (a, c)] 
 
A. Provider Satisfaction 
1. Description Indicator: 
a. Provider Satisfaction Survey 
2. Frequency of Activities: 
a. An outside agency distributes surveys on behalf of O’Donovan’s via mail once per year. 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
3/27/2023 10:08 AM 
 
2 
PH.2430_Client and Referral Source Satisfaction 
 
3. Responsibility: 
a. The pharmacy manager or designee has been designated the responsibility for receiving 
reports from an outside agency, tracking and trending data as well as presenting it to the 
QMC for review.  
 
4. Methods of Data Collection: 
a. An outside agency receives and reviews returned Provider Satisfaction Surveys. 
b. An outside agency assigns given values to level of satisfaction for each survey question.  
c. Results are tallied. 
d. Satisfaction survey ratings are calculated and an outside agency shares reports with the 
pharmacy.  
 
5. Threshold/Goals: 
a. The pharmacy will review all results for all survey questions. 
b. The goal will be determined after the first set of surveys are received and reviewed and 
will be an overall percent satisfaction rate.  
c. If goals are not achieved, there will be a written plan of correction. 
d. If goals are set by the pharmacy, they will be re-evaluated if acceptable limits are not 
met on a consistent basis as the goal may have been set too high.  
 
6. Sample Size: 
a. 100% of Completed Surveys received by an outside agency.  
 
7. Reporting: [URAC P-PSC 2-2 (c)] 
a. The QMC shall receive reports at least quarterly. 
b. The QMC shall analyze data and identify performance trends on telephone metrics 
during quarterly QMC meetings. Documentation of this review shall be found in the 
QMC meeting minutes.  
(1) If the abovementioned goals are not met, the QMC shall implement action plans 
designed to improve or correct identified problems as needed. 
 
8. Criteria for Evaluation: 
a. Survey Questions: 
(1) Overall ease of referral process 
(2) Pharmacy ability to answer questions 
(3) Our ability to partner with your practice to manage patient drug therapy. 
(4) Timeliness of getting patients started on new medications 
(5) Provides your patient with a better care experience 
(6) Please rate your satisfaction with the ease of speaking with a pharmacist at the 
specialty pharmacy 
(7) What is your overall rating of our practice? 
(8) Please rate your overall service satisfaction with our pharmacy 
(9) What do you like about the specialty pharmacy? 
(10) How can the specialty pharmacy provide better care for your patients? 
(11) If you would like to be contacted about your experience, please leave your 
name and email address 
b. Scale 
(1) Very Good (5) 
(2) Good (4) 
(3) Neutral (3) 
(4) Poor (2) 
(5) Very Poor (1) 
(6) Does Not Apply (N/A) 3 
PH.2430_Client and Referral Source Satisfaction 
 
 
9. Pharmacy or Clinic Survey Drop Off Procedure: 
a. From time to time, a provider may elect to drop off a completed survey at the pharmacy 
or in clinic to a liaison. If this occurs, the completed survey should be mailed to the 
outside agency at the address provided on the survey.  
 
10. Complaint/Incident Process 
a. The pharmacy will obtain client and provider satisfaction through review and analysis 
of all client and provider complaints.  
b. If a complaint or grievance is received that involves patient care, it will be addressed 
according to policy PH.2464_Patient Complaint Process Policy 
c. If the complaint does not involve patient care, the staff member receiving the complaint 
will complete a complaint form including: 
(1) Date 
(2) Caller  
(3) Description of the complaint 
(4) Information about the business or patient involved 
d. The staff member will forward the complaint to their immediate supervisor to determine 
actions needed to address and resolve the problem. When resolution is accomplished the 
Complaint Form will be filed in the designated file for review by the Quality 
Management Committee. 
e. In the event that the complaint cannot be resolved and review by the Quality 
Management Committee is required, the client will be notified verbally or in writing 
with the date of the next Quality Management Committee meeting. 
f. At the conclusion of the review by the Quality Management Committee, the client or 
provider will be notified in writing regarding the outcome of the investigation with a 
resolution statement that this would be the final review process for the complaint and 
there are no complaint appeal options.  
g. A summary of all complaints will be reviewed by the pharmacy manager at least 
quarterly. Information from these complaints/grievances will aid in addressing areas for 
improvement as well as the period required to resolve the complaints effectively.  
h. All complaints/grievances will be documented, and copies of Complaint responses shall 
be maintained by the pharmacy manager.  
                      
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• URAC Standards: P-PSC 2-2 
• ACHC Standards: DRX6-1A, DRX6-3C 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  