 
PH.2455_Adverse Events 
1 
 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT: 
Retail Pharmacy/Community Pharmacy 
SUBJECT:  
Adverse Events 
PAGES: 
3 
REPLACES POLICY (NUMBER/DATE): 
PH.2455 (03/27/2023) 
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE 
DATE: 02/07/2017 
REVISIONS EFFECTIVE: 
11/25/2024 
POLICY NUMBER:  
PH.2455 
 
SCOPE: 
Applies to team members who work in or for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc. (OLOLH) retail/community 
pharmacies. 
PURPOSE: 
This policy outlines adverse events and the adverse drug event reporting process. 
POLICY: 
A. An adverse event is an unexpected occurrence involving death or serious physical or psychological injury of a 
patient/consumer, or the risk of such of occurrence. Serious injury specifically includes loss of limb or function. 
Adverse events signal the need for immediate investigation and response.  
B. All adverse drug events will be documented, investigated, and resolved in a consistent and timely manner in order 
to ensure quality patient care.  Documentation of adverse drug events are submitted through the health system 
electronic reporting tool (RLDatix) as described in PH.2450 Quality and Error Management. 
DEFINITIONS: 
Adverse Event is a clinical occurrence that is inconsistent with or contrary to the expected outcomes. An adverse event 
or adverse drug reaction is unexpected in normal therapeutic use and may cause life-threatening conditions. An adverse 
drug event (ADE) shall be defined as any medication error, potential adverse drug event, or an adverse drug reaction 
(ADR) 
Medication error is any preventable event that may cause or lead to inappropriate medication use or form while the 
medication is in control of the healthcare professional or patient. This may include prescribing errors, dispensing errors 
or medication administration errors  
Potential adverse drug event (PADE) is a mistake in prescribing, dispensing, or planned medication administration that 
is detected and corrected through intervention, by healthcare worker or patient, before actual medication administration  
Adverse drug reaction (ADR) is an unintended physical reaction to a drug when it is used in the approved manner.  An 
allergic reaction and an idiosyncratic reaction are also considered ADR’s.  Side effects are not included in this definition. 
PROCEDURE: [URAC P-PSC 1-3 (a)] 
A. Th e goal s of this policy are:  
1. to have a positive impact in improving patient care; 
2. to focus attention on understanding the causes that underlie the event; 
3. to reduce the probability of a reoccurrence of the event in the future; 
4. to increase the general awareness and enhance strategies for prevention 
B. When adverse events occur in a health care organization, it is necessary that appropriate individuals within the 
organization be aware of the event; investigate and understand the causes that underlie the event; and make changes 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE HOSPITAL 
 
 
 
11/25/2024 4:32 PM 
 
 
PH.2455_Adverse Events 
2 
in the organization's systems and processes to reduce the probability of such an event in the future. The leaders are 
responsible for establishing processes for the identification, reporting, analysis, and prevention of adverse events 
and for ensuring the consistent and ongoing implementation of a root cause analysis. A standardized reporting 
mechanism will be employed:  
1. ADEs can be reported to the pharmacy via telephone or in person. The pharmacy provides a New Patient 
Welcome Packet to all patients which includes pharmacy contact information and guidance on when to 
contact the pharmacy to report any issues or concerns. Should a patient or another healthcare provider report 
an ADE, it will receive the highest priority level until resolved.  
2. All ADEs will be referred to a pharmacist for appropriate follow-up; 
3. Forms will be thoroughly and accurately completed with factual, specific, and objective information so that 
the circumstances can be critically evaluated; 
4. All clinically significant ADEs will be communicated to the prescribing physician immediately; The 
pharmacy will contact prescribers to inform them of adverse events reported by patients or caregivers.  
5. If the ADE is an ADR, new information (i.e., allergy) must be immediately documented in the patient’s 
medical record. 
C. Adverse Events that are subject to review by advisory boards and accrediting bodies include: 
1. an occurrence or event which results in an unanticipated death; or 
2. an event in which major permanent loss of function (not related to the natural course of the patient's illness 
or condition) occurs  
D. When such an event occurs, Pharmacy is expected to prepare a thorough and credible root cause analysis and action 
plan within 45 calendar days of the event or of becoming aware of the event. The organization may submit the 
written analysis and plan to its accrediting body at its discretion and as advised by their legal counsel.   
E. If  a pplicable, a detailed analysis shall be compiled which includes a possible plan of correction and a process for 
quality improvement or the discussion will take place during Quality Management Committee meetings. Pharmacy 
will conduct a root cause analysis which:  
1. focuses primarily on systems and processes, not on individual performance; 
2. progresses from special causes in clinical processes to common causes in organization processes; 
3. identifies changes which could be made in systems and processes that would reduce the risk of such events 
occurring in the future; 
4. is thorough and credible 
F. Pharmacy, as it provides patient/consumer care in the delivery of medical equipment and rehabilitation 
technological services, utilizes the FDA Med-Watch criteria in establishing its definition and reporting requirement 
of adverse events. [URAC P-PSC 1-3 (a)] 
1. The following are reportable adverse events:  
a. Death -when a medication causes death or contributed to the death of a patient; 
b. Life-threatening - when a medication may have resulted in the death of a patient if use of the medication 
had continued; 
c. Hospitalization - when the medication caused or contributed to the hospitalization of a patient; 
d. Disability -when a medication may have caused or contributed to a permanent injury or impairment of 
the patient; 
e. Intervention - if medical or surgical intervention was necessary to preclude permanent damage due to 
the use of the medication. 
G. The Pharmacy Manager will be notified when a reportable adverse event occurs, and appropriate action will be 
taken.  
H. All adverse events will be reported to the Quality Management Committee (QMC) for review and    analysis. The 
Pharmacy Manager will complete an FDA Med Watch Report on severe or previously unrecognized ADEs and 
send these to the FDA (www.FDA.gov/medwatch) and ISMP (Institute for Safe Medication Practices) when 
appropriate. [URAC P-PSC 1-3 (a)]  
Note:  The information described herein does not create any legal rights and FMOLHS reserves the right to deviate 
from, revise or eliminate this policy, at any time, in its sole discretion. 
  
PH.2455_Adverse Events 
3 
STATUTORY/REGULATORY AUTHORITY: 
• ACHC Standards: DRX6-1A, DRX6-3F 
• URAC Standards: P-PSC 1-3 
• PH.2450 Quality and Error Management 
 
ATTACHMENTS:  
N/A 
 
Policy Oversight by: 
Senior Director of Pharmacy for Our Lady of the Lake Hospital, Inc.  