OO-HR-E-027 
Page 1 of 2 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Administration and 
Personnel 
Title: Electronic Devices Policy Reference #: PH0112 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Review Date: 11/4/2024 
Last Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE 
To establish guidelines for the appropriate use of: 
▪ Personal cell phones, pagers and text messaging devices at work in an “on-stage” area 
▪ Cellular phones equipped with digital photo capability 
▪ Musical equipment 
 
POLICY 
OLOL telephone equipment 
1. OLOL recognizes that employees will occasionally need to place and receive personal phone calls 
during the workday. However, personal phone calls during working hours distract employees from 
their job responsibilities and may be disruptive to coworkers.   
2. Personal calls should be placed/received in a non-public or non-patient care area while the employee 
is either on a scheduled break or lunch. 
 
Use of personal cell phones, pagers and text messaging devices at work 
1. While at work, employees are expected to exercise the same discretion in using personal cellular 
phones, pagers and text messaging devices as is expected for the use of company phones. 
 
3. If a personal cellular call must be made or received while the employee is on OLOL premises, the 
call is to be made/received in a non-public or non-patient care area. For example, break rooms are 
appropriate; hallways, lobbies, and nursing unit stations are not.  Appropriate environment to receive 
or place calls during shift would be in the pharmacy break area, away from the general work 
environment. 
 
2. All personal cell phones, pagers and text messaging devices are to be kept in silent mode while 
employees are on duty.  Sending or receiving personal text messages should never be allowed to 
interrupt or interfere with the employee’s work at hand. 
 
3. OLOL will not be liable for the loss of personal cellular phones brought into the workplace. 
 
All photo equipment 
1. In addition to the above guidelines, cellular phones equipped with digital photo capability are subject 
to the provisions of OLOL policy OrgClin/023 - Photographing Patients.   
 
2. Under no circumstances is it appropriate to photograph without consent. 
 
Musical/Video equipment 
1.  While at work, listening to music in the pharmacy department is permissible but limited with the 
following guidelines OO-HR-E-027 
Page 2 of 2 
• It is not distracting to the performance, concentration and focus of the individual and 
other team members 
• Ear buds are not allowed (reference policy PH-0104 Dress Code) 
• Volume is kept low as to not disrupt other team members 
• Must not contain sexual, racial, profane, derogatory, hostile or vulgar content 
• Viewing video (i.e., sporting events, movies, television, etc.) is restricted to the 
breakroom area during lunches and breaks 
 
Enforcement 
1. Employees will be held accountable for their actions under OLOL disciplinary procedure. 
 
2. Appropriate disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment, may be taken against 
any OLOL employee who violates this policy.   
 