   
 
 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Administration & 
Personnel 
Title: Pharmacy Time and Attendance Policy Reference #: PH-01-06 
Supersedes #: PH-02-13 
Date of Origination: 02/01/2012 Last Date Reviewed: 01/06/2025 
Last Date Revised: 01/11/2022 
 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Leader: For purposes of this policy, the term “Leader” refers to the employee of FMOLHS (Franciscan 
Missionaries of Our Lady Health System)  or its Affiliate with direct authority over the individual team 
member. Leaders generally hold titles such as director, manager or supervisor. 
 
Scheduled Absence: A team member’s absence is only considered a scheduled absence if the team member 
requests time off on time and approval is granted. 
 
Unscheduled Absence: A team member adds an unscheduled absence if he/she calls -in per the reporting 
procedures described in this policy but has not obtained approval for time off in advance. If a team member 
does not call in by the end of his/her scheduled shift, the absence will be considered a No Call/No Show 
Absence. Repeated or excessive Unscheduled Absences will be treated as a disciplinary matter. 
 
Tardiness: A team member is tardy if he/she clocks in, or, in the case of a team member not needed to 
clock-in, starts work more than f ifteen (15) minutes after his/her scheduled start time. A team member 
who does not clock-in but is present for a shift will be considered tardy. At the Leader’s discretion, a tardy 
team member arriving so late as to be disruptive or redundant to the operation, may be sent home and the 
incident considered an unscheduled absence. Repeated  or excessive tardiness will be treated  as a 
disciplinary matter. 
 
Holiday Dates (see definition below) are those dates where requests for PTO may be limited in order to 
allow as many employees to be off as possible. 
 
TAS: Time & Attendance System that collects actual time entered by the employee using the computer or by 
the timekeeper using software approved by the Organization. The data is later transferred to the payroll system 
where employees are paid for the hours recorded. 
 
Timekeeper: A person chosen by the Pharmacy Leader to edit and review missing punches, employee sick 
leave, vacation and other paid absences daily.  
 
Scheduler: A person responsible for approving time off in a manner consistent with these guidelines, which 
balance the operational and service delivery needs of the department with the time off preferences of the staff 
member. 
Incremental Overtime: Any overtime created because the employee came in early or left late during 
the pay period that may result in greater than the approved work schedule.    
 
 Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. All employees are expected to report to their assigned work areas prepared to work at their 
scheduled times. 
II. Employees are responsible for accurately recording time worked in the hospital’s timekeeping 
system (e.g., Timekeeping by Kronos). Employees who are not timekeepers or approvers are not 
allowed to record hours worked by another employee in the hospital’s time keeping system. Such 
conduct is subject to corrective action. 
III. Excessive failures to clock in or out by any employee are subject to corrective action. 
IV. Overtime must be approved by the employee’s immediate supervisor. Unapproved overtime is 
subject to corrective action. 
V. Employees are responsible for electronically reviewing and approving their individual timecards 
by the designated deadline set by the Organization. The exception is when employees are on 
approved leave. In this instance, time is approved by the Leave Office. 
VI. Employees with discrepancies in their timecard must submit requests for correction s to 
timekeepers using a form chosen by the department. 
VII. Timekeepers are responsible for reviewing time corrections slips given to them prior to the 
designated deadline for time approval. 
VIII. Employees must abide by the organization’s policy on meals and breaks (see Org/HR/S/004). 
Failure to do so will result in corrective action. 
IX. PTO will be used for all scheduled and unscheduled absences on a shift. 
X. Staff members carrying PTO balances may not opt to take unscheduled absences without pay in 
lieu of PTO to save banked PTO. 
XI. In the event a staff member is not needed due to low workload, that staff member may be sent 
home at the discretion of the supervisor. PTO use in this situation is optional for the employee. 
XII. Request for scheduled time off must be given to the scheduler at least 4 weeks prior to the posting 
of the schedule covering the requested dates. Holiday coverage is predetermined at the beginning 
of each year and does not need to be requested. 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A. Requesting corrections to the timecard 
I. Employees must fill out a time correction sheet for corrections to be made to the timecard for 
any of the following reasons: 
• Missed time punch or skipped lunch 
• Used Incorrect clock code 
• Attended training or workshop 
• Timekeeping system is down 
II. The correction sheet must be signed by the team member’s immediate supervisor. If he or she 
is not present or was not present during the period in question, the charge pharmacist or charge 
technician may sign the employee’s time correction sheet . The time correction sheet with all 
required signatures must be turned in to the timekeeper before the pay period closes. 
    
 
 Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 4 
B. Failure to Clock in or Out 
Non-exempt employees must properly record their time worked by using the TAS to clock in and 
clock out. Repeated failures to clock in or out are not acceptable and may result in corrective action 
(see Org/HR/E/001). 
 
C. Gaining approval for planned PTO 
I. Pharmacy management reserves the right to deny time off requests which may have an adverse 
effect on pharmacy operations or cancel previously approved time off requests if unexpected 
circumstances arise which require the staff member’s attendance at work. 
II. Time off requests will generally be honored by the date they are received. The number of 
employees off at the same time is up to pharmacy management. Requests or a pattern of 
requests for days off on consecutive weeks of work may be denied if they create a disruption 
to the staffing schedule (e.g., requesting every Wednesday off on a scheduled week to work). 
III. “Holiday” dates are considered the week of Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year’s as well 
as the week of Mardi Gras. If an employee has received time off the previous year during the 
“holiday” period, then precedence may be given to the employee that has not received holiday 
time the previous year. The employee that received time off the previous year may be asked to 
select alternative days. If the scheduler is unable to accommodate any alternative times, the 
request may be denied. 
IV. Team members are strongly encouraged to submit requests for time off at least 30 days in 
advance of the earliest date requested. R equests with shorter notice may be honored if 
workflow allows, but the team member will be asked to coordinate coverage for any openings 
created.   
 
D. Unplanned PTO 
I. Employees unable to report as scheduled due to illness or accident must notify the shift 
supervisor as soon as they are aware of  the need for their absence, but not less than 2 hours 
prior to their scheduled reporting time. 
II. In case of illness or emergency preventing the staff member from reporting to work for periods 
exceeding one (1) day, the staff member must contact the supervisor or charge pharmacist each 
day no later than 2 hours prior to the start of the shift. 
 
E. Entering PTO 
I. When entering approved PTO time, the following pay codes should be used 
• FMOLHS Holiday 
• FMOLHS PTO Scheduled 
II. When entering unapproved absences (e.g., ≤ 3 sick days, suspensions, other planned absences), 
the FMOLHS PTO Unscheduled pay code should be used. 
 
 
 
F. Employee Approval 
By approving the timecard, an employee attests to the best of their knowledge that his/her information 
is complete and correct. The employee is responsible for any inaccuracy or omission of which he/she 
is aware of at the time the time the time the time the timecard is approved. 
    
 
 Policy Reference Number 
Page 4 of 4 
Errors caused by the employee or an employee’s failure to check for and correct errors will be dealt 
with individually and may not result in a special check. If this occurs, the time may be included on the 
next regular payroll. Corrections after the pay period closes should be submitted in writing as soon as 
they are discovered. 
 
G. Time Management 
I. Timekeeper Responsibilities 
• When a discrepancy is noted in the TAS, the Timekeeper should review the submitted 
time correction slips. In the absence of a time correction slip, the Timekeeper should 
contact the employee to obtain a completed time correction form. No time corrections 
may be made without a corresponding time correction slip approved by management. 
• At the end of the pay period, the Timekeeper should review each employee’s time 
verifying the following: 
a. Any time corrections must have a note including the reason for the correction 
b. All vacations and unscheduled absences must use PTO. 
c. Vacations without PTO  that have been approved by pharmacy leadership  
should be coded as ABE 
 
II. Scheduler Responsibilities 
The scheduler(s) responsibilities include: 
• Entering the schedule in the TAS by appointed cut off 
• Publishing open shifts 
• Approving any shift swaps between employees 
• Publishing open graveyard vacations and coverage 
 
H. Monitoring Attendance 
Late arrival, early departure, and other absences from scheduled work hours are disruptive to 
departmental operations, impact quality and safety of patient care, and place an unfair burden on other 
team members. Team members are expected to report to work as scheduled, on time, prepared to start 
work, and to remain at work for their entire shift.  
Attendance will be checked using the Occurrence System and corrective action associated with any 
attendance issues will be  managed as  outlined by the Organization (see FMOLHS Attendance - 
SJM20180202). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 