 PH-01-11 
Page 1 of 3 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Administration and 
Personnel 
Title: Security of Staff and Medications Policy Reference #: PH-01-11 
Supersedes #: PH-20-01-O 
Date of Origination: 07/01/2000 Last Date Reviewed: 05/15/2024 
Last Date Revised: 02/06/2020 
 
POLICY: 
 
Security of the pharmacy and medication storage areas shall be maintained in accordance with federal 
laws, the laws of this state, and local laws.  All personnel on duty shall protect pharmacy assets and records 
and guard against the theft or diversion of medications. 
 
LOCKING OF PHARMACY AREAS 
All areas occupied by the pharmacy shall be capable of being locked by key, combination or electronic 
door lock, so as to prevent access by unauthorized personnel by force. 
 
RESTRICTED ACCESS TO THE PHARMACY (TRAFFIC CONTROL) 
Only pharmacy or authorized personnel shall be permitted to have free access to the pharmacy.   Medical 
staff, nursing service, administrative, housekeeping, and other facility personnel are authorized admission 
in conjunction with their duties . The pharmacy shall limit nonessential traffic (e.g., by medical service 
representatives, visitors, and others). 
 
RESTRICTIONS ON ACCESS BY SURVEYORS AND INSPECTORS 
Surveyors (e.g., CMS and JCAHO), inspectors (e.g., OSHA and State Board of Pharmacy), other agents 
(e.g., Drug Enforcement Administration) may have access to the pharmacy and pharmacy areas in the 
course of their official business.  Pharmacy staff should require these individuals to show official evidence 
of their affiliation. 
These individuals shall be permitted to examine pharmacy records  where necessary and as approved by 
the Pharmacy Department Leader.  However, records may be copied or removed from the facility only if 
approved by the administration of the facility.  The individuals who copy or remove records shall furnish 
the pharmacy with a complete list of the records copied and removed and a receipt for the records removed. 
 
PHARMACY LOCK-UP PROCEDURES 
Pharmacy lockup procedures shall ensure that medications are secure,- and that the pharmacy is free of 
hazardous conditions.  Lock-up procedures include but are not be limited to ensuring that: 
• Controlled drugs are secure  PH-01-11 
Page 2 of 3 
 
• Confidential material is secure 
• Cash is secure 
• Water is turned off 
• Nonessential lights and electrical equipment are turned off 
• The door is locked 
 
TESTING OF SECURITY ALARMS AND EQUIPMENT 
Pharmacy security alarms and equipment, if installed, will be tested regularly. 
 
MEDICATION STORAGE AND MEDICATION PREPARATION AREAS 
Security of medication storage areas shall be maintained in accordance with federal laws, the laws of this 
state, and local laws. 
Medications are stored to prevent diversion, contamination, pilferage, or theft.  Medications are secured 
so that unauthorized personnel cannot obtain access (locked or under constant surveillance). 
 
PROTECTION OF MEDICATIONS AND RECORDS 
All personnel on duty should protect medications and records and guard against the theft or diversion of 
medications. 
PRESCRIPTION PADS/BLANKS CONTROL 
Prescription pads/blanks shall be kept in locked storage or be otherwise not accessible to patients, visitors, 
and unauthorized staff.   
 
REQUIREMENT FOR LOCKABLE STORAGE 
Lockable storage units or lockable medication carts, if necessary, should be provided for medication 
storage areas throughout the facility.  Medications shall be kept in locked storage or be inaccessible to 
patients, visitors, and unauthorized staff. 
 
ACCESS TO MEDICATION STORAGE AREAS 
Access to medication storage areas is limited to pharmacy personnel and persons authorized to handle and 
administer these medications. 
Medical staff, nursing service, administrative, housekeeping, and other personnel are authorized access to 
medication storage areas only in conjunction with their duties. 
 
SECURITY BREACHES 
Break-in, theft, or unexplained loss of medications shall be reported, in accordance with applicable federal  PH-01-11 
Page 3 of 3 
 
and state laws. 
 
THEFT OR BREAK-IN 
If there is a theft or break-in, the Pharmacy Department leader shall be notified immediately  and -shall 
ascertain the loss, if any. 
REPORTS 
The Pharmacy Department leader will make reports to: 
• Chief Executive Officer or a designee 
• DEA regional office, if appropriate 
• The agency responsible for controlled medication regulation in this state, if appropriate 
• The Louisiana Board of Pharmacy 
• Local police, if appropriate 
REPORT FORMS FOR CONTROLLED DRUGS 
Thefts or suspected thefts of controlled drugs shall be reported to the DEA on DEA Form-106.  Copies of 
this report shall be retained in the pharmacy. 
 