 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Patient Care 
Services 
Title: Resolution of Conflicts Related to Drug 
Therapy 
Policy Reference #: PH-02-12 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 10/01/2010 Last Date Reviewed: 06/06/2024 
Last Date Revised: 02/07/2020 
 
PURPOSE:  This policy is to describe a clear process to resolve conflicts in drug therapy and to ensure all patients receive safe and 
timely drug therapy. 
 
 
DEFINITIONS:  None 
 
 
POLICY:   
I. Resolution of conflicts related to drug therapy will be approached and resolved in a systematic and standardized manner 
that ensures timely delivery of safe and effective drug therapy. 
II. Pharmacists are responsible for documenting order clarifications and recommendations as interventions in the 
organization’s electronic medical record. 
III. Any issues not resolved within a scheduled shift should be communicated to the incoming pharmacist verbally and in the 
form of documented interventions   
 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
A. Incomplete or unclear medication orders 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 3 
a. If a pharmacist is unable to interpret a medication order, the prescriber must be contacted for order clarification.  Orders 
transcribed by nursing where clarification is needed, the pharmacists may contact that nurse to obtain the clarification 
from the physician.   
 
B. Potentially harmful therapy 
a. If the pharmacist suspects that the use of any of the elements of the prescribed drug therapy may pose more harm than 
benefit to a patient, he/she must pursue the matter in the following fashion: 
i. Research the issue before contacting the ordering physician so concerns can be clearly communicated and based 
on facts, not opinion.  If the time needed to gather information may result in delays in therapy and subsequent 
harm to the patient, the prescriber must be contacted immediately to discuss the matter.  
ii. Request supporting documentation (protocols, journal articles, etc.) from the prescriber to verify the safety of the 
order when appropriate. 
iii. If the prescriber is a medical resident  or mid-level practitioner and there is further concern that the order may 
cause significant harm, the attending must be contacted. 
iv. If the pharmacist still has concerns about drug therapy despite the above efforts and the physician has not changed 
the order, consider whether more significant harm would result from administering the drug than from 
withholding it.  Tell the attending you must contact your immediate supervisor before dispensing the medication 
if you feel more harm would result.  The responsible pharmacist would then contact their immediate supervisor 
and provide all information acquired for the order.   If the immediate sup ervisor of the location cannot resolve 
directly with the prescribing physician, then proceed to steps below.   
 
1. If the immediate supervisor agrees that withholding the drug is the safest action, and is unable to resolve 
directly with the prescribing physician, then he/she will discuss this information with the  Pharmacy 
Department Leader responsible for that area and/or facility where the issue is occurring.   
2. If both agree to withhold therapy the Pharmacy Department Leader will contact the attending physician 
for the patient to discuss further action or appropriate steps to provide care for the patient.     
b. Do not request or allow the physician to give the drug himself when a concern for patient safety remains unanswered.  
Patient safety is not served by attempting to transfer responsibility to the physician for any patient harm resulting from 
drug administration. 
 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 3 
 
REFERENCES:   
 
The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards: MM04.01.01 Medication Orders are Clear and Accurate.  EP The hospital 
has a written policy that defines the following: Actions to take when medication orders are incomplete, illegible, or unclear.  
 