 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Patient Care 
Services 
Title: Clozapine Dispensing & Monitoring  Policy Reference #: PH-02-20 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: April 24, 2014 Last Date Reviewed: 3/13/2024 
Last Date Revised: 07/17/2023 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center is compliant with the monitoring and 
reporting requirements outlined by the Clozapine Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) 
Program as required by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 
 
DEFINITIONS:  
The Clozapine REMS Program provides a centralized point of access for prescribers and pharmacies to 
enroll and manage patients on clozapine as well as certify before prescribing and dispensing clozapine. 
The purpose of the Clozapine REMS Program is to minimize the risk of severe neutropenia associated 
with the use of clozapine.    
 
POLICY: 
I. The inpatient pharmacy is enrolled in the Clozapine REMS Program which allows the pharmacy 
to purchase and dispense clozapine. In compliance with the Clozapine REMS program, the pharmacy 
staff must enroll in the program to complete required eligibility checks before dispensing clozapine. 
 
II. Psychiatrists with privileges at the hospital and psychiatric residents must be certified with the 
Clozapine REMS Program to prescribe clozapine.  
 
III. Patients must be enrolled in the Clozapine REMS Program to receive clozapine while inpatient. 
 
A. If a patient is not enrolled and the provider is not a psychiatrist, a consult to psychiatry or 
a certified prescriber must be initiated by the ordering prescriber to enroll the patient before they 
are eligible to receive clozapine.  
 
IV. Prescribers ordering clozapine for the continuation of patient’s home therapy while receiving 
inpatient care will not be required to become certified with the Clozapine REMS program if the patient 
is already enrolled in the program.  
 
V. Pharmacists must complete an eligibility check through the program website or by calling the 
contact center prior to dispensing clozapine. Patients prescribed clozapine as a continuation of home 
therapy must be registered in the Clozapine REMS Program. Pharmacist must complete an eligibility 
check through the program website or by calling the contact center prior to dispensing clozapine. 
A. Effective November 19, 2021, FDA temporarily suspended certain Clozapine REMS 
Program requirements. While this guidance is in effect, FDA does not intend to object if: 
Commented [CE1]: Added per Dr. Tynes 
Commented [CE2]: Added per Dr. Tynes 
Commented [MBL3]: I think Dr. Tynes wanted this 
reworded so that it didn’t sound like a psychiatry consult 
needed to be placed on every clozapine patient, unless that is 
what the beginning of the sentence is serving. If that’s the 
case, ignore this comment 😊 
Commented [CE4R3]: So if the patient is not enrolled in the 
program, then the patient will need to be enrolled by 
psychiatry or the ordering physician will have to become 
certified to prescribe.  
Formatted: Font color: Auto Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
1. Pharmacists dispense clozapine without a REMS dispense authorization (RDA) 
that checks for patient enrollment and an updated Patient Status Form. 
2. Pharmacists may use their clinical judgement to dispense clozapine if a patient is 
not yet enrolled in the modified REMS or if a Patient Status Form hasn't been submitted. 
3. Prescribers should continue to use the Patient Status Form as appropriate and 
submit the form monthly. 
4. Wholesalers ship clozapine to pharmacies and health care settings without 
confirming enrollment in the REMS. 
B. Abrupt discontinuation of clozapine can result in significant complications for patient 
treatment. Health care professionals should use their clinical judgment with regard to prescribing 
and dispensing clozapine to patients with an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) within the 
acceptable range. 
 
 
VI. Pharmacists will use the “Clozapine REMS Eligibility Fact Sheet for Inpatient Pharmacist” 
issued by the Clozapine REMS Program as guidance in determining the appropriateness in dispensing 
clozapine.  
 
A. If the eligibility check is not successful, the pharmacist must contact the prescriber and/or 
psychiatrist. A certified prescriber must then enroll the patient in the Clozapine REMS program 
using the Clozapine REMS Program website to continue with therapy. 
 
B. If the eligibility check warrants applying clinical judgement, the pharmacist will contact 
the prescribing physician to either consult psychiatry or to get prior approval before dispensing 
the medication.  
 
VII. A baseline complete blood count (CBC) with differential must be ordered prior to dispensing 
clozapine. If a baseline CBC with differential is not ordered, a pharmacist will order one to be obtained 
within 24 hours of clozapine being ordered. If ANC is not received within 24 hours, contact prescribing 
physician for clinical judgement on whether to dispense or not.  
 
VIII. Pharmacy will monitor the absolute neutrophil count (ANC) in accordance with the ANC 
monitoring schedule as outlined by the Clozapine REMS Program. Pharmacy can report the results by 
using the program website or calling the contact center. 
 
IX. The inpatient pharmacy will maintain electronic monitoring forms for all patients receiving 
clozapine therapy. Monitoring forms will be documented in patient chart by opening an intervention 
under the “Evaluation of High Risk” type and attaching to the clozapine order. 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
Clozapine REMS Program. www.clozapinerems.com. Accessed January 26, 2022  
 
SUPPORTING DCOUMENTS 
 
Clozapine REMS Eligibility Fact Sheet for Inpatient Pharmacist  
Formatted: Font color: Auto
Formatted: Font color: Auto
Formatted: Font color: Auto
Formatted: Outline numbered + Level: 2 + Numbering
Style: A, B, C, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at:
 0.5" + Indent at:  0.5"