 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Clinical 
Title: Automatic Renal Dose Adjustment Policy Reference #: PH-02-18 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: November 2011 Last Date Reviewed: 01/06/2025 
Last Date Revised: 07/05/2022 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure that medications that require renal dose adjustment are reviewed by a pharmacist and adjusted 
according to manufacturer recommendations and the most current clinical literature. 
 
DEFINITIONS:  
 
Renal dysfunction: For the purposes of this protocol, renal dysfunction is defined as calculated 
creatinine clearance (CrCl) less than 50 mL/min. 
 
Current serum creatinine:  a creatinine level drawn within 30 days of admission 
 
POLICY: 
I. Renal function will be assessed by a pharmacist prior to verification of medication orders. Dose 
adjustments will be made as needed upon initial order verification. 
II. Creatinine clearance (CrCl) will be calculated based on the Cockroft-Gault equation.  It will be 
used to determine all dose adjustments of medications. 
III. If a medication that pharmacy is approved to adjust per protocol by the Pharmacy and 
Therapeutics committee requires renal adjustment and a current serum creatinine is not available 
nor scheduled to be drawn in the next 24 hours, a pharmacist will order a routine Renal Function 
Panel (RFP) to be drawn now/with AM labs (depending on urgency). A report of targeted 
medications that require renal dose adjustment will be generated and reviewed by a pharmacist 
daily.   A pharmacist will review the patient’s medical record to determine the indication for use 
of the medication. 
IV. Targeted medications will automatically be adjusted as defined by the Renal Dosing protocol 
approved by the Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T) Committee.  Prescribers will be contacted to 
discuss dose adjustment for all other medications requiring dose adjustment not included in the 
protocol. 
V. Protocol-related changes will be entered into the electronic medical record with an order mode of 
“Per Protocol”. 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
See References listed on the Protocol 