 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Patient Care 
Services 
Title: Patient and Family Education Policy Reference #: PH-02-01 
Supersedes #: PH-03-01-C 
Date of Origination: 05/19/2005 Last Date Reviewed: 07/05/2024 
Last Date Revised: 07/04/2022 
  
POLICY: 
 
The pharmacy shall provide education to patients and their families upon request.   
 
MEDICATION EDUCATION 
Pharmacists, nurses, discharge counselors, qualified dietetics services personnel, and other 
qualified and competent personnel may educate patients on medications and food -drug 
interactions.  Physicians may reserve the right to personally provide education  to their own 
patients.  Pharmacy shall provide medication-related educational information in the course of their 
duties to personnel who provide patient medication education. 
 
DRUG-FOOD INTERACTION EDUCATION - PROCEDURE 
Nursing, pharmacy and dietary personnel may provide Food/Drug interaction education.  If 
Food/Drug interaction counseling has not been provided, nursing may request the pharmacy or 
nutrition service department provide this counseling prior to discharge.  Prior to the patient's 
discharge, the educator will instruct the patient, patient's family and/or caregiver about the 
medication, potential drug -food interac tions and diet restrictions.  The authorized healthcare 
provider instructing the patient will docume nt the education in the Medical Record.  A listing of 
food-drug interactions may be provided in the admission packet for every patient admitted to  an 
OLOL facility.  In the event this list is damaged or misplaced, copies can be available for nursing 
units, the dietary department, and in the pharmacy department. 
 
DISCHARGE COUNSELING 
 
Prior to discharge, the facility shall counsel patients and families on the safe, effective, and 
appropriate use of medications to be taken following discharge.  Physicians, pharmacy, nursing, 
and qualified others shall cooperate in providing medication counseling. 
 
HOW TO REQUEST PATIENT EDUCATION SERVICES 
 
Patient education may be requested through a consult to pharmacy in the Medical Record software 
or verbally to the pharmacist. 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PATIENT AND FAMILY EDUCATION FORMATS 
 
Patient and family education may be provided by literature and/or direct communication to 
individual patients and/or family members, or groups of patients and/or family members. 
 
GOALS OF PATIENT AND FAMILY MEDICATION EDUCATION 
 
The goals of patient and family medication education include, as appropriate: 
 
• To educate on specific medications and drug classes 
• To educate concerning the need to take medications as ordered 
• To improve patient compliance 
• To assess side effects that may interfere with the patient's ability to function 
• To assist the patient in tolerating unavoidable effects 
• To encourage attitudinal adjustments about medications to improve compliance with 
medication therapy regimens after discharge 
• To educate chemical dependent patients on medications that will not compromise their 
sobriety 
• To improve quality of life 
• To answer patient and family questions regarding medications 
 
INFORMATION INCLUDED IN PATIENT AND FAMILY MEDICATION EDUCATION 
 
Patient and family medication education shall include written or verbal instruction on the 
importance of correct use of medications to be taken during the patient's stay and following 
discharge.  Education may include but shall not be limited to: 
 
• Identity of the medication and how it works 
• The drug class and other medications in the class 
• Intended benefits 
• How and when to administer the medication 
• Side effects 
• Allergies 
• Precautions 
• Contraindications 
• Significant drug-food and drug-drug interactions  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• What to do in case of a missed dose 
• Storage requirements 
 
DOCUMENTATION OF EDUCATION 
 
Patient education shall be documented as required by the facility policy.  Records documenting 
patient education shall be maintained in the patient’s medical record. 
 
Action Upon Refusal to Take the Medication -- The educator shall notify the prescriber if the 
patient refuses to take the medication based on the information provided. 