 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Patient Care 
Services 
Title: Intravenous to Oral Automatic 
Substitution 
Policy Reference #: PH-02-23 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: May 8, 2014 Last Date Reviewed: 6/3/24 
Last Date Revised: July 6, 2022 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for conversion of intravenous (IV) medications to enteral routes when clinically 
appropriate.  
 
POLICY: 
 
I. A report of patients receiving targeted medications will be generated and reviewed by a 
pharmacist daily. 
II. A pharmacist will confirm the available routes of administration for patients prior to 
conversion of targeted medications by reviewing the medical record and/or by contacting the 
patient’s provider or nurse. 
III. Targeted medications will be converted to oral or enteral routes once criteria defined by the 
Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T) Committee-approved IV-to-PO protocol have been met. 
IV. Protocol-related changes will be entered into the electronic medical record with an order type 
of “Per Protocol” and a note in the comment field stating, “Automatic IV to PO conversion 
per P&T approved protocol”. 
V. Prescribers will be contacted to discuss IV to PO conversion for all other targeted step-down 
medications meeting criteria for adjustment. Prescriber-approved changes made to these 
medications will be entered with an order type of “telephone read back” and routed for 
physician signature. 
VI. When patients do not meet the eligibility criteria listed below, a pharmacist will continue to 
evaluate the patient daily until they are eligible or discharged, whichever occurs first. 
VII. Pharmacists will adjust enteral medications to the dosage form most appropriate and/or 
accessible based on the available enteral access (oral or enteral tube). 
VIII. The pharmacist will ensure that the bioavailability is equivalent between dosage forms. 
a. Prescribers may specify “do not interchange” in the administration instructions or 
note to pharmacy field of the order to have the medication be exempt from this 
protocol. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
I. Patients will be converted to oral or enteral therapy unless one or more of the following 
exclusion criteria are met:    
a. NPO status that includes medications 
b. Post-pyloric enteral tube (Dobhoff, J tube) 
c. Inability or difficulty swallowing AND no enteral access  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 3 
d. Continuous tube feedings that cannot be interrupted. This only applies only to drugs 
that bind to enteral formula. 
e. Continuous nasogastric (NG) tube suctioning 
f. NG tube residuals greater than 500mls that occur twice or more in a 24-hours  
g. Nausea or vomiting & use of an antiemetic in the previous 24 hours 
h. Active GI Bleed 
i. Mucositis 
j. Diagnosis of short bowel syndrome, ileus, or partial/total gastrectomy 
k. Shock with vasopressor use in the previous 24 hours 
l. Wernicke /Korsakoff Syndrome (IV thiamine only) 
m. Myxedema Coma (IV Levothyroxine only)  
II. Anti-epileptic medications will only be converted to oral formulations if the patient is seizure 
free for greater than 24 hours 
III. Methocarbamol injection can be used for 24 hours before it is eligible for conversion to oral 
therapy.  
IV. Patients receiving antimicrobial therapy will be deemed eligible for IV to PO conversion if 
they satisfy the above criteria for IV to PO conversion in addition to the following: 
a. Afebrile (or max temperature of less than 100.4°F in the past 24 hours) 
b. Normal white blood cell (WBC) count (less than 11,000 cells/µL) or improving 
which is defined as WBC less than 15,000 cell/uL and a decrease by 2,000 cells/uL in 
the previous 48 hours 
c. Non-neutropenic (ANC > 500) 
d. Received greater than or equal to 24 hours of IV antibiotics 
e. Documentation of clinical improvement  
f. The infection does not require IV antibiotic treatment 
i. Infections requiring IV antibiotic therapy include: 
1. CNS infections (e.g., meningitis, brain/spinal abscess) 
2. Orbital cellulitis 
3. Endocarditis 
4. Mediastinitis 
5. Osteomyelitis 
6. Gangrene 
7. Bloodstream infections due to Staphylococcus, Pseudomonas, 
Enterococcus, or Candida 
8. Endophthalmitis 
9. Cystic Fibrosis exacerbation 
10. Empyema 
11. Neutropenic fever 
12. Pancreatic necrosis or abscess 
 
REFERENCES: 
1.  Lourenco R. Enteral feeding: Drug/nutrient interaction. Clin Nutr. 2001; 20(2): 187-93. 
2. Gilbar PJ. A guide to enteral drug administration in palliative care. J Pain Symptom Manage. 
1999; 17: 197-207. 
3. Lacy CF, Armstrong LL, Goldman MP, et al., eds. Drug Information Handbook. 15th ed. 
Hudson, OH: Lexi-Comp; 2007.  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 3 
4. Pelz RK, Lipsett PA, Swoboda PA, et al. Enteral fluconazole is well absorbed in critically ill 
surgical patients. Surgery. 2002; 131-534-40.  
5. Oosterheert JJ, Bontent MJM, Schneider MM, et al. Effectiveness of early switch from 
intravenous to oral antibiotics insevere community acquired pneumonia: multicenter randomized 
trial. BMJ. doi: 10.1136/bmj.38993.560984.BE. Published November 7, 2006.  
 
 
Supporting Documents: 
See IV to PO conversion protocol 