 PH-03-01 
Page 1 of 5 
 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Medication Use, 
Storage and 
Handling 
Title: Medications: Medication Use 
Improvement Plan 
Policy Reference #: PH-03-01 
Supersedes #: PH-10-01-O 
Date of Origination: 07/01/2000 Last Date Reviewed: 05/15/2024 
Last Date Revised: 5/23/2022 
  
POLICY: 
 
Medical staff, nursing service, pharmacy, management and administrative staff, and other departments, services 
and individuals shall participate and collaborate in medication use improvement activities. 
 
FOCUS OF MEDICATION USE IMPROVEMENT ACTIVITIES 
 
Medication use improvement activities shall focus on one or more of the following processes.  Emphasis shall be 
on the effective, appropriate, and safe use of medications. 
 
• Selection, procurement, and storage of medications (e.g., ensuring their integrity and security) 
• Ordering/prescribing medications (e.g., improving the clarity of medication orders and preventing duplicate 
medication therapy, adjusting dosing and routes of administration to provide optimal patient outcomes and 
reduce adverse events) 
• Dispensing/preparing medications (e.g., reducing pharmacy dispensing errors and ensuring timely delivery 
of medications). 
• Administration of medications  (e.g., reducing medication administration errors and improving medication 
administration techniques) 
• Monitoring the effects of medications on patients  (e.g., improving the detecting, reporting, and assessing of 
adverse drug reactions and less than optimal patient outcomes). 
 
PRIORITIES 
 
If specific medications are targeted, the emphasis should be on medications that are: 
• Frequently prescribed 
• Known or suspected of presenting a significant risk to patients 
• Known or suspected to be problematic 
• A critical component of care provided for a specific diagnosis, condition, or procedure 
   PH-03-01 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
 
 
 
CRITERIA 
 
If specific medications are targeted, medication use improvement activities may include the use of criteria against 
which medication use can be compared.  Criteria may describe the absence of critical structures, processes, 
desirable outcomes, and undesirable outcomes. 
 
COLLECTION OF DATA 
 
Data may be collected from pharmacy patient profiles, patient medical records, laboratory reports, adverse drug 
reaction reports, medication administration records, and other sources. 
 
EVALUATION OF CARE 
 
Medication use shall be evaluated when important single events or variances occur and when patterns and trends 
signal opportunities to improve the quality of medication use. 
 
SELECTION/PROCUREMENT/STORAGE OF MEDICATIONS 
 
The pharmacy shall monitor the selection/procurement/storage of medications.  The pharmacy shall review the 
findings, identify problems to resolve or processes to improve, and work within the framework of the 
organization-wide performance improvement program to improve the processes. 
 
ORDERING/PRESCRIBING MEDICATIONS 
 
The pharmacy shall monitor the ordering/prescribing of medications. The pharmacy shall review the findings, 
identify problems to resolve or processes to improve, and work within the framework of the organization -wide 
performance improvement program to improve the processes. 
 
PREPARING AND DISPENSING MEDICATIONS 
 
The pharmacy shall monitor the preparing and dispensing of medications and shall document pharmacy 
dispensing errors (e.g., those related to accuracy and contraindications).  The pharmacy shall review the findings, 
identify problems to resolve or processes  to improve, and work within the framework of the organization -wide 
performance improvement program to improve the preparing and dispensing of medications. 
 
ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATIONS 
 
The pharmacy shall cooperate with nursing service to monitor and document medication administration errors.  
The pharmacy shall participate as necessary in the review of medication administration errors to help identify 
problems to resolve or processes to improve, and work within the framework of the organization -wide 
performance improvement program to improve the administration of medications. 
 
  PH-03-01 
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
 
 
 
MONITORING THE EFFECTS OF MEDICATIONS (PATIENT MEDICATION MONITORING) 
 
The pharmacy shall cooperate with the medical staff and nursing service to monitor the effects of medications.  
The pharmacy shall participate in the facility's adverse drug reaction reporting program to help identify problems 
to resolve or processes to im prove, and work within the framework of the organization -wide performance 
improvement program to improve the detection and reporting of adverse drug reactions and to reduce the 
incidence of adverse drug reactions. 
 
ACTIONS TO IMPROVE MEDICATION USE 
 
The facility shall systematically improve its medication use processes.  Actions to improve medication use 
include, but are not limited to, the following: 
 
• Revising processes 
• Providing educational programs 
• Informing facility staff through newsletters and memoranda 
• Developing, revising, and approving policies and procedures 
• Establishing formulary and prescribing restrictions 
• Developing standardized medication therapy protocols 
• Implementing therapeutic substitution policies 
• Requiring special order forms for selected medications 
• Acquiring new up-to-date technology 
 
 
ASSESSMENT, DOCUMENTATION, AND REPORTS 
 
Assessment, documentation, and reports of medication use improvement activities may include, as appropriate, 
one or more of the following: 
 
• Findings (e.g., data, variances, and unjustified variances) 
• Conclusions (e.g., problems identified, opportunities to improve medication use, causes of problems, and 
usage patterns and trends) 
• Recommendations (e.g., proposed actions and what should be done) 
• Action taken (e.g., what has been done to date) 
• Effectiveness or results of action taken (e.g., problems resolved and improvements in medication use) 
 
 
PRESENTATION OF FINDINGS 
 
Results of findings may be presented to a variety of stakeholders.  The following committees may serve as a 
venue for review: 
  PH-03-01 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
 
 
 
• Medication Use Committee 
• Nursing Operations 
• Pharmacy & Therapeutics 
• Interdisciplinary Quality Committee 
 
While this list is not all inclusive, these committees serve as the primary venues for data presentation, evaluation, 
and feedback.   
 
INNOVATION & BEST PRACTICE 
In an effort to keep up with new technologies, the pharmacy will: 
• Partner with current vendors to stay up to date with new innovations as well as those under development 
• Evaluate competitors' products and technologies 
• Engage with national organizations and review of best practice standards 
• Engage with other institutions to seek knowledge on best practices 
• Review literature when assessing and proposing change to medication use policy 
• Conduct gap analysis and develop action plans to address deficits 
 
REFERENCES 
MM 08.01.01 EP1.  The hospital collects data on the performance of its medication management system.  The 
Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
 
MM 08.01.01 EP2.  The hospital analyzes data on its medication management system.  The Joint Commission  
Medication Management Standards 
 
MM 08.01.01 EP3.  The hospital compares data over time to identify risk points, levels of performance, patients, 
trends, and variation of its medication management system.  The Joint Commission  Medication Management 
Standards 
 
MM 08.01.01 EP5.  Based on analysis of its data as well as review of the literature for new technologies and best 
practices, the hospital identifies opportunities for improvement in its medication management system.  The Joint 
Commission Medication Management Standards 
 
MM 08.01.01 EP6.  The hospital takes action on improvement opportunities identified as priorities for its 
medication management system.  The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
 
MM 08.01.01 EP7.  The hospital evaluates its actions to confirm that they resulted in improvements for its 
medication management system.  The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
 
MM 08.01.01 EP8.  The hospital takes additional action when planned improvements for its medication 
management processes are either not achieved or not sustained.  The Joint Commission Medication Management 
Standards 
  PH-03-01 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 