 PH-03-08 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Medication Use, 
Storage and 
Handling 
Title: Medications:  Temperatures: Storage and 
Monitoring 
Policy Reference #: PH-03-08 
Supersedes #: PH-09-04-O 
Date of Origination: 07/01/2000 Last Date Reviewed:  05/07/2024 
Last Date Revised: 09/28/2021 
 
POLICY: 
All drugs shall be stored at appropriate temperatures that do not exceed manufacturer's 
recommendations or warnings.   
DEFINITIONS: 
Storage temperatures are defined as follows: 
• Cold - Any temperature not exceeding 8°C (46°F). 
• Freezer -  between- –50°C and –15°C (--58°F and 5°F). 
• Refrigerator - between 2°C and 8°C (36°F and 46°F). 
• Cool - Any temperature between 8°C and 15°C (46°F and 59°F).  Articles, for which storage in a 
cool place is directed, may be stored in a refrigerator unless otherwise indicated. 
• Room Temperature - Same as controlled room temperature. 
• Controlled Room Temperature -  A temperature held between 15°C and 30°C (68°F and 77°F). 
• Warm -  A temperature between 30°C and 40°C (86°F and 104°F). 
• Excessive Heat -  Any temperature above 40°C (104°F). 
• NonSpecific Conditions -Where storage conditions are not specified or limited, it is understood 
that protection from moisture, freezing, and excessive heat shall be provided. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
Pharmacy has the responsibility of ensuring the proper storage of medications that require refrigeration.  
Refrigerators connected to automated dispensing cabinets (ADC) will have temperature monitoring 
through the ADC technology.  At some campus locations, third party vendors may monitor refrigerators 
remotely with recordings taken every hour.   Pharmacy personnel may also monitor medication 
refrigerator temperatures throughout shifts.    Reports can be generated upon request for compliance 
purposes and are reviewed regularly to determine if a refrigerator needs to be replaced. 
Temperatures are to be maintained between 2°C and 8°C (36°F and 46°F).  The Pharmacist-in-Charge, 
Pharmacy Supervisor or their designee will be responsible for assessing the refrigerator and document 
any action taken to correct the variation. If the refrigerator temperature continues to be out of range, the 
medications stored within that refrigerator will be relocated to another refrigerator temporarily. 
Continued problems will be reported to plant services (Trimedx) for maintenance and if necessary, the 
refrigerator will be taken out of service or replaced.  PH-03-08 
Page 2 of 2 
Medication Refrigerators and Freezers without continuous monitoring: 
Additional refrigerators and freezers throughout the hospital that store medications will be monitored 
manually and recorded in the software system Simplifi 797 where applicable.  Recorded temperatures 
must be between 2°C and 8°C (36°F and 46°F) for refrigerators and between –25°C and –10°C (--13°F 
and 14°F) for freezers.  Readings outside this range will be documented with actions captured 
electronically.   Refrigerators and freezers must be rechecked to ensure adjusted temperature has 
returned to within range. If the temperature continues to be out of range, the medications will be 
relocated to another refrigerator or freezer temporarily. Continued problems will be reported to plant 
services (Trimedx) for maintenance and if necessary, the equipment will be taken out of service or 
replaced. 
 
 Actions 
Temperature Out of Range (Too Hot) 
1. Document awareness variation and recheck in one hour. 
2. If still out of range after 1 hour, verify that device is still working and make adjustments to the 
temperature, while documenting that an adjustment has been made.   
3. Verify that temperature is heading in the proper direction after change and pass on information 
during shift change. 
Temperature Out of Range (Too Cold) 
1. Document awareness of variation and recheck in one hour. 
2. If still out of range after 1 hour, verify that refrigerator is not frozen and the freezer is clear of 
excess frost.   
3. If frozen, take out of service to defrost and replace with spare. 
4. If not frozen, make adjustment to refrigerator temperature and recheck in 1 hour. Document 
findings after recheck.   
5. Verify that temperature is heading in the proper direction after change and pass on information 
during shift change. 
Refrigerator Labeling 
A sticker shall be affixed to each refrigerator identifying storage contents. 
• Medications only, no food 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
MM 03.01.01 EP2.  The hospital stores medications according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, 
according to a pharmacist’s instructions.  The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 03.01.01 EP4.  The hospital has a written policy addressing the control of medication between receipt 
by an individual health care provider and administration of the medication, including safe storage, 
handling, security, disposition, and return to storage. .  The Joint Commission Medication Management 
Standards 
 
USP Standards: 
http://www.uspnf.com/sites/default/files/usp_pdf/EN/USPNF/revisions/659_rb_notice.pdf 
 
 
 