Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center  
Policy Manual:  Pharmacy Section:  Medication Use, 
Storage and Handling 
Medications: Vinca Alkaloid Preparation 
and Administration  
Policy Reference #:  PH-03-31 
Supersedes#:  NA 
Review Date: 4/22/24 
Date of Origination: 10/13/2015 
Revision Date:  05/07/2018 
 
Purpose: 
To identify the vinca alkaloids as high alert medications and provide guidelines for the prescribing 
and administration of these medications in patients with hematologic or solid tumor malignancies.  
 
Definition: 
1. Vinca Alkaloids: are drugs which bind to tubulin and inhibits microtubule formation, 
therefore, arresting the cell at metaphase by disrupting the formation of the mitotic 
spindle; it is specific for the M and S phases.  
2. Vesicant: An agent that has the potential to cause blistering, severe tissue injury, or tissue 
necrosis when extravasated.  
3. Extravasation: Unintentional leakage (or Instillation) of fluid out of a blood vessel into 
surrounding tissue 
 
Prescribing: 
1. Appropriate indications for use included:   
A. Hematologic malignancies 
B. Solid tumor malignancies 
2. Verbal orders for initial vinca alkaloid chemotherapy will not be accepted.  
3. Physicians’ orders must include all of the following to be processed.  
A. Vinca Alkaloid 
B. Total dose of medication 
i. Note for vincristine the usual maximum does is 2mg, however this may 
vary in some study protocols 
C. Route of administration  
i. Note for all vinca alkaloids route of administration is IV ONLY. 
D. Rate of administration 
E. Frequency of administration 
F. Total course of therapy (i.e. duration of therapy)
 
Dispensing: 
1. Pharmacy will verify the appropriateness and dosing of all vinca alkaloids agents. 
2. All doses of vinca alkaloids MUST be prepared by the pharmacy in minibags.  See below 
for Lexi Comp preferred dilutions:  
a. Vinblastine: The preferred administration is in Normal Saline (NS) or D5W as a short IV 
infusion in a 25 to 50 mL minibag. b. Vinorelbine: The preferred administration is in NS or D5W diluted to a final concentration of 
0.5 - 2 mg/mL (for IV bag) and administered as a short IV infusion. 
c. Vincristine: Preferred administration is in NS or D5W as a short IV infusion in a 25 to 50 mL 
minibag.  Specific protocols utilize a 24-hour continuous IV infusion rate (e.g., EPOCH). 
d. Vincristine liposomal: Preferred administration is IV infusion over 1 hour; total volume of IV 
bag is 100 mL (vinCRIStine liposomal plus normal saline).  
3. Pharmacy will ensure that bag that is dispensed will contain the following phrase: “For 
Intravenous use only.  Fatal if given by other routes.”  
4. Pharmacy will ensure that all drugs are dispensed in appropriate concentrations and 
appropriate containers.  
5. Pharmacy will complete independent calculations as a pharmacy “double check” 
a. A second pharmacist will verify the dosing 
 
Administration: 
1. Vinca alkaloids must not be transported through the pneumatic tube system. 
2. Vinca alkaloids can only be administered by registered nurses that have completed the 
appropriate antineoplastic/cytotoxic agent administration training.   
3. Vinca alkaloids must undergo a “double check” procedure per nursing protocol/policy 
prior to administration to the patient 
4. Vinca alkaloids must be administered via intravenous route only. Note: inadvertent 
intrathecal administration will result in death.  
5. Intravenous: Preferred administration is as a short 5 to 10-minute infusion in a 25 to 50 
mL minibag. If administration via minibag is absolutely not possible, may also be 
administered as a slow (1-minute) push.  ISMP (Institute for Safe Medicine Practices) 
strongly recommends against utilizing IV Push as an option with vinca alkaloids due to 
errors of administration being reported causing serious and/or fatal harm to patients. 
 
Monitoring: 
The patient should be monitored as listed in the package insert. 
• Since all Vinca alkaloids are considered vesicant, they should be monitored for 
extravasations and infusion site irritation at all times.  
• Refer to nursing policy NMO-001 and NO-002 - Chemotherapy (Cytotoxic agents), 
Handling, Administration and Disposal; CHON-003 Chemotherapy (Cytotoxic agents) 
Administration 
Safety: 
Nurses perform a double check on all vinca alkaloid agents prior to administration to the patient.  
 
Special handling: 
Hazardous agent: Use appropriate precautions for handling and disposal; avoid eye 
contamination 
 
References: 
• Lexicomp: www.lexi.com  • ISMP Institute for Safe Medication Practices: 20 22 Targeted Medication Safety Best 
Practices for Hospital 