 PH-03-05 
Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Medication Use, 
Storage and 
Handling 
Title: Medications:  Storage and Handling of 
Medications 
Policy Reference #: PH-03-05 
Supersedes #: PH-09-01-O 
Date of Origination: 05/23/2006 Last Date Reviewed: 05/07/2024 
Last Date Revised: 08/11/2021 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide healthcare providers with procedures for safely storing and handling of medications. 
POLICY: 
Medications will be stored in a manner to assist in maintaining medication integrity; promote the 
availability of medications when needed; minimize the risk of medication diversion and reduce potential 
dispensing errors. 
The Director of Pharmacy  and/or Pharmacist-in-Charge is responsible for the storage of medications as 
governed by hospital policy and procedure. The director of each nursing service / clinical department is 
responsible for ensuring support and assistance in the execution of the policy outlined and in its application 
to the performance of employees under his/her direction. 
PROCEDURE: 
Purchasing: 
• Orders will be initiated as the item’s balance on hand falls below an established reorder level. 
• Seasonal modifications to the minimum amount will be monitored by the Pharmacy Purchaser or 
designee. 
• A purchase order will be placed with the prime vendor or approved vendor. 
• Schedule II controlled substances will be ordered on DEA form 222 or electronically using CSOS. 
• A copy of the purchase order should be used in receipt verification 
Verification of Receipt: 
• Pharmacy medication orders will be shipped directly to the Pharmacy Department where 
documentation of the receipt will be matched against the purchase order. 
• Items will be inspected to ensure integrity. 
• If discrepancies occur during the verification process, proper notification is made on the purchase 
order.  Appropriate steps will be taken to ensure discrepancies are addressed.   
• Proper documentation will be stored per the DSCSA requirements. 
  PH-03-05 
Page 2 of 5 
Storage of Medications in the Pharmacy: 
• Medications will be stored according to the manufacturers’ recommendations as well as under the 
proper conditions of sanitation, temperature, light, moisture, ventilation, segregation and security. 
• Medications will be stored in a manner to facilitate inventory control and minimize errors. 
• Storage areas will be kept clean, uncluttered and free from trash. 
• The storage of food and other non-medication items in the medication refrigerators is not permitted.  
 
Transport of Medications: 
• Medications will be delivered via the tube system or will be hand delivered to a secure location on the 
nursing unit or directly to an authorized individual.  
• Select medications identified as being volatile and/or labile, high dollar, and/or bulky may not be 
transported via pneumatic tube.  
• Medications being delivered to offsite locations shall be done in a secure manner as deemed 
appropriate by the Director of Pharmacy or designee in adherence to state laws and regulations.  The 
stocking and restocking of medications and devices within an automated medication system may be 
performed by other licensed personnel approved by the pharmacist-in-charge without the necessity of 
direct pharmacist supervision.  
o All medications will be checked by a pharmacist and separated prior to leaving the pharmacy. 
o A bar code verification process , which prohibits any human intervention  at the automated 
medication system , following the pharmacist verification of the product will be  utilized to 
assure the correct selection of medication to be placed into an automated medication device. 
Any medication or automated medication device pocket where a secured cubie is not utilized 
for storage of that medication and does not scan at the automated medication device, shall not 
be loaded and will be brought back to the pharmacy for further inspection by the pharmacist. 
o The use of the bar code verification process shall require an initial quality assurance validation 
of the personnel performing the stocking process  followed by ongoing quality assurance 
reviews at intervals no greater than 90 days since the previous review, all conducted by a 
pharmacist. 
 
Storage of Medications in the Patient Care Areas: 
• Medications will be stored in specialized compartments in the automated medication cabinets or 
secured drawers/cabinets at all times when not in use. 
• Proper environmental control will be maintained wherever medications are stored in patient care areas. 
• Medications will be stored in an orderly manner in medication drawers and /or in carts of sufficient 
size to prevent crowding or in separate compartments in the automated medication cabinet. 
• Medications bearing an expiration date will not be dispensed or distributed beyond the expiration date. 
• Medications should not be carried / stored in the pocket(s) of a Patient Caregiver. 
• Unused, discontinued, expired, discolored, damaged, or inappropriately labeled medications will be 
returned to the pharmacy for proper credit and/or disposal.  PH-03-05 
Page 3 of 5 
 
Concentrated Electrolytes should only be stored on patient care units if stored in the automated dispensing 
cabinets and only when patient care necessitates it presence.  
All Hospital Personnel: 
• Must observe proper storage and labeling requirements for all medications during the performance of 
their daily tasks. 
• Will demonstrate safety regarding the potency of medications administered as evidenced by: 
o Removal of outdated medications from active stock, returning them to the pharmacy where 
they will be quarantined together until all such medications are disposed of according to policy. 
o Intravenous solutions, which are packaged in an outer protective covering, should be removed 
from their outer protective wrapping just prior to administration. If unused after removal from 
the outer protective covering, the bag should be discarded, or labeled with a 24 hour beyond 
use date. Vials marked as single dose should be discarded immediately after use. 
o Multidose containers: see Policy NOP 021. 
o Medications must be stored at appropriate temperatures per manufacturer’s recommendations 
or as listed on provided auxiliary labeling.  
o Medication refrigerators will have a working thermometer ensuring the proper temperature 
range. 
o Medication refrigerators will not be used to store food. 
 
Disposition of Medications at time of Administration: 
• When a prepared medication is not used immediately, the medication will be labeled with the 
following: 
o Medication name, strength, amount (if not apparent from the container) 
o Expiration date  
o Expiration time where applicable 
o The date prepared and the diluent for all compounded IV admixtures ( IV admixtures should 
only be prepared outside of Pharmacy during emergent situations). 
• Each nurse administering medications will be responsible for maintaining the security of medications 
at all times. 
• Prepared medications may never be left unattended at the patient’s bedside. 
• Medications used in the patient care setting should not be dispensed to patients for home use.   The 
Patient Care Unit will return all of the patient’s in-house medications to the Pharmacy upon discharge 
of the patient (where applicable).  
Return of medications from patient care areas to the pharmacy: 
• Discontinued medications, medications remaining after a patient is discharged, excessive medications, 
and unusable medications shall be returned to the pharmacy. 
• Medications returned to the pharmacy shall not be placed in active stock or dispensed unless they can  PH-03-05 
Page 4 of 5 
be absolutely identified (including lot number and manufacturer) and there is no evidence (or 
suspicion) of contamination or potential contamination. 
 
   PH-03-05 
Page 5 of 5 
 
REFERENCES 
MM 03.01.01 EP1. The hospital safely stores medications. The Joint Commission Medication 
Management Standards 
MM 03.01.01 EP2. The hospital stores medications according to the manufacturers' recommendations 
or, in the absence of such recommendations, according to a pharmacist's instructions. The Joint 
Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 03.01.01 EP3. The hospital stores all medications and biologicals, including controlled (scheduled) 
medications, in a secured area to prevent diversion, and locked when necessary, in accordance with law 
and regulation. Note: Scheduled medications include those listed in Schedules II–V of the 
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. The Joint Commission Medication 
Management Standards 
MM 03.01.01 EP4. The hospital has a written policy addressing the control of medication between 
receipt by an individual health care provider and administration of the medication, including safe 
storage, handling, security, disposition, and return to storage. The Joint Commission Medication 
Management Standards 
MM 03.01.01 EP5. The hospital implements its policy addressing the control of medication between 
receipt by an individual health care provider and its administration. The Joint Commission Medication 
Management Standards 
MM 03.01.01 EP6. The hospital prevents unauthorized individuals from obtaining medications in 
accordance with its policy and law and regulation. The Joint Commission Medication Management 
Standards 
MM 03.01.01 EP7. All stored medications and the components used in their preparation are labeled with 
the contents, expiration date, and any applicable warnings. The Joint Commission Medication 
Management Standards 
MM 03.01.01 EP8. The hospital removes all expired, damaged, and/or contaminated medications and 
stores them separately from medications available for administration. The Joint Commission Medication 
Management Standards 
MM 03.01.01 EP9. The hospital keeps concentrated electrolytes present in patient care areas only when 
patient safety necessitates their immediate use, and precautions are used to prevent inadvertent 
administration. The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 03.01.01 EP10. Medications in patient care areas are available in the most ready-to administer 
forms commercially available or, if feasible, in unit-doses that have been repackaged by the pharmacy or 
a licensed repackager. The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 03.01.01 EP18. The hospital periodically inspects all medication storage areas. The Joint 
Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 03.01.01 EP19. The hospital has a pharmacy directed by a registered pharmacist or a supervised 
drug storage area, in accordance with law and regulation. The Joint Commission Medication 
Management Standards 
 
 