Policy Number PH-03-11 
Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Medication Use, Storage 
and Handling 
Title: Medication Samples in Provider-Based Clinics 
and Inpatient Departments 
Policy Reference #: PH-03-11 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 08/17/2021 Last Date Reviewed: 6/22/24 
Last Date Revised: 04/18/2023 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish a protocol regarding the receipt, storage, dispensation and documentation of Medication Samples in 
a department of the hospital.  Separate policies and procedures govern the use of Medication Samples in the 
non-provider-based locations affiliated with Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) and Our 
Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (OLOLCH).    
 
DEFINITIONS:  
Medication Sample: a legend or prescription drug as defined by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), that 
is not intended to be sold to the consumer; however, the use of the Medication Sample is expected to promote 
the sale of the drug.  Medication Samples are regulated by the Prescription Drug and Marketing Act of 1987. 
“Blind Count”: a count required by the end user where the beginning quantity of a medication present is 
unknown by the user prior to the medication being accessed for removal from an automated medication 
dispensing cabinet.  
Provider: where used in this policy, “Provider” refers to a Doctor of Medicine, Doctor of Osteopathic 
Medicine, or Advanced Practice Provider (APP) with prescriptive authority. 
Administration: with regard to medication samples, the term administered means directly or through an agent 
to give, provide, or supply for immediate oral ingestion, insertion, application, or injection 
Dispensation: with regard to medication samples, the term dispense means to give, provide, or supply for later 
oral ingestion, insertion, application, injection, or other use 
 
POLICY: 
Approved Medications, Locations & Approved Use 
1. Medication samples are not allowed in the inpatient setting. Procurement of medications for inpatient 
administration will follow the pharmacy department’s established protocols.  
2. Medication Samples are permitted only in the following Provider-Based Clinics:  
a. OLOL Rheumatology  
b. Approved Pediatric Specialty Clinics located in the OLOLCH Medical Office Building 
3. Within these Provider Based Clinics, Medication Samples can be dispensed for use: 
a. On a trial basis to confirm efficacy 
b. While awaiting prior authorization  
c. For chronic use when financial constraints are present  Policy Number PH-03-11 
Page 2 of 5 
4. The receipt, storage and use of controlled substance samples is strictly prohibited. 
5. All new Medication Samples will require review by the Clinic Medical Director and the Director of 
Pharmacy prior to first use. New sample requests (see Appendix A) will be communicated to the Our 
Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T) Committee as consent 
agenda items unless otherwise indicated by the chairman of the P&T Committee. 
6. Medications added to the sample formulary will be reviewed for potential look-alike, sound-alike errors, 
high-alert drugs, and applicability of weight-based dosing. Controls will be added to mitigate errors 
based upon this review. 
 
Receipt, Storage and Handling 
1. All Medication Samples must be stored in a secure medication room, locked cabinet, and/or an 
automated dispensing cabinet (ADC); however, the preferred method of storage is within an ADC. All 
medications must be stored according to manufacturer’s recommendations. A perpetual inventory will 
be maintained, and Medication Samples will require an inventory count and/or a “blind count” upon 
removal from its secure storage location. Any discrepancies should be reconciled immediately to 
determine if documentation on a previous patient was incorrect. The Clinic Leader should be notified 
when a discrepancy occurs. Pharmacy may be notified for guidance in cases where the discrepancy 
cannot be resolved. Discrepancies must be documented to include findings.  
2. Only a Provider as defined in this policy may request Medication Samples be sent to the clinic.  The 
following are the appropriate methods by which Medication Samples may be delivered to the clinic 
upon Provider request: 
a. The pharmaceutical representative may deliver the Medication Sample directly to the clinic upon 
request of the Provider, provided the request of the Medication Sample has been signed by the 
requesting Provider and released to the pharmaceutical representative.   
b. Medication Samples may be shipped to the clinic from the drug manufacturer provided the clinic 
Provider has previously signed and requested the medication be shipped directly to the clinic.  
Medication Samples shipped from the drug manufacturer must be signed for by the Clinic Leader 
or designee upon receipt.   
3. The Clinic Leader of the Provider Based Clinics using Medication Samples will oversee the stock of 
samples, including the proper disposal of expired samples and management of recalled medications. 
4. Only clinical staff are permitted to retrieve ordered Medication Samples and to restock the secure 
medication storage location with additional Medication Samples. 
 
Dispensing, Labeling and Documentation: 
1. Medication samples shall be provided to patients under the direction and order of a Provider as defined 
in this policy. Samples do not require the Provider to have a dispensing permit in the State of Louisiana. 
2. Reports pertaining to the distribution of Medication Samples will be available on demand in a readily 
retrievable format to include the Patient Name, Drug Name, Quantity, Lot, Expiration date, and package 
size. 
3. Documentation must be present in the patient’s medical record indicating dispensation of a Medication 
Sample. 
4. Each unit of the Medication Samples must be labeled by the manufacturer to reflect that the medication 
is a sample, including “sample”, “not for sale” or “professional courtesy package.” Policy Number PH-03-11 
Page 3 of 5 
a. The manufacturer or authorized distributor of record of a Medication Sample shall include on the 
label of the sample unit and on the outside container or packaging of the sample unit an 
identifying lot or control number that will permit the tracking of the distribution of each 
Medication Sample unit. 
5. Each Medication Sample will be dispensed in its original manufacture packaging, which notes the 
following:  
a. The brand and/or generic name of the drug 
b. The strength of the drug per dosage unit 
c. Package quantity  
d. Lot number 
e. Expiration date 
6. Each Medication Sample will be affixed with a label to include the patient’s name and date of birth, 
taking care not to cover the medication details noted above or any other critical information, such as 
storage instructions. Including patient specific instructions for home use is recommended.    
7. The patient will be provided clear directions for home use as well as any cautionary statements or side 
effects related to the medication using verbal and written communication.  
8. A Provider will be responsible for evaluating contraindications, interactions and duplications with a 
pharmacist available for consultation, if necessary. 
9. A log detailing the dispensing of Medication Samples will be available on demand in a readily 
retrievable format. 
10. In the instance where a Provider determines the administration of a medication sample is warranted, the 
medical record will reflect that a medication sample was ordered for both dispensation and in-clinic 
administration. 
11. Documentation will ensure that all medication management standards are met and appropriate billing 
procedures are followed to ensure no cost is incurred by the patient with regard to the medication 
sample. 
 
Pharmaceutical Rep Management: 
1. Staff of Provider-Based Clinics storing and utilizing Medication Samples shall receive a written notice 
of this policy. 
2. Pharmaceutical representatives are not permitted to access the area where samples are stored. 
3. Failure to comply with procedures as set forth in this policy and within FMOLHS Pharmaceutical 
Vendor Policy pertaining to interactions with pharmaceutical vendor representatives, may result in 
removal of samples from the non-compliant area, restriction of future samples, and the exclusion of the 
pharmaceutical representative from FMOLHS facilities. 
 
REFERENCES: 
• A Checklist for Safe Use of Medication Samples. Joint Commission Resources, 2014. 
• Prescription Drug Marketing Act of 1987. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 21 C.F.R. Part 203. 
• Recommendations for Avoiding Medication Errors with Medication Samples. National Coordinating 
Council for Medication Error Reporting and Prevention. 2008. Policy Number PH-03-11 
Page 4 of 5 
• Title 46: Professional and Occupational Standards Part XLV. Medical Professions. Subpart 1. General. 
Louisiana Board of Medical Examiners. 
  Policy Number PH-03-11 
Page 5 of 5 
Appendix A 
 
REQUEST FORM: 
Adding a New Medication Sample to the Formulary 
Date of Request: Requesting Provider and Department: 
Drug Manufacturer: 
 
Pharmaceutical Representative: Contact Number: 
Medication Details 
Brand Name: Active Ingredient: FDA Approval Date: 
FDA-Approved Indication: 
 
Dosage Form, Usual Dosing Regimen, and Duration of Treatment: 
Will the medication sample be administered in clinic? 
❑ Yes     ❑   No 
Does the medication sample have an approved J code? 
❑ Yes     ❑   No           If yes, please provide: 
Medication Safety Considerations 
Storage Needs: 
❑ Room Temperature     ❑ Refrigerated     ❑ Frozen      
Hazardous Drug (NIOSH) Classification: 
❑ None     ❑ Antineoplastic    ❑ Non-Antineoplastic     ❑ Reproductive Risk Only 
Pregnancy Considerations: 
❑ None     ❑ Yes, describe:     
Sound Alike Look Alike Potential: 
❑ None     ❑ Yes, list:     
Noted drug-allergy, drug-drug, or drug-food interactions: 
❑ None     ❑ Yes, list:     
Black box warnings or contraindications: 
❑ None     ❑ Yes, list:     
Specific therapy monitoring requirements: 
❑ None     ❑ Yes, describe:     
Significant renal or hepatic dosing adjustments: 
❑ None     ❑ Yes, describe:     
To Complete Upon Presentation to Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee  
Date Presented at P&T: Committee Decision: 
❑ Approved      ❑ Denied, reason:   
Signature of Pharmacy Reviewer: Date: Time: 
Signature of Physician Reviewer: Date: Time: 
 