 PH-05-02 
Page 1 of 3 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Good Documentation Practices Policy Reference #: PH-05-02 
Supersedes #: PH-20-02-O 
Date of Origination: 01/14/2011 Last Date Reviewed: 01/06/2025 
Last Date Revised: 01/06/2025 
 
1.0 Definition and Purpose 
To define the requirements of good documentation practices that produce concise, legible  and easily 
retrievable compounding and patient records. These practices will include patient chart or compounding 
record entries and storage and disposition of patient care records whether memorialized on paper or in 
electronic format.  
2.0 Policy: 
2.1 All documentation practices must clearly and legibly reflect patient care interventions. These 
interventions may include prescription compounding records, physician, patient or caregiver 
communications. 
2.2 All interventions must be recorded at the time of occurrence in order to preserve the integrity and 
content of the event.  
2.3 All documentation must be completed in such a manner as to allow others to easily understand 
and re-trace activities or actions if necessary. 
2.4 All documentation must be filed and stored in such manner to ensure that they are readily 
retrievable. 
3.0 Definitions 
"Original documentation" is defined as documentation that is the result of an original observation, action or 
intervention. 
3.1 All documentation practices must clearly and legibly reflect patient care interventions. These 
interventions may include prescription compounding records, physician, patient or caregiver 
communications. 
3.2 All interventions must be recorded at the time of occurrence in order to preserve the integrity and 
content of the event.  
3.3 All documentation must be completed in such a manner as to allow others to easily understand 
and re-trace activities or actions if necessary. 
3.4 All documentation must be filed and stored in such manner to ensure that they are readily 
retrievable. 
4.0 Definitions 
"Original documentation" is defined as documentation that is the result of an original observation, action or 
intervention. 
5.0 Procedure 
Formatted: Line spacing:  Multiple 1.08 li PH-05-02 
Page 2 of 3 
 
5.1 All original prescription information or documentation will remain on file to meet all state and/or 
federal requirements. 
5.2 Only authorized employees of the company may access information in the patient medical record.  
5.3 Employees are only permitted access to patient care information relative to performing their 
respective job function. 
5.4 Only pharmacists, authorized technicians, and designated pharmacy personnel such as data 
analysts are to have access to the pharmacy computer system. Access will be password 
restricted, and the pharmacy manager will issue appropriate security levels.  
5.5 Any written documentation will be made in black or blue ink. The use of pencils or writing 
instruments with erasable medium is prohibited. 
5.6 Documentation will be completed at the time of occurrence, observation, interaction or 
intervention or documented in such a manner to denote the actual time, date and outcome as 
soon as possible. 
5.7 All documentation must be legible. 
5.8 All documentation must be signed and dated at the time of occurrence, observation, interaction or 
intervention. Signatures may be either distinctive initials or the full name.  
5.9 If documentation cannot occur at the time of the original occurrence, the intervention will be 
recorded and followed with the following statement: “Performed on (Month/Day/Year) by (Initials 
or Signature) but (unable or failed) to document.” This entry mus t be signed and dated.  
5.10 Only authorized personnel will be allowed to record observations, actions, occurrences or 
interventions in patient clinical care charts or records.  
5.11 Times must be recorded to indicate the time of day of the intervention or occurrence. 2400 hour 
clock or military time is the preferred method however a 12 hour format may be used provided the 
designation “AM” for the first 12 hours of the day and “PM” be used for the second 12 hours of the 
day. 
5.12 Erroneous documentation entries MUST NEVER be covered with “white-out”, paper correction 
fluid, erased or rendered illegible.  
5.13 When a correction is required, the erroneous entry will be crossed out with a single line. This 
single line will be dated and initialed. 
5.14 If a patient care record, prescription or other document has to be corrected and replaced by a 
new one, the original WILL NOT be discarded. 
5.14.1 All documents to be voided must be approved by either the pharmacy manager or 
designee.  
5.15 If there should ever be any doubt as to the correct way to document an action, occurrence or 
intervention, the individual will contact the pharmacy manager at the earliest opportunity for 
clarification. 
5.16 All defined document spaces that are not used must have a “N/A” or a single line placed on or 
through that space, block or section, with a N/A in close proximity to the line.  
6.0 Confidentiality 
 All information concerning client care or prescription information must be treated confidentially.  
7.0 Falsification of Documentation  PH-05-02 
Page 3 of 3 
 
7.1 Falsification of any documentation will not be tolerated. Any confirmed incidents of document 
falsification will be fully investigated and may require the pharmacy manager to prepare a written 
statement assessing the potential impact that the falsification  incident had on patient care and/or 
product integrity. Falsification of documentation may result in disciplinary action, which may 
include termination. 
7.2 It must never be documented on any form, paper or patient care record that a check, inspection, 
action, interaction, intervention or conversation occurred when, in fact, it did not.  
7.3 The documentation of a task, action, interaction or intervention must not be completed before it is 
actually performed. 
7.4 The recorded date of a task, action, interaction or intervention on any form, paper, or patient are 
record must be the actual date the entry occurred and recorded. Backdating of entries is not 
permitted. 
7.5 Rewriting of documents and discarding the original is not permitted. Rewriting of a document can 
only occur after receiving approval from the Pharmacy Manager or designee.   
7.6 An employee must not document that another employee or individual performed a check, task, 
action, interaction or intervention, unless it is clearly documented in a third -person narrative 
format. An employee must not sign a document for a check, task, acti on, interaction or 
intervention that was performed by another employee.  
8.0 Storage: 
8.1 All documents, papers or patient care records must be retained according to local, state or federal 
laws. 
8.2 Archived documents must be readily retrievable and stored in an area that provides adequate 
protection from fire, theft, environmental deterioration, damage or unauthorized access.  
8.3 All documents, papers or patient care records will be stored in cartons indicating a “Discard Date” 
based on current local, state or federal law. 
9.0 Disposition:  
9.1 All papers, documents or patient care records will be destroyed according to the discard date and 
by a means to ensure complete destruction.      
9.2 If an outside vendor performs the destruction of papers, documents or patient care records, proof 
of confidentiality and destruction should be obtained and kept on file.  
 
References: None 
 
 