OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Personal Protective Equipment for 
Hazardous Drugs 
Policy Reference #: PH0550 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the procedures related to Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) where 
Hazardous Drugs (HDs) are handled within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
1.2. Harm to healthcare personnel from occupational exposure to HDs can occur throughout the 
medication-use process including receipt, storage, transport, compounding, administration, 
disposal and spill control. Types of occupational exposure to HDs include der mal absorption, 
mucosal absorption, inhalation, injection, and ingestion. 
1.3. Damage to healthcare workers from HDs can include but are not limited to chromosomal 
aberrations, reproductive toxicities, and organ toxicities.  
1.4. Healthcare workers can experience either an acute exposure and/or long-term exposure over an 
entire career. Proper use of PPE is one of the mechanisms to limit occupational exposure to HDs 
and to limit contamination to the healthcare environment. 
1.5. FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies may exempt some dosage forms of HDs from full USP 
<800> containment strategies and work practices as long as they are not Active Pharmaceutical 
Ingredients (API) or antineoplastic drugs requiring manipulation beyond counting or repackaging 
and if an Assessment of Risk (AoR) is performed, documented, and reviewed at least annually.  
1.6. This SOP refers to all HD API, antineoplastic HDs requiring manipulation (beyond counting or 
repackaging), and other non-antineoplastic and reproductive risk only HD dosage forms for which 
an AoR has not been performed. 
1.7. This SOP does not refer to PPE worn when handling a HD spill, refer to HD spill policy for 
procedures. 
2. Policy  
2.1 All policies and procedures pertaining to compounding sterile and nonsterile preparations are 
followed including hand hygiene and garbing, in addition to all procedures in this PPE policy for 
HDs. 
2.2 Appropriate HD PPE is required when handling HDs during: 
• Receipt • Storage 
• Transport 
• Compounding (sterile and nonsterile) 
• Administration 
• Deactivation/decontamination, cleaning, and disinfecting  
• Spill control  
• Waste disposal  
2.3 Gloves worn when handling HD always meet ASTM Standard Practice for Assessment of 
Resistance of Medical Gloves to Permeation by Chemotherapy Drugs (D6978) or its successor. 
Gloves are either sterile or non-sterile depending on use. 
2.4 Personnel who handle any form of HD during normal job duties are trained and have 
documented competency on proper handling of HDs per the HD Training Policy.  
2.5 In addition to required garb for sterile and nonsterile compounding activities, personnel handling 
HDs must don additional required PPE including: 
• Chemotherapy Gown is donned over non-HD gowns and frocks  
• Head and hair cover (including facial hair) 
• Shoe covers 
• Chemotherapy gloves 
2.6 PPE is stored in a manner that minimizes contamination (e.g., away from sinks to avoid 
splashing). 
2.7 Donning and doffing of HD PPE is performed in appropriate locations immediately adjacent to 
HD storage and/or compounding areas per HD Facilities and Engineering Control policy.   
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 Designated Person (DP): 
• Ensures all personnel have education and training in the foundational knowledge and skills on 
the proper use of PPE utilized when handling HDs as required by activities performed.   
• Partners with Pharmacy Leadership to review PPE requirements based on an assessment of 
risk (AoR) and the occupational safety plan for FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
• Ensures all PPE is appropriate for HD compounding. 
• Provides immediate access to the SOPs, USP <800> and supporting Chapters and supporting 
regulations, and other expert documentation to perform job duties successfully and safely. 
3.2 Compounding Personnel: 
• Remain current and in good standing on all required education, trainings, evaluations, and 
assessments pertaining to handling HDs. 
• Follow all policies pertaining to HDs and use proper PPE to decrease hazardous drug 
contamination in the healthcare environment.  
4. Procedures 
Activity  Required PPE* 
Receiving and storage • Single pair of chemotherapy glove  Activity  Required PPE* 
o Two pairs of chemotherapy gloves required when leaking 
shipping container, spills occur, or integrity of shipping 
container is in question 
• Chemotherapy gown 
• Respiratory protection – when leaking shipping container, spills, 
integrity of shipping container is in question 
• Eye and face protections – when leaking shipping container, spills, 
integrity of shipping container is in question  
Transport • Single pair of chemotherapy gloves 
Compounding 
• Two pairs of chemotherapy gloves 
• Chemotherapy gown 
• Two pairs of shoe covers 
• Head, hair covers 
• Respiratory protection (if not performed in containment device)  
•  
Administration: 
  Intact tablet or capsule 
• Single pair of chemotherapy gloves  
• Eye and face protection (when risk of spills or splashes) 
Administration: 
  Antineoplastic HDs 
  Liquid drug 
  Topical 
  Irrigation 
  Injection (SC, IM, IV, amp) 
• Two pairs of chemotherapy gloves 
• Chemotherapy gown  
• Eye and face protection (when administration occurs at or above eye 
level or when a risk of spills or splashes) 
Administration: 
  Inhalation 
 
• Two pairs of chemotherapy gloves 
• Chemotherapy gown  
• Respiratory protection (if inhalation potential) 
• Eye and face protection (when risk of spills or splashes) 
Waste Disposal • Single pair of chemotherapy gloves 
Cleaning 
• Two pairs of chemotherapy gloves 
• Chemotherapy gown 
• Two pairs of shoe covers 
• Eye and face protection 
• Respiratory protection 
Spill Control 
• Two pairs of chemotherapy gloves 
• Chemotherapy gown 
• Two pairs of shoe covers 
• Eye and face protection 
• Respiratory protection 
*Required PPE: unless differs in AoR  
 
Gloves: 
4.1 Chemotherapy gloves meet the standard ASTM D6978 or its successor. Gloves are either sterile 
or non-sterile depending on use. Inspect gloves for physical defects before use, do not use gloves 
with pin holes or weak spots.  
4.2 Both pairs of chemotherapy gloves worn during HD CSP compounding are sterile. 
4.3 Remove chemotherapy gloves by: 
• Remove outer gloves one at a time:  o Touching the outer surface of the glove only, remove first glove turning glove inside out. 
o Using the clean inside glove, remove second outer glove by placing fingers underneath 
the wrist of the second outer glove and roll the glove down without touching outer 
surface of glove with ungloved hand or fingers, turning carefully inside out to avoid 
touching the outside of the glove and to not contaminate inner glove. 
• Remove inner gloves one at a time following the same procedures above. Taking care not to 
contaminate bare hands. 
4.4 Wash hands with soap and water after doffing chemotherapy gloves. 
Gowns: 
4.5 Chemotherapy gowns are disposable polyethylene-coated polypropylene (or a similar laminate) 
to resist permeation by HDs, seamless, close in the back, has long sleeves, and has cuffs made of 
elastic or a knit material. 
• Cloth laboratory coats, surgical scrubs, isolation gowns, or other absorbent materials are not 
allowed to be worn when a gown is required for handling HDs and as the permeation of the 
material can hold spilled drugs against the skin, increasing exposure.  
• Chemotherapy gowns are intended to be worn over nonhazardous gowns and frocks to 
provide two layers of protection to personnel. 
• Change chemotherapy gowns per manufacturer's information or every two to three hours or 
immediately after a spill or splash.  
• Do not save or reuse gown for the remainder of a shift when removed. 
Shoe Covers: 
4.6 Don a second pair of shoe covers before entering Containment Secondary Engineering Control 
(C-SEC) and doff when crossing the line of demarcation or perimeter line of the C-SEC.  
• Shoe covers worn in HD handling areas are not worn in other areas to avoid spreading HD 
contamination and exposing other healthcare workers to HDs.  
• Shoe covers are low -linting, made from water -resistant or waterproof materials, and are 
seamless. 
Eye and Face Protection: 
4.7 Don eye and face protection when there is risk for HD spills or splashes or a risk from HD waste 
materials when working outside of a Containment Primary Engineering Control (C-PEC) (e.g., spill 
cleanup, cleaning C-SEC, administration in the surgical suite, working at or above eye level) 
• A full-facepiece respirator provides eye and face protection. 
• Don goggles when eye protection is needed (eyeglasses and safety glasses alone are not 
enough eye protection). 
• Face shield in combination with goggles provides a full range of protection against splashes 
to the face and eyes. 
Respiratory Protection: 
4.8 Respiratory protection for HD handling is required when there is known or suspected airborne 
exposure to particles or vapors, such as: 
• Personnel unpacking HDs that are not contained in plastic until the integrity of the package 
can be confirmed 
• Working outside of a C-PEC (e.g., spill cleanup, cleaning C-SEC, administration in the surgical 
suite, working at or above eye level) 
• Cleaning under the work surface of a C-PEC • Cleaning up a spill 
4.9 Respiratory protection for HD handling: 
• Surgical masks do not provide respiratory protection from drug exposure and are not used 
alone when respiratory protection from HD exposure is required. 
• A fit -tested NIOSH -certified N95 (or more protective) respirator protects against airborne 
particles from HD exposure. 
o N95 respirators do not protect against HD gases and vapors and provide little protection 
against direct liquid splashes. 
• A chemical cartridge-type respirator or powered air-purifying respirator (PAPR) is worn when 
there is a risk of respiratory exposure to HDs, including: 
o Attending to HD spills larger than what can be contained with a spill kit 
o Deactivating, decontaminating, and cleaning underneath the work surface of a C-PEC 
o When there is a known or suspected airborne exposure to powders or vapors 
4.10 Head, hair, facial hair, shoe covers, and sleeve covers are disposable and provide 
protection from contact with HD residue.  
4.11 Reusable PPE is decontaminated, cleaned and disinfected after use and is disinfected prior to use 
in controlled environments per policy.  
4.12 Follow PPE doffing procedures: 
• Chemotherapy Gloves: Remove gloves by slowly removing the first contaminated glove and 
place into the other gloved hand. Slide index finger under the remaining glove, and slowly pull 
the glove off inside out without touching glove surface to ungloved hand or fingers making a 
packet of the two gloves, and discard into trace HD waste receptacle. Wash hands with soap 
and water. 
• Chemotherapy Gowns: Remove gown by releasing the fastener, then grasp the gown at the 
hip area and pull gown down and away from body.  Once the gown is off the shoulders, pull 
one arm at a time from the sleeves so the gown arms are bunched at the wrist.  Then roll the 
exposed side of the gown inward until it is a tight ball.  Dispose of down in trace HD wast e 
receptacle 
4.13 All individuals entering the containment compounding area follow all procedures outlined in the 
Hand Hygiene and Garbing policy USP <797> or USP <795> prior to donning PPE for HD handling 
and compounding.  
4.14 Donning and doffing HD PPE in a cleanroom suite for HD compounding of CSPs and/or CNSPs: 
Donning PPE: 
• Outside the ante room: 
o Tie long hair back 
o Clean eyeglasses 
• Enter the ante room: 
o Don head cover and facial hair cover if applicable, ensuring all hair is covered 
o Don mask 
o Don two pairs of shoe covers while stepping over the line of demarcation 
o Perform hand hygiene 
o Don gown followed by chemo gown 
o Sanitize hands/wrists with alcohol-based hand sanitizer o Don two pair of sterile chemotherapy gloves – one glove is under the cuff of the 
chemotherapy gown, and one is over the cuff of the chemotherapy gown 
Doffing PPE after compounding a HD preparation: 
• Deactivate and decontaminate outer pair of chemotherapy gloves prior to handling the 
container (e.g., chemotherapy transport bag) the preparation will be placed into. 
• Just prior to leaving the negative pressure buffer room, remove outer pair of chemotherapy 
gloves, chemotherapy gown and outer pair of shoe covers. Dispose into the trace HD waste 
receptacle. 
• Remove all garb upon leaving the ante room 
• Wash hands with soap and water 
4.15 Donning and doffing HD PPE for nonsterile HD compounding in nonsterile compounding area: 
Donning PPE: 
• Don two pair of shoe covers, hair cover, facial hair cover, and mask. 
• Cross over the perimeter line of the nonsterile compounding area 
• Wash hands and forearms up to the elbows with soap and water for at least 30 seconds. Dry 
hands and forearms to the elbows completely with disposable towels or wipers. Allow hands 
and forearms to dry thoroughly before donning gloves. 
• Don chemotherapy gown 
• Inspect nonsterile chemotherapy gloves for holes, punctures, or tears and discard if defects 
are detected. 
• Don nonsterile chemotherapy gloves and prepare for compounding; first pair is worn under 
the cuff of the chemotherapy gown and second pair is worn over the cuff of the chemotherapy 
gown 
Doffing PPE: 
• Deactivate and decontaminate outer pair of nonsterile chemotherapy gloves prior to handling 
transport container (e.g., chemotherapy transport bag) the preparation will be placed into.  
• Remove chemotherapy gown and outer pair of shoe covers. Dispose into the trace HD waste 
receptacle. 
• Cross over the perimeter line of the nonsterile compounding area 
• Remove all additional PPE worn and dispose into the trace HD waste receptacle. 
4.16 Garbing for non-compounding staff or visitors: 
• When it is necessary for non -compounding staff or visitors to enter the containment 
compounding area to perform maintenance, cleaning procedures, inspections; the persons 
entering the area perform all proper hand hygiene and garbing per policy and follow all steps 
of PPE donning and doffing per this policy with one exception: the second pair of 
chemotherapy gloves is not required to be donned.  
4.17 Treat all PPE worn when compounding HDs, handling HDs, or worn while working in the 
containment compounding areas as trace HD waste and dispose all PPE in the trace HD waste 
receptacle.  
5. Definitions 
5.1 Assessment of Risk (AoR): Evaluation of risk to determine alternative containment strategies 
and/or work practices.  5.2 Chemotherapy glove: A powder -free medical glove that meets the ASTM Standard Practice for 
Assessment of Resistance of Medical Gloves to Permeation by Chemotherapy Drugs (D6978) or 
its successor. Gloves are either sterile or non-sterile depending on use.  
5.3 Chemotherapy gown : Gown used for handling HDs that is disposable, polyethylene -coated 
polypropylene (or a similar laminate) to resist permeation by HDs, seamless, closes in the back, 
has long sleeves, and has cuffs made of elastic or a knit material.    
5.4 Containment Primary Engineering Control (C-PEC): A ventilated device designed and operated to 
minimize worker and environmental exposures to HDs by controlling emissions of airborne 
contaminants. 
5.5 Containment Segregated Compounding Area (C -SCA): Type of segregated compounding area 
with nominal requirements for airflow and room pressurization as they pertain to HD 
compounding.  
5.6 Containment Secondary Engineering Control (C-SEC): The room with fixed walls in which the C -
PEC is place. It incorporates specific design and operational parameters required to the contain 
the potential hazard within the compounding room.  
5.7 NIOSH: National Institute for Occupational Safety & Health 
5.8 NIOSH List: List that identifies drugs approved by the FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and Research 
(CDER) that have intrinsic properties that meet the NIOSH definition of a hazardous drugs.  
 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <795> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.3 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
6.4 Kienle P. The Chapter <800> Answer Book. Bethesda, MD: ASHP; 2017. 
6.5 American Society of Health-System Pharmacists. ASHP Guidelines on Handling Hazardous Drugs. 
Am J Health-Sys Pharm. 2018; 75:1996-2031. Retrieved 12/20/22.  
7. Approval and Review Summary 
 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2025 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2023.  
7.2 Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
7.3 Reviewed with no changes 11/2024. 
 
 