OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Master Formula & Compounding Records Policy Reference #: PH0540 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the documentation elements and record keeping requirements for Master 
Formulation Records and Compounding Records for Compounded Sterile Preparations (CSPs) 
prepared for within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.   
1.2. In addition to USP <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding – Sterile Preparations requirements, 
FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies follow all regulations issued by the Louisiana Board 
of Pharmacy, including record keeping and record retention. 
1.3. Master Formula and Compounding Records create a detailed and reproduceable compounding 
procedure and historical record of each CSP compounded ensuring patients receive a 
consistent, high quality CSPs. The Compounding Record also provides the documentation 
framework to quickly implement a recall or patient review if needed. 
• A Master Formula Record (MFR) is a detailed procedural record describing how a unique 
CSP is prepared, verified, packaged, and labeled.  A MFR provides a precise roadmap 
allowing any compounder to, without assistance or interpretation, prepare a consistent and 
replicable CSP each time. 
• A Compounding Record (CR) documents each instance of CSP compounding including 
specifics about the manufacture, measurement, and use of Active Pharmaceutical 
Ingredients (APIs), added substances, supplies, and dispensing devices in the preparation 
and quality control of the final dosing or yield unit(s).    
2. Policy  
2.1 A Master Formula Record (MFR) is created for each unique Category 1, 2 and Immediate-Use CSP 
formulation when one or both of the following conditions exist: 
• CSPs prepared for more than one patient (i.e. batch compounding or repackaging) 
• CSPs prepared from one or more nonsterile ingredient(s) or component(s) 
2.2 MFRs include at least the following per USP <797>:  • Name, strength or activity, and dosage form of the CSP 
• Identities and amounts of all ingredients, active and inactive; if applicable, relevant 
characteristics of components (e.g. particle size, salt form, purity grade, solubility) 
• Type and size of container closure system(s) 
• Complete instructions for preparing the CSP, including equipment, supplies, a description of 
the compounding steps, and any special precautions (e.g., hazardous material handling 
instructions) 
• Physical description of the final CSP 
• Beyond use dating (BUD) and storage requirements 
• If applicable, calculations  or conversions  to determine and verify quantities and/or 
concentrations of components and strength or activity of API 
• Stability reference source for the CSP 
• Quality control (QC) procedures (e.g., pH testing, filter integrity test, refractive index, visual 
inspection, sterility and endotoxin testing, sterilization cycle validation) and expected results 
• Other information as needed to describe the compounding process and ensure repeatability  
• Labeling requirements 
2.3 Two (2) qualified compounding personnel including IV Pharmacists, Designated Person(s), and/or 
Pharmacy Manager, review and sign-off on all new or revised MFRs and associated calculations 
prior to initial use.   
2.4 A Compounding Record (CR) is created for all Category 1 & 2 CSPs and for Immediate Use batched 
or repackaged CSPs intended for use in more than one patient and compounded according to an 
MFR.   
2.5 CRs include at least the following per USP <797>: 
• Name, strength or activity, and dosage form of the CSP  
• Date and time of preparation of the CSP  
• Assigned internal identification number (e.g., prescription, order, or lot number)  
• A method to identify the individuals involved in the compounding process and individuals 
verifying the final CSP  
• Name of each component including Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs), excipients, 
and other added substances 
• Vendor, lot number, and expiration date for each component  used in the preparation of 
CSPs (e.g., APIs, excipients, diluents, components, containers, and each sterilizing filter or 
biological indicator used during sterilization for CSPs)  
• Weight or volume of each component  
• Strength or activity of each component  
• Total quantity compounded  
• Final yield (e.g., quantity, containers, number of units)  
• Assigned BUD and storage requirements  
• Results of QC procedures (e.g., visual inspection, filter integrity testing, pH testing, sterility 
and endotoxin testing, sterilization cycle validation) 
If applicable: 
• MFR reference (if retained separately) 
• Calculations and conversions made to determine and verify quantities and/or 
concentrations of components, if applicable 2.6 MFRs and CRs are retained and readily accessible for review. 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Person (DP):  
• Ensures MFRs are created, reviewed, and approved for each unique CSP formulation prepared 
for more than one patient (including repackaging) or prepared from one or more nonsterile 
starting components. 
• Provides education and communication for new or revised MFRs and CRs to compounding 
personnel. 
• Ensures CRs are completed, retained, and readily accessible for required CSPs.   
• Ensures MFRs and CRs meet minimum documentation standards.  
 
3.2 Compounding Personnel: 
• Follow the exact specifications and directions in the MFR and ensure complete and accurate 
documentation within the CR. 
4. Procedures  
4.1. Creation and Revisions of Master Formula Records (MFRs) 
• Submit requests for new or revised MFRs to the Designated Person. 
• The Designated Person reviews the request to determine the feasibility and viability the 
requested formulation including, but not limited to: 
o Supporting references for the formulation, CSP stability and BUD, and compounding 
methods and techniques  
o Availability and cost of needed ingredients, dispensing devices, equipment, and supplies 
o BUD assignment, storage, transport, and labeling requirements 
o Quality control procedures and tests based on the dosage form, route/location of 
administration, and drug stability 
o Impact to workflow and staffing 
• If the request is approved, the DP or a qualified designee creates (or revises) the MFR.   
• An independent review of the MFR is conducted by two compounding personnel with the 
appropriate expertise.  Both the MFR author and reviewer(s) sign off on the final MFR 
version prior to use.  
• The DP or designee provides education and communication about the new/revised MFR 
with an effective date to Sterile Compounding Personnel. 
• The DP retains a revision history of the MFR. 
4.2. Creation of Compounding Records (CRs) 
• Compounding personnel creates a CR for all Category 1 and 2 CSPs and for immediate use 
compounds made for more than one patient.   
• CRs are allowed in the following formats that are fully compliant with the CR documentation 
requirements stated above in section 2.5.  
o Prescription or medication order 
o Electronically stored medication order stored and readily retrievable from a workflow 
management system, ACD, or similar equipment. o MFR designed to allow for the manual or electronic entry of the information needed to 
complete the CR 
o Standalone CR 
4.3. Use of MFR and CR 
• Prior to starting the compounding process, compounding personnel review the MFR and 
compounding procedure in detail; initiate the CR; complete and record all required 
calculations; and confirm necessary ingredients, devices, equipment, and supplies are 
readily available. 
• Update the CR during the preparatory, compounding, and QC processes to ensure accurate 
and complete documentation of the compounding process.    
• Ensure all components of the CR are complete and accurate including, but not limited to: 
o Formulation Name 
o Name/ID, manufacturer (or wholesaler), lot number, expiration, weight/volume, and 
strength of each API and added substance incorporated into the CSP 
o Calculations and conversions, if applicable 
o Final yield (including total quantity compounded, number of containers, and/or number 
of final dose units) 
o Results of QC procedures and tests (e.g., final yield unit weight/volume, pH, tonicity 
adjustments), if applicable and verifying Pharmacist’s initials. 
• Validate the CSP label, prescription or med order and Master Formulation Records and 
Compounding record are consistent and conform with each other. 
• Ensure signatures or initials of the compounder(s) and verifying Sterile Pharmacist are 
written or electronically stamped on each CR. 
• Ensure compounding date, BUD, and assigned internal ID number are written or 
electronically stamped on each CR. 
• Submit final CR to the DP if not electronically documented in the IVWS or Compounding 
System for final review and approval prior to storage in a readily retrievable format. 
5. Definitions 
5.1 Active pharmaceutical ingredient (API): Any substance or mixture of substances intended to be 
used in the compounding of a preparation, thereby becoming the active ingredient in that 
preparation, and furnishing pharmacological activity or other direct effect in the diagnosis, cure, 
mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans and animals or affecting the structure 
and function of the body.  
5.2 Added substance: An ingredient that is necessary to compound a preparation but is not intended 
or expected to cause a pharmacologic response if administered alone in the amount or 
concentration contained in a single dose of the compounded preparation. The term is used 
synonymously with the terms: inactive ingredient, excipient, and pharmaceutical ingredient. 
5.3 Beyond-Use Date (BUD):  The date and time after which a CSP shall not be used, stored, or 
transported. The date is determined from the date and time the preparation is compounded. 
5.4 Category 1 CSP: A CSP that is assigned a BUD of 12 hour or less at controlled room temperature 
or 24 hour or less refrigerated that is compounded in accordance with all applicable 
requirements for Category 1 CSPs in USP 797.  5.5 Category 2 CSP: A CSP that may be assigned a BUD of greater than 12 hours at controlled room 
temperature or greater than 24 hours refrigerated that is compounded in accordance with all 
applicable requirements for Category 2 CSPs in USP 797.  
5.6 Category 3 CSP: A CSP that may be assigned a BUD exceeding the limits for Category 2 CSPs and 
is compounded in accordance with all applicable requirements for Category 3 CSPs in USP. 
5.7 Compounded sterile preparation (CSP): A preparation intended to be sterile that is created by 
combining, admixing, diluting, pooling, reconstituting, repackaging, or otherwise altering a drug 
product or bulk drug substance.  
5.8 Compounding: The process of combining, admixing, diluting, pooling, reconstituting, 
repackaging, or otherwise altering a drug or bulk drug substance to create a sterile medication. 
5.9 Container closure system: Packaging components that together contain and protect the dosage 
form. This includes primary packaging components and secondary packaging components if the 
latter are intended to provide additional protection. 
5.10 Designated Person (DP) is one ore more individuals assigned to be responsible and accountable 
for the performance and operation of the facility and personnel for the preparation of CSPs. 
5.11 Final yield /Final yield unit : The total number of containers prepared at the end of the 
compounding process prior to release testing. 
5.12 Quality assurance (QA): A system of procedures, activities, and oversight that ensures that the 
compounding process consistently meets quality standards.  
5.13 Quality control (QC): The sampling, testing, and documentation of results that, taken together, 
ensure that specifications have been met before release of the CSP. 
5.14 Release inspection and testing:  Visual inspection and testing performed to ensure that a 
preparation meets appropriate quality characteristics. 
5.15 Repackaging: The act of removing a sterile product or preparation from its original primary 
container and placing it into another primary container, usually of smaller size without further 
manipulation 
5.16 Workflow management system: Technology comprised of hardware and software that allows 
for automation to assist in the verification of components of, and preparation of, CSPs and to 
document components and processes. 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version. 
7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2025 7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2022.  
7.2 Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
7.3 Reviewed with no changes 11/2024. 
 
 