ECLS-012 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: LSU Health Baton Rouge – 
North Clinic Pharmacy  Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for LSU Health Baton 
Rouge – North Clinic Pharmacy  
Policy 
Reference #: 
PH0557  
NBR Pharmacy cost 
centers 4814 and 7303 
Supersedes #: ECLS-012 
Date of Origination: 7/9/18  Review Date: 01/06/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated EXIT signs are located (1) above the staff pharmacy entrance door (2) above the 
pharmacy lobby door (3) above the door at the top of the staircase near radiology (4) at the end 
of the hallway near administration (5) above the main entrance door in the front lobby, and (6) 
above the employee entrance door in the back hall. 
• Adjacent Smoke Compartments are located  ECLS-012 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
Normal Operating Hours are Monday through Friday, 7am to 6:30pm 
• Pharmacy or designee: secure pharmacy and assist team with evacuation of patients from their 
immediate area. 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments 
(horizontal and vertical evacuations) 
• The majority of the patient population is ambulatory.  
• Non ambulatory patients may be evacuated using wheelchairs. 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• There is 1 fire pull at the top of the staircase near radiology.  
There are 2 fire extinguishers. One is in the pharmacy near the sink and bathroom, and one is in the 
hallway outside the pharmacy lobby entrance. 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• In the event the fire is in the back of the LSU Health building, the destination of all 
Infusion/Oncology patients/employees is behind the dollar general store in the parking lot away 
from the building.  
• In the event the fire is in the front of the LSU Health building, the destination of all 
Infusion/Oncology patients/employees is in the back parking lot away from the building.   
 
 
 
 