OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: CSP Handling, Storage, Packaging, 
Transport & Shipping 
Policy Reference #: PH0544 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 5/8/2024 
Last Date Revised: 5/8/2024 
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the handling, storage, packaging, shipping, and transportation requirements 
and procedures for Compounded Sterile Preparations (CSPs) prepared at FMOLHS Baton Rouge 
Market Pharmacies. 
1.2. CSP quality and integrity can be adversely affected by inappropriate handling, storage, packaging, 
shipping, & transport methods. Care and consideration are given to the determination and 
selection of these methods and personnel and/or vendors to carry out  these duties.  Proper 
training, processes, and quality assurance and control measures are integral to maintaining the 
quality of CSP during these processes. 
1.3. Refer to Label, Packaging, and Transport of Hazardous Drugs policy for procedures to hazardous 
medication handling, storage, packaging, transporting, and shipping. 
2. Policy  
2.1. Personnel handling, storing, packaging, and transporting CSPs are trained in the knowledge and 
skills needed to perform job -related responsibilities. Refer to Sterile Compounding Personnel  
Training & Evaluation policy for further information. 
2.2. CSPs are handled in a manner that maintains CSP quality and packaging integrity and are stored 
in temperature controlled designated storage areas to ensure storage temperatures remain 
within the appropriate range.  
2.3. Designated CSP storage area temperatures are monitored and logged daily on days of operation 
in SoleSource® Simplifi 797®.  
2.4. Temperature monitoring systems are verified for accuracy at least every 12 months  or as 
required by the manufacturer.  
2.5. Temperature excursions  above or below the required limits are investigated and CSPs are 
discarded if available literature or analytical testing does not verify the affected CSP(s) are 
expected to retain integrity or quality. 2.6. CSP packaging materials protect CSPs from damage, leakage, contamination, degradation, and 
adsorption as well as prevent accidental exposure to transport personnel. 
2.7. Tamper evident closures are used for all controlled substance CSPs and all other CSPs shipped 
outside of FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
2.8. Light-resistant packaging materials are used for light-sensitive CSPs. 
2.9. Shipping and transportation methods and vendors are selected that reasonably and reliably 
deliver properly packaged CSPs in an undamaged, sterile, and stable condition. 
2.10. CSPs delivered or shipped outside of FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies bear the 
appropriate visible and legible labeling on the outer packaging or container conveying in-transit 
storage requirements, special handling instructions (if applicable), and immediate storage 
requirements (if appropriate) upon receipt.  Refer to the Labeling of CSPs  policy for further 
information. 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Person(s) (DP): 
• Provide appropriate training and competency evaluations for personnel performing CSP 
handling, storage, packaging, and transport 
• Ensure CSP storage locations are appropriately monitored, and temperature is recorded 
daily or readily accessible 
• Research CSP stability and integrity when drug storage temperature excursions occur and 
determine if CSPs have retained quality and can be dispensed or must be destroyed due to 
a lack of uncertainty in the available stability and sterility data in the event of an excursion 
• Ensure packaging procedures and materials are appropriate to help retain the quality of the 
CSP 
3.2. Internal Personnel Handling, Storing, Packaging, & Transporting CSPs: 
• Personnel successfully complete and remain current on training and competency 
assessments required to perform job functions.  Refer to Sterile Compounding Personnel 
Training & Evaluation policy for further information. 
3.3. Third Party Delivery and Shipping Vendors: 
• Maintain appropriate CSP storage conditions during transit per labeling and delivery or 
shipping instructions.  
4. Procedures 
4.1. CSP Handling and Storage 
• After CSPs have been compounded and transferred to final dispensing containers, minimize 
jostling, shaking, or inverting CSPs unless labeling or literature promotes these actions to 
maintain or reestablish homogeneity of mixture. 
• Transport CSPs to drug storage locations on carts or in sanitized bins to minimize the risk of 
jostling, dropping, or damaging packaging and container closure systems and , as result,  
potentially impacting CSP integrity. • Move CSPs to the designated storage areas within controlled compounding areas 
corresponding with the labeled storage conditions upon pharmacist final verification, or 
when delays in final verification exceed 30 minutes from completion of compounding for 
CSPs requiring refrigerated or frozen storage or pending release testing results.   
• Move CSPs to designated storage areas within or outside of controlled areas when CSPs 
have been released for dispensing or administration, packaging, transport, or shipping. 
• Store CSPs in the following storage locations:  
Storage Condition Within Controlled Area(s) Outside of Controlled Area(s) 
Prior to Final Verification (including CSPs that have not undergone final verification or pending 
release testing results) 
Controlled Room 
Temperature: 
20°C - 25°C  
On carts in the buffer room or 
within perimeter line of SCA N/A 
Refrigerated:   
2°C - 8°C  
On carts in the buffer room or 
within perimeter line of SCA  N/A 
Frozen:   
-25°C to -10°C  
On carts in the buffer room or 
within perimeter line of SCA  N/A 
After Final Verification (CSPs released for dispensing, delivery, or shipping) 
Controlled Room 
Temperature: 
20°C - 25°C  
N/A Pharmacy IV batch delivery bins, 
patient medication carts 
Refrigerated:   
2°C - 8°C  Sterile compounding suite 
refrigerators 
IV workroom refrigerators, Pharmacy 
IV batch refrigerator, Pyxis 
refrigerators 
Frozen:   
-25°C to -10°C  N/A Pharmacy freezers 
4.2. CSP Packaging 
• Select CSP container closure systems and packaging that do not interact physically or 
chemically (e.g., adsorption)  with the CS P and that protect the CSP’s  sterility, identity, 
potency, purity, and similar quality criteria (e.g., light sensitivity).  
o Refer to the USP -NF drug monograph, manufacturer’s packaging data, or similar 
literature to determine appropriate container closure systems and packaging.  
o Record container closure system and packaging requirements and references on the 
Master Formulation Record (MFR), if applicable, for future reference.  
• Use tamper evident CSP containers or closure systems for the following: 
o Controlled substance CSPs 
o Ophthalmic and Otic CSPs 
o CSPs for use via high-risk routes of administration (e.g., intrathecal, epidural) 
o CSPs transported or shipped to an offsite administration site or directly to the patient  
o CSPs delivered, transported, or shipped by a third party vendor 
• Prior to transport out side of the pharmacy, package CSPs in packaging materials that 
minimize the risk of damage, leakage, or contamination and are designed to maintain the 
integrity of the requisite storage conditions for each CSP. Acceptable packaging includes, 
but is not limited to: 
o Containers: Hard -sided coolers, insulated containers, and/or refrigerated or frozen 
storage units o Cooling Source: Ice packs, refrigerant cooling blocks, or dry ice  
4.3. CSP Transport, Delivery, & Shipment 
• Transport CSPs to drug storage locations within the immediate facility on well -organized 
carts to minimize the risk of jostling, dropping, or damaging packaging and container closure 
systems and potentially impacting CSP integrity. 
o If multiple CSP deliveries occur simultaneously, sort CSPs into sanitized and labeled 
bins or totes to reduce the risk of mix up or missed delivery of time -sensitive 
medications. 
o Transport medications in appropriate packaging and storage conditions (see table 
below). 
• Pneumatic tube systems can be used for the transport of CSPs that are not sensitive to 
physical shaking, exposure to temporary temperature fluctuations, or are packaged in easily 
damaged containers (e.g., glass vials). CSPs or containers cannot be transpor ted via 
pneumatic tube system include, but are not limited to: 
o Antineoplastic Hazardous Drug medications 
o Refer to site-specific DO NOT TUBE list, if applicable 
• For transport and delivery outside of the immediate facility, package CSPs individually in 
clear zippered bags if possible to minimize the risk of contamination or spill exposure to 
transport personnel and use appropriate packaging and devices (e.g., insul ated cooler) to 
maintain storage conditions during transport.  
 
Transport 
Scenario / 
Storage 
Conditions 
Required Packaging Materials 
Controlled Room 
Temp 
(20°C - 25°C) 
Refrigerated: 
2°C - 8°C 
Frozen: 
-25°C to - 10 
Transport within 
immediate facility 
via cart 
• N/A • N/A  
 
• CSP(s) placed in clear 
zippered bag  
• Transported in cooler 
with ice packs 
Transport within 
immediate facility 
via pneumatic 
tube system 
• N/A  • N/A 
 
• N/A 
Transport or 
delivery to 
locations outside 
of immediate 
facility 
• CSP(s) placed in clear 
zippered bag  
• Transported in tote or 
cooler with ice packs  
• CSP(s) placed in clear 
zippered bag 
• Transported in tote or 
cooler with ice packs  
• CSP(s) placed in clear 
zippered bag 
• Transported in cooler 
with ice packs or dry ice  
Shipping via 
Common Courier 
• CSP(s) placed in clear 
zippered bag  
• Packaged in tote or 
insulated container with 
ice packs  
 
• CSP(s) placed in clear 
zippered bag  
• Packaged in tote or 
insulated container with 
ice packs or dry ice  
 
• CSP(s) placed in clear 
zippered bag  
• Packaged in insulated 
container with ice packs 
or dry ice  
 
• When transporting or shipping CSPs outside of the immediate facility, package CSPs in 
shipping containers designed to protect and maintain the quality of the contents and secured in a manner that allows for immediate detect of tampering or unauthorized entry 
into the shipping container. 
• For temperature sensitive CSPs, package the CSP in a moisture resistant clear, zippered bag 
placed inside of an appropriate insulated shipping container. Transport or ship CSP with the 
necessary quantity of ice packs or dry ice to reasonably ensure controlled storage conditions 
for 48 hours from packaging of shipping container until delivery to final recipient.   
• Select transportation and shipping modes that reasonably and reliably allow for delivery of 
temperature sensitive CSPs within the timeframe that corresponds to the useable life of ice 
packages or dry ice inserted into insulated storage containers for temperature control.  
• Label external shipping containers special handling instructions, in -transit storage 
requirements and, immediate storage requirements upon receipt if appropriate . Refer to 
common courier policies and instructions on proper containing labeling. 
4.4. Monitoring & Logging Storage Temperatures  
• Monitor and log temperatures of all drug storage locations and devices daily on days of 
operation or via continuous monitoring device.  
• Temperatures are recorded in SoleSource® Simplifi 797®. 
• Temperature monitoring devices are maintained, and accuracy validated at least once every 
12 months or per manufacturer instructions. 
• Retain readily retrievable records of temperature logs and accuracy validations. 
4.5. CSP Storage Location Temperature Excursions 
• Report out of range temperatures or continuous temperature monitoring system alarms 
immediately to the Designated Person or Charge Pharmacist. Temperature deviations in 
drug storage locations are considered urgent maintenance events and are remediated as 
quickly as possible.  
• When deviations exceed +5°C of the required storage conditions for longer than 60 minutes, 
quarantine CSPs located in the affected drug storage areas(s) in appropriate comparable 
storage conditions. Refer to the Release Inspections & Testing policy  for CSP quarantine 
procedures. 
•  As soon as possible, the DP or responsible party conducts necessary research to determine 
if the affected CSP quality and integrity has been compromised. 
o If CSPs are determined to have retained quality and integrity, move CSPs back to the 
appropriate storage location. 
o If CSP quality or integrity cannot be determined or has been compromised, log or 
remove CSPs from dispensable inventory and destroy and/or dispose of per facility 
drug disposal policy.  
• Investigate the temperature excursion to determine root cause(s) and implement corrective 
actions if appropriate. Consider historical trends in the investigation. Refer to the Quality 
Assurance and Quality Control policy  for procedures related to conducting investigations 
and corrective actions. 
4.6. CSPs Exposed to Temperature Deviation during Transport or Shipping • Provide delivery personnel and vendors transporting CSPs within and outside of the 
immediate facility with instructions regarding: 
o Monitoring CSP temperatures, packaging, and storage conditions before, during, and 
immediately after transit  
o Managing and reporting temperature deviations and excursions  
• Insert instructions in shipping containers or in labeling materials for the evaluation of CSP 
temperature upon receipt, if appropriate. Instructions should also include pharmacy contact 
information for further information.   
• When temperature excursions are reported to the Pharmacy, log the issue per the 
Complaint, Adverse Drug Reaction, & Recall Handling policy.  
5. Definitions 
5.1. Closure: A material that seals an otherwise open space of a  Container and provides protection 
for the contents. It also provides access to the contents of the  Container (e.g., screw caps and 
stoppers). 
5.2. Container: A receptacle that holds an intermediate compound, API, excipient, or dosage form, 
and is in direct contact with the article (e.g., ampules, vials, bottles, syringes, and pen injectors). 
5.3. Controlled room temperature: The temperature maintained thermostatically that encompasses 
the usual and customary working environment of 20°–25° (68°–77° F). 
5.4. Freezer: A place in which the temperature is controlled between −25° and −10° (−13° and 14° F) 
5.5. Room temperature (also referred to as Ambient temperature): The temperature prevailing in a 
working environment. 
5.6. Tamper-evident packaging:  A Packaging system  that may not be accessed without obvious 
destruction of the seal or some portion of the Packaging system 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
6.3. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <659> Packaging and Storage Requirements. 
Current version. 
7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 5/2025 
7.1. Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2023.  
7.2. Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 7.3. Revised 5/2025 (formatting). 