OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: 
Hand Hygiene and Garbing for Sterile 
Compounding in a Segregated 
Compounding Area 
Policy Reference #: PH0533 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 12/02/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the requirements and procedures for hand hygiene and garbing where 
Compounded Sterile Preparations (CSP) are prepared within a Segregated Compounding Area 
(SCA) within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
1.2. Personal hygiene and proper garbing are essential to minimizing microbial control of the sterile 
compounding environment. The human body sheds squamous cells at a rate of 106 or more per 
hour and these skin particles are covered in microorganisms. Touch contamination is the leading 
cause of CSP contamination. To minimize the risk of contamination into the sterile compounding 
environment, all persons who enter the sterile compounding environment must be properly 
garbed per this policy. 
1.3. This policy applies to the compounding of Category 1 CSPs only.  
1.4. This policy applies to compounding of only non -hazardous CSPs. Refer to USP <800> for 
additional Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) that may be required when compounding 
hazardous drugs.  
2. Policy  
2.1. It is the policy that all persons who enter the SCA of FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies 
comply with all aspects of this Hand Hygiene and Garbing policy to maintain microbial control of 
the sterile compounding environment.  
2.2. Individuals entering the SCA are properly garbed and maintain proper personal hygiene and hand 
hygiene to minimize the risk of contamination to the environment and/or CSPs. 
2.3. Gloves worn in the SCA are always sterile. 
2.4. Garb is replaced immediately if it becomes soiled or if the integrity is compromised. 
2.5. All garb is stored away from the sink to avoid splashing onto clean garb and is stored in a way 
that minimizes contamination.  2.6. All personnel responsible for sterile compounding are trained in hand hygiene and garbing and 
have their competency evaluated. Competency in hand hygiene and garbing is assessed by the 
DP or an Assigned Trainer (AT) and by passing a gloved fingertip test. 
2.7. All personnel who restock or clean the SCA (excluding the PEC) are trained in hand hygiene and 
garbing and have their competency evaluated. Competency in hand hygiene and garbing is 
assessed by the DP or AT and by passing a gloved fingertip test. 
2.8. Replace all garb that has become visibly soiled (e.g., becomes moist or wet due to splashing of 
cleaning agents and/or perspiration) after cleaning and prior to resuming compounding duties; 
at a minimum, repeat hand hygiene and replace sterile gloves before returning to compounding. 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1. The Designated Person(s) (DP): 
• Oversees the personnel who enter the SCA and ensures they comply with all procedures in 
the Hand Hygiene and Garbing policy. 
• Evaluates if compounding personnel need to be excluded from sterile compounding based 
on individual special conditions. Special conditions include but are not limited to: rashes, 
recent tattoos, oozing sores, conjunctivitis, or active respiratory infections 
• Ensures that any non -compounding staff or visitors who enter the SCA comply with all 
procedures in the Hand Hygiene and Garbing policy. These include but are not limited to: 
engineering, environmental services, stocking personnel, inspectors, or students. 
3.2. Compounding personnel: 
• Maintain the sterile environment by performing hand hygiene and garbing procedures.  
• Inform the Designated Person (DP) if they have any conditions that could contaminate the 
sterile compounding environment. Examples of these conditions include but are not limited 
to: rashes, recent tattoos, oozing sores, conjunctivitis, or active respiratory infections. 
3.3. Non-compounding staff and visitors: 
• Maintain the sterile environment by performing hand hygiene procedures. 
• Don appropriate garb according to facility SOP. 
4. Procedures 
4.1. All personnel entering the SCA take appropriate steps to minimize microbial contamination of 
the environment and of the CSPs, including hand hygiene, garbing, and consideration of needed 
materials to be brought into the compounding area. 
4.2. All individuals entering the SCA remove all items that are not easily cleanable or are not necessary 
for compounding. The DP may permit accommodations to the below list as long as the quality of 
the CSP and compounding area will not be affected, accommodations are documented. At a 
minimum, individuals must: 
• Remove personal outer garments (e.g., bandanas, coats, hats, jackets, sweaters, vests) 
• Remove all cosmetics 
• Remove all hand, wrist, and other exposed jewelry, including piercings that could interfere 
with the effectiveness of garbing. Cover any jewelry that cannot be removed. 
• Remove earbuds and headphones • Individuals will not bring in electronic devices that are not necessary for compounding or 
other required tasks into the compounding area 
• Nails are clean and neatly trimmed. No nail products may be worn (all nail polish, artificial 
nails and extenders are not allowed) 
• If eyeglasses are worn, they are cleaned with an eyeglass wipe on the lenses and with a 
disinfectant wipe on the frames 
• Employees entering the sterile compounding area will wear socks long enough to cover 
exposed skin on legs that may be present when the employee is sitting. 
4.3. Required garb for sterile compounding Category 1 CSPs include:  
• Low-lint gown with sleeves that fit snugly around the wrist and have an enclosed neck 
o Gowns with a thumb loop are used 
• Low-lint shoe covers  
• Low-lint face mask 
• Low-lint cover for head that covers the hair and ears, and if applicable, cover for facial hair 
• Sterile powder-free gloves 
4.4. Any person entering the SCA must wash hands and forearms up to the elbows with soap and 
water before initiating compounding activities. 
• Steps for hand hygiene: 
o Remove visible debris from underneath fingernails under warm running water using a 
disposable nail cleaner 
o Wash hands and forearms up to the elbows with soap and water for at least 30 seconds 
o Dry hands and forearms up to the elbows completely with low-lint disposable towels or 
wipers 
• Brushes and hand dryers are not used 
• A non-refillable soap dispenser is located next to the sink  
4.5. All garb for sterile compounding is stored outside the perimeter line of the SCA. 
4.6. Order of hand hygiene and garbing is: 
• Outside of the SCA: 
o Tie long hair back 
o Clean eyeglasses  
• Enter SCA: 
o Don mask, head, and facial hair covers outside the perimeter line 
o Perform hand hygiene 
o Don gown 
o Sanitize hands/wrists with alcohol-based hand sanitizer: 
• Apply alcohol-based hand sanitizer to dry skin on one hand (volume determined by 
manufacturer) 
• Rub hands together, covering all surfaces of fingers, hands, and wrists until hands are 
dry 
• Inside the perimeter line of the SCA: 
o Don shoe covers one foot at a time while stepping over the perimeter line  
o Don sterile gloves 
4.7. Donning and doffing of garb will not occur in the perimeter line of the SCA at the same time. 
4.8. Sterile gloves are never donned or doffed inside a Laminar Airflow System (LAFS) or Class II 
Biological Safety Cabinet (BSC) ISO Class 5 PEC.  
4.9. Garbing for non-compounding staff or visitors: • When it is necessary for non -compounding staff or visitors to enter the SCA to perform 
maintenance, cleaning procedures, inspections; the persons entering the area performs all 
proper hand hygiene and garbing per this policy. 
4.10. Doffing of gown worn while compounding CSPs occurs within the perimeter of the SCA. 
Order of doffing garb worn during sterile compounding: 
• Remove sterile gloves 
• Remove gown 
o For Category 1 CSPs gowns are stored within the perimeter of the SCA for reuse during 
the same shift only if the gown is not visibly soiled or torn.  
• Leave the SCA perimeter line and remove and dispose of mask, facial hair cover, head cover, 
and shoe covers  
5. Definitions 
5.1. Assigned Trainer (AT):  One or more individuals assigned by the Designated Person(s) to be 
responsible for directly providing the training, observation, and/or evaluation of personnel for 
the preparation of CSPs 
5.2. ISO: International Standards Organization 
5.3. Laminar Airflow System (LAFS): A device or zone within a buffer area that provides an ISO Class 
5 or better air quality environment for sterile compounding. The system provides a unidirectional 
HEPA-filtered airflow. Examples of LAFS are Laminar Airflow Workbenches (LAFWs), Integrated 
Vertical Laminar Flow Zones (IVLFZs) and Biological Safety Cabinet, Class II (BSCs). 
5.4. Low-lint: Material that exhibits few, if any, fibers or other contamination, visible without 
magnification, which is separate from, or easily removed from the material in a dry condition 
5.5. Perimeter Line: A visible demarcation (such as a door, walls , or visible marking on the floor) that 
defines the SCA 
5.6. Primary Engineering Control (PEC) : A device or zone that provides an ISO Class 5 air quality 
environment for sterile compounding 
5.7. Restricted-access Barrier System (RABS):  An enclosure that provides HEPA -filtered ISO Class 5 
unidirectional air that allows for the ingress and/or egress of materials through defined openings 
that have been designed and validated to preclude the transfer of contamination, and that 
generally are  not to be opened during operations. Examples of RABS include Compounding 
Aseptic Isolators (CAIs) and Compounding Aseptic Containment Isolators (CACIs). 
5.8. Segregated Compounding Area  (SCA): A designated, unclassified space, area, or room with a 
defined perimeter that contains a PEC and is suitable for preparation of Category 1 CSPs only 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 proposed version. 
6.2. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 5/2024 
Next review: 12/2025 7.1. Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2022.  
7.2. Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
7.3. Reviewed with no changes 12/2024. 
 