OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Designated Person for Sterile 
Compounding 
Policy Reference #: PH0527 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
 
             
 *FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-
Oncology Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital 
Inpatient Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
Overview and Scope 
1.1 This policy describes the primary roles and responsibilities for the Designated Person(s) (DP) 
responsible for the oversite of sterile compounding processes and compliance where 
Compounded Sterile Preparations (CSP) are prepared within FMOLHS Baton Rouge M arket 
Pharmacies.  
2. Policy  
2.1. FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies will designate one or more individuals (i.e., the 
designated person(s)) to be responsible and accountable for the performance and operation of 
the facility and personnel in the preparation of CSPs and all other functions pertaining to CSPs. 
 
2.2. The DP for CSPs will have the following qualifications:  
• Initial completion of 30 CE hours in the area of sterile compounding 
• Ongoing completion of CriticalPoint® training modules 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1. The Designated Persons for sterile compounding are listed in Appendix A.  
 
3.2. The DP(s) is responsible for:  
• Overall compliance with USP <797>, applicable federal and state laws and regulations and 
accreditation standards. 
• Oversight of personnel training and competency for those involved in sterile compounding 
and handling and preparing CSPs 
• Selection of components 
• Monitoring and observing sterile compounding activities and taking immediate corrective 
action if deficient practices are observed. 
• Ensuring standard operating procedures (SOPs) and/or policies are fully implemented, and 
that follow-up is carried out if problems, deviations, or errors are identified. 
• Establishing, monitoring, and documenting procedures for the handling and storage of CSPs 
and/or components of CSPs.  
 
3.3. The DP reports to the Senior Director or Director of Pharmacy.  
 
3.4. Pharmacy Management is responsible for: 
• Ensuring adequate personnel resources for training and adherence to FMOLHS Baton Rouge 
Market Pharmacies’ Sterile Compounding procedures 
• Ensuring adequate equipment and facilities to comply with USP <797> standard 
• Coordinating with the Designated Person for Sterile Compounding for local site 
implementation, monitoring, or concerns. 
4. Procedures 
4.1 Training and Evaluation: 
• The DP creates, implements, and oversees training of all compounders, personnel who have 
direct oversight of compounders, and personnel who perform restocking or cleaning and 
disinfection duties. The DP ensures that all persons who enter the sterile compounding area 
and/or handles CSPs complete training and demonstrate competency in maintaining the quality 
of the sterile compounding environment. 
• The DP performs all training and observation associated with CSPs and/or designates an 
assigned trainer to complete these functions. 
 
4.2 Personal Hygiene and Garbing: 
• The DP evaluates if individuals with certain conditions should be excluded from the sterile 
compounding environment. Conditions that have a higher risk of contaminating the CSP and 
the environment are personnel with rashes, recent tattoos, oozing sores, co njunctivitis, or 
active respiratory infections. 
• The DP may permit individual personnel accommodations to hand hygiene and garbing as 
long as the quality of the CSP and the environment will not be affected; and will document 
accommodations as defined in the Hand Hygiene and Garbing policy.     
 
4.3 Facility Design and Environmental Control: 
• The DP ensures that each area where CSPs are prepared meets the classified air quality 
standard appropriate for the activities conducted in that area.  
• The DP ensures that International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Class 5 areas are 
located, operated, maintained, monitored, and certified to have appropriate air quality. 
• The DP determines the dynamic operating conditions for the sterile compounding 
environment. The dynamic operating conditions are reproduced during dynamic room 
certification testing.  
o Dynamic operating conditions are the conditions in the sterile compounding 
area in which personnel are present and simulating or performing sterile 
compounding. These conditions will reflect the largest number of personnel 
and highest complexity of compoun ding expected during routine operations 
as determined by the DP.  
• The DP identifies and addresses other areas of risk related to placement and movement 
of materials within the compounding area to ensure the quality of the CSP and the 
environment will not be affected.   
4.4 Certification and Recertification: 
• The DP reviews all certification and recertification records to ensure that the classified 
environments meet the minimum requirements outlined in USP <797>.  
 
4.5 Components: 
• The DP assesses and selects acceptable and reliable sources if a component used in the 
compounding of CSPs cannot be obtained from a Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-
registered facility.  
 
4.6 Standard Operating Procedures (SOP)s: 
• The DP ensures that SOPs are appropriate and are implemented, which includes ensuring 
that personnel demonstrate competency in performing every procedure that relates to 
their job function.  
• The DP ensures that corrective actions are taken if problems, deviations, failures, or errors 
are identified, and documents corrective actions as necessary. 
• The DP reviews SOPs at least every 12 months to ensure that they reflect current 
practices. The review is documented on LakeLink.  
• Any changes or alterations to an SOP are made only by a DP and must be documented. 
 
4.7 Quality Assurance and Quality Control: 
• The DP ensures that FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies have a formal, written 
Quality Assurance (QA) and Quality Control (QC) program. 
• The written QA and QC program establishes a system of: 
o Adherence to procedures 
o Prevention and detection of errors and other quality problems 
o Evaluation of complaints and adverse events 
o Appropriate investigations and corrective action 
• The DP reviews the overall QA and QC program once every 12 months and the results of 
the review are documented and appropriate action taken if necessary. 
 
4.8 Complaint Handling: 
• The DP reviews all complaints to determine whether the complaint indicates a potential 
quality problem with the CSP. 
 
4.9 Handling and storing CSPs: 
• If there is a known excursion to temperatures either below or above the storage 
temperature limits for the CSP, the DP determines (e.g., by consulting literature or 
analytical testing) whether the CSP is expected to retain its integrity or quality.  If thi s 
cannot be determined, the CSP is discarded. 
 
 5. Definitions 
5.1 Designated Person (DP): One or more individuals assigned to be responsible and accountable for 
the performance and operation of the compounding facility and personnel in the preparation of 
CSPs.  
 
5.2 Compounded Sterile Preparation (CSP) : A preparation intended to be sterile that is created by 
combining, admixing, diluting, pooling, reconstituting, repackaging, or otherwise altering a drug 
product or bulk drug substance. 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2023 version. 
7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved 
by/date: 
Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2025 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2022.  
7.2 Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
7.3 Reviewed with no changes 11/2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix A: Designated Persons per Facility 
 • OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy – Pharmacy Manager 
• OLOL Cancer Institute Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy – Pharmacy Supervisor 
• OLOL Non-Oncology Infusion – Pharmacy Supervisor 
• OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy – Pharmacy Manager 
• North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy – Pharmacy Supervisor 
• OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient Pharmacy – Staff Pharmacist, as determined by Pharmacy 
Director 
• OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy – Staff Pharmacist, as determined by 
Pharmacy Director 
 
 