OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Hazardous Drug Compounding and 
Materials Movement 
Policy Reference #: PH0548 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the procedures for Hazardous Drug Compounding and Materials Movement 
where Hazardous Drugs (HDs) are prepared within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
1.2. Harm to healthcare personnel from occupational exposure to HDs can occur throughout the 
medication-use process including HD sterile and nonsterile compounding. Proper use of Personal 
Protective Equipment (PPE) and use of engineering controls is important to limit occupational 
exposure to HDs and to limit contamination to the healthcare environment.    
1.3. This SOP refers to all HD Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients ( API), antineoplastic HDs requiring 
manipulation (beyond counting or repackaging), and other non -antineoplastic and reproductive 
risk only HD dosage forms for which an Assessment of Risk (AoR) has not been performed. 
2. Policy  
2.1 Sterile and nonsterile HDs are compounded using methods that protect employees, the 
surrounding environment, and others who may encounter these HDs within FMOLHS Baton Rouge 
Market Pharmacies . Procedures outlined in this policy serve to minimize the risk of HD 
contamination.  
2.2 If a Containment Primary Engineering Control (C -PEC) sustains a power loss or alarms due to 
malfunction, all HD compounding activities in the affected C-PEC are suspended immediately. 
2.3 All HDs are labeled as hazardous drugs following facility HD labeling policies so that all HD dosage 
forms are identifiable to all personnel handling them.  
2.4 Any employee who may be expected to handle any form of HDs during  compounding is trained 
on proper handling of HDs, competency is evaluated, and documented in SoleSource® Simplifi 
797® at least annually. Training includes: 
• Identifying HDs according FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies’ HD list  
• Use of required PPE 
• Use of engineering controls 
• Response to exposure of HDs, spill management, and proper disposal of HDs 2.5 All hand hygiene and garbing policies and procedures pertaining to compounding sterile and 
nonsterile preparations are followed. There is required additional PPE for HD Compounded Sterile 
Preparations (CSPs) and HD Compounded Nonsterile Preparations (CNSPs) that includes: 
• Chemotherapy Gown donned over non-HD gowns and frocks  
• Head and hair cover (including facial hair) 
• Shoe covers 
• Two pairs of chemotherapy gloves 
2.6 Gloves worn when handling HD meet ASTM Standard Practice for Assessment of Resistance of 
Medical Gloves to Permeation by Chemotherapy Drugs (D6978) or its successor. Gloves are either 
sterile or non-sterile depending on use. 
2.7 All USP <797> compounding policies are followed when compounding HD CSPs to maintain the 
sterility of the CSP. Microbial contamination remains a risk during HD CSP compounding and all 
procedures for sterile compounding are followed to maintain sterility of the final CSP.  
2.8 Closed System Transfer Devices (CSTDs) are used at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies  
when compounding HD CSPs  to reduce environmental HD contamination . The CSTDs used are 
Equashield, ICU Medical ChemoClave ™, and any others as determined by the preparation and 
facility. All compounding staff are trained on all CSTDs components, how components work 
together, steps that are not appropriate with CSTD, and proper techniques to use CSTDs safely 
and minimize HD contamination in the environment and HD exposure to the worker.  
• CSTDs for compounding are supplemental containment controls and are used within a C-PEC 
only. 
2.9 CSTDs are attached to the final dosage form (if dosage form allows) to ensure the final dosage 
form is provided with maximum safety during administration of the drug.  
2.10 Tablet and capsule HD dosage forms are not placed in automated counting machines, 
repackaging is manual. Unit dose products are purchased whenever possible. 
2.11 Dedicated equipment is used for counting, compounding, and pouring of nonsterile HDs. 
Equipment is clearly labeled and stored separately from other non-hazardous equipment.  
2.12 Crushing HD tablets and opening HD capsules is avoided, when possible; liquid products are purchased whenever 
available. When crushing antineoplastic HD tablets and opening HD capsules, a C -PEC is always used along with 
proper PPE per HD PPE policy. When crushing non-antineoplastic and reproductive risk only HD tablets and opening 
HD capsules, refer to the AoR for containment strategies.  
2. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 Designated Person (DP): 
• Ensures all HDs are identified per the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) list and maintains the list of HDs specifically handled at this facility. 
• Ensures all personnel have education and training  in the foundational knowledge and skills 
needed to handle HDs and perform hazardous drug compounding job duties successfully and 
safely; per this policy and in order to minimize HD exposure in the facility. 
• Provides immediate access to the SOPs, USP <800> and supporting Chapters and supporting 
regulations, and other expert documentation to perform job duties successfully and safely. 
3.2 Compounding Personnel: • Follow all USP <797> policies and procedures when compounding sterile HDs along with 
following all procedures in this policy.  
• Follow all USP <795> policies and procedures when compounding nonsterile HDs along with 
following all procedures in this policy. 
• Follow all CSTD procedures for working with HDs to increase efficiency and minimize HD 
exposure to self, compounding environment, transport packaging, and personnel handling 
the final dosage form for administration.  
• Follow all negative-pressure techniques and procedures for working with HDs to minimize HD 
exposure to self, compounding environment, transport packaging, and personnel handling 
the final dosage form for administration. 
4.  Procedures 
      4.1 Sterile Compounding: Materials Movement in a BSC 
• Perform all hand hygiene and garbing and HD PPE garbing per <797> and <800> policies. 
• Prepare only one patient preparation at a time. 
• Remove the HDs from the primary packaging and discard packaging into trace HD waste as 
needed. 
• Don second pair of sterile chemotherapy gloves, wipe gloved hands with sIPA. 
• Decontaminate HD vials with the decontaminating agent Peridox RTU®  according to 
procedures outlined in Decontaminating Policy. Decontaminate gloves afterward. 
• Sanitize all items per USP <797> policies with sterile 70% Isopropyl Alcohol (sIPA) and a 
sterile low-lint wiper and allow to dry before transferring items into the BSC.  
o The wiping procedure does not render the product label unreadable.  
o Sterile supplies in sealed containers moving into the PEC may be removed from the outer 
covering as the supplies are introduced into the PEC without needing to be wiped with sIPA  
• Apply sIPA to gloved hands after transferring items into the BSC. Gloved hands remain inside 
the BSC for the entire sterile compounding process. When hands are removed from the BSC, 
wipe gloved hands with sIPA prior to putting hands back into the BSC. 
• Arrange only items needed for one preparation in the BSC so that all items are receiving first 
air.  
• IV workflow systems are arranged inside the BSC to the right or left of the DCA. First air is 
maintained across the surface of the IV workflow system when CSPs are arranged on the 
hardware.  
      4.2 Sterile Hazardous Drug Compounding and Aseptic Techniques: 
• CSTDs are used whenever possible to reduce risk to the compounding personnel and 
increase efficiency during HD compounding. Follow all CSTD manufacturer instructions for 
all steps in HD sterile compounding. 
• Spike IV bag with appropriate IV line and prime per manufacturer specifications and per 
facility-specific practices 
o Care is taken to avoid contamination of the IV line with potential HD residue in the C -
PEC. 
  
 
4.3 Reconstituting HDs: 
• CSTDs are used whenever possible to reduce risk to the compounding personnel and 
increase efficiency. Follow all CSTD manufacturer instructions for HD vial reconstitution 
while using CSTDs.  
• When reconstituting HD vials without using CSTDs, care is taken to maintain slight negative 
pressure in the HD vial by: 
o Wipe vial septum with sIPA and allow to dry.  
o Syringes used to reconstitute are sufficient in size so that when filled with anticipated 
maximum volume, they are no more than three quarters full (3/4), reducing the chance 
the plunger will become separated from the barrel. 
o Draw up the diluent, then insert the needle or vial spike into the vial with the vial in the 
upright position. 
o Pull plunger back slightly to create slight negative pressure. 
o Slowly add diluent to the vial per drug Package Insert specifications, by alternating 
between adding diluent and withdrawing air from the vial, maintaining slight negative 
pressure.  
o Withdraw needle from vial and discard into trace HD waste sharps container.  
o Swirl or shake vial per manufacturer Package Insert to reconstitute. 
4.4 Withdrawing HDs from a vial: 
• Follow all CSTD manufacturer instructions for withdrawing drug from a HD vial while using 
CSTDs.  
o Wipe vial septum with sIPA and allow to dry. 
o Insert CSTD vial spike into the vial. 
o Attach syringe the CSTD vial spike 
o Invert vial, while allowing critical sites to receive first air withdraw the HD drug from the 
vial by pulling back on the plunger.  
o Tap the syringe to remove any air bubbles and push air back into the vial; check volume 
drawn up.  
o While holding the plunger, turn the vial again until it is upright and place onto the DCA 
of C-PEC. Pull back slightly to clear the hub of HD drug and detach syringe from the 
vial.   
• When withdrawing a HD from a vial without using CSTDs, care is taken to maintain slight 
negative pressure in the HD vial by: 
o Volume of air added to the vial is less than the volume of drug removed from the vial. 
Pull back on the syringe to a volume less than being withdrawn.  
o Wipe vial septum with sIPA and allow to dry. 
o Insert needle into the vial septum. 
o Invert vial, while allowing the critical sites to receive first air withdraw the HD drug from 
the vial by pulling back on the plunger. Without pushing on the plunger, allow the air to 
flow back into the vial. Continue these steps until the desired volume o f drug has been 
withdrawn from the vial.  
o Tap the syringe to remove any air bubbles and inject air into the vial; check volume 
drawn up. o While holding the plunger, turn the vial again until it is upright and place onto DCA of 
C-PEC. Pull back slightly to clear the needle of HD drug and withdraw needle  from the 
vial septum.  
4.5 Adding HDs to an IV bag: 
• Follow all CSTD manufacturer instructions for adding HD drug to a bag while using CSTDs.  
• Inject HDs into an IV without using CSTDs utilizing the following techniques: 
o Wipe IV bag injection port with sIPA and allow to dry.  
o Insert needle or attach syringe to the IV bag injection port and push HD drug from syringe into the bag.  
o Remove the syringe and discard into trace HD waste sharps container. 
o Add tamper evident seal/lock to the injection port as needed. 
o Add the administration CSTD to the product. 
4.6 Withdrawing HD drug from ampule: 
• Withdraw HDs from an ampule utilizing the following techniques:  
o Tap the neck of the ampule gently to move solution to the main chamber of the ampule 
o Wipe the neck with sIPA and allow to dry. 
o Wrap sIPA wipe around the neck of the ampule and break toward the back of the C -
PEC 
o Attach a fi lter needle  or straw to appropriately sized syringe and withdraw required 
amount of drug.  
o Remove filter needle or straw and place into trace HD waste sharps container and place 
needle onto the syringe. 
o Follow steps for adding drug to IV bag if required.  
o Discard the ampule and syringe/needle into trace HD waste sharps container.  
4.7 Dispensing HD in a syringe: 
• Follow all CSTD manufacturer instructions for dispensing HD in a syringe utilizing CSTDs.  
• Dispense HD doses in a syringe utilizing the following techniques: 
o Follow all steps for withdrawing HD from a vial or ampule 
o Pull back the plunger to clear fluid from the needle and hub. 
o Replace needle (if used) with CSTD for administration. 
4.8 Conclusion of HD sterile compounding: 
• Perform all release inspections and quality control checks by the compounder, and final 
verification by the compounding pharmacist or verification pharmacist through DoseEdge®.  
• Decontaminate all surfaces of the HD product as needed. 
• Decontaminate the DCA of the C-PEC between compounding different HDs. 
• Place product into transport bag taking care not to contaminate the outer surfaces of 
transport bag.  
• When IV workflow systems are used, all steps above for HD sterile compounding are 
followed along with all steps required for the IV workflow system.  
• Doff HD PPE according to PPE for HD Compounding policy  and dispose of PPE in trace HD 
waste receptacle.  
• Wash hands and wrists with soap and water. 
 
Nonsterile Hazardous Drug Compounding: 
      4.9 Preparation for HD CNSPs • Prepare only one patient preparation at a time. 
• Refer to all USP <797> policies  when nonsterile compounding occurs in sterile cleanroom 
suites. 
• Perform hand hygiene per USP <795> policies. 
• Don PPE per PPE for HD Compounding policy. Don PPE per facility design requirements and 
classification of compounding area.  
o Enter C-SEC or C-SCA, garbing in the correct locations per policy. 
• Place all items required for each patient preparation according to the compounding 
documentation, either per paper or digital documentation, in a bin. Items gathered include 
but are not limited to: all components, supplies, and equipment required to complete the 
CNSP. 
• Perform an independent double check of the assembled items. 
      4.10 Nonsterile HD Materials Movement and Compounding Techniques 
• Remove the HDs from the primary packaging. 
• Place the bin with the items needed for compounding on the cart next to compounding 
personnel. 
• Don second pair of chemotherapy gloves. 
• Decontaminate HDs vials with the decontaminating agent Peridox RTU®  according to 
procedures outlined in Decontaminating Policy. Decontaminate gloves afterward. 
• Clean the C -PEC per USP <795> or <797> cleaning policies and calibrate any equipment 
before using. 
• Follow the steps withing the Master Formulation Record (MFR), either in paper or digital 
form) to complete the preparation. 
o Document HD product information, calculations, weights and measures, and results of 
quality control checks on the Compounding Record (CR). 
• Perform all release inspections, quality control checks and final verification by the 
pharmacist. 
• Label CNSP with patient or bulk product label and hazardous drug identification label.  
• Place final CNSP into zip-top containment bag for storage, dispensing, or transport. 
• Decontaminate and clean the compounding area, equipment and tools used during 
compounding according to USP <795> policy.  
o Contaminated equipment is wiped with sterile water, cleaned with approved facility 
detergent, followed by approved facility deactivating agent, and then rinsed per USP 
<795> policies. The wipers used and rinse water are disposed as trace HD waste. 
• Doff HD PPE according to PPE for HD Compounding policy and dispose PPE in trace HD waste 
receptacle.  
• Wash hands and wrists with soap and water. 
5. Definitions 
5.1 Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (API): Any substance or mixture of substances intended to be 
used in the compounding of a drug preparation, thereby becoming the active ingredient in that 
preparation and furnishing pharmacological activity or other direct effect in the diagnoses, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans and animals or affecting the structure 
and function of the body. 
5.2 Assessment of Risk (AoR) : Evaluation of risk to determine alternative containment strategies 
and/or work practices. 
5.3 Biological Safety Cabinet (BSC): A ventilated cabinet often used for preparation of hazardous 
drugs. These cabinets are divided into three general classes (Class I, Class II, and Class III). Class II 
BSCs are further divided into types (Type A1, Type A2, Type B1, and Type B2). 
5.4 Chemotherapy glove: A powder -free medical glove that meets the ASTM Standard Practice for 
Assessment of Resistance of Medical Gloves to Permeation by Chemotherapy Drugs (D6978) or 
its successor. Gloves are either sterile or non-sterile depending on use. 
5.5 Chemotherapy gown : Gown used for handling HDs that is disposable, polyethylene -coated 
polypropylene (or a similar laminate) to resist permeation by HDs, seamless, closes in the back, 
has long sleeves, and has cuffs made of elastic or a knit material. 
5.6 Compounding Aseptic Containment Isolator (CACI): A specific type of CAI that is designed for the 
compounding of sterile HDs. The CACI is designed to provide worker protection from exposure to 
undesirable levels of airborne drugs throughout the compounding and material transfer processes 
and to provide a n aseptic environment with unidirectional airflow for compounding sterile 
preparations. 
5.7 Containment Primary Engineering Controls (C-PEC): A ventilated device designed and operated 
to minimize worker and environmental exposures to HDs by controlling emissions of airborne 
contaminants. 
5.8 Containment Secondary Engineering Controls (C-SEC): The room with fixed walls in which the C-
PEC is place. It incorporates specific design and operational parameters required to the contain 
the potential hazard within the compounding room.  
5.9 Containment segregated compounding area (C-SCA): A type of C-SEC with nominal requirements 
for airflow and room pressurization as they pertain to HD compounding. 
5.10 Closed System Transfer Device (CSTD): A drug -transfer device that mechanically prohibits the 
transfer of environmental contaminants into the system and the escape of HD or vapor 
concentrations outside the system.  
5.11 Containment Ventilated Enclosure (CVE) : A full or partial enclosure that uses ventilation 
principles to capture, contain, and remove airborne contaminants through HEPA filtration and 
prevent release into the work environment.  
5.12 Master Formulation Record (MFR):  A detailed record of procedures that describe how the 
compounded preparation is to be prepared.  
5.13 NIOSH: National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health 
5.14 Trace HD Waste : Materials that have come into contact with or may contain only a residual 
amount of HD. Usually less than 3% of HD material by weight. 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <795> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 6.3 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version. 
6.4 American Society of Health-System Pharmacists. ASHP Guidelines on Handling Hazardous Drugs. 
Am J Health-Sys Pharm. 2018; 75:1996-2031. Retrieved 12/20/22.  
6.5 Kienle P. The Chapter <800> Answer Book. Bethesda, MD: ASHP; 2017. 
7. Approval and Review Summary 
 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2025 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2023.  
7.2 Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
7.3 Reviewed with no changes 11/2024. 
 
 