OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: BUD Determination and Stability 
Considerations 
Policy Reference #: PH0530 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised: 5/29/2024 
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the procedures for the determination and assignment of beyond use dating 
(BUD) for Compounded Sterile Preparations (CSP) prepared within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market 
Pharmacies.  
1.2. BUD limits are intended to help prevent patient harm resulting from microbial proliferation and 
contamination of CSPs.   BUDs are determined by evaluating the chemical stability of the CSP 
components or formulation, storage conditions, starting components (sterile vs. non -sterile), 
sterile processing approach, and type of sterile compounding area where the CSP is prepared. 
1.3. Expiration dates and BUDs are not interchangeable terms or concepts and medication 
administration terms cause confusion around the definition and application of BUDs assigned to 
compounded sterile preparations.  
Expiration date is the time during which a manufactured product can be expected to meet the 
requirements of the USP –NF monograph, if one exists, or maintain expected quality 
provided it is kept under the specified storage conditions; applies to all conventionally 
manufactured products, active pharmaceutical ingredients (API), and added substances. 
BUD is the date, or hour and date, after which the administration of a CSP cannot begin. BUDs are 
not intended to limit administration time; applies to all CSPs and stock solutions made by 
Compounding Personnel.  
Hang time or administration time  refers to the amount of time during which a CSP or 
conventionally manufactured product (e.g., pre-mix, large volume parenteral solution) may 
be infused before which the tubing or medications needs to be changed due to stability 
considerations. Hang time is not determined by USP <797> and is considered out of scope 
for this policy. 
1.4 This policy denotes the BUD assignment for all CSPs compounded at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market 
Pharmacies. 
Refer to Immediate-Use Compounding policy for the procedures pertaining further information 
about the requirements and definition of Immediate Use Compounding  2. Policy 
 
2.1 Every CSP is labeled with a date, or date and hour, after which administration of the 
      medication cannot occur (i.e., BUD).  BUDs are:  
      Based on anticipated storage conditions 
      Determined from the time compounding begins  
     Not allowed to exceed the shortest remaining expiration date of any of the commercially 
     available or compounded components used in the preparation of the CSP. 
     Consider one day equivalent to 24 hours 
 
Maximum BUDs differ for Immediate Use, Category 1, and Category 2 CSPs  and, at no time, are 
extended beyond those stated in USP <797>; adapted from Tables 12 and 13 of USP <797>.   
 
• Controlled 
Room 
Temperature 
• [20oC to 25oC] 
• Refrigerated 
Temperature 
• [2oC to 8oC] 
• Frozen 
Temperature 
• [-25oC to -
10oC] 
• Immediate Use CSPs  
Aseptically processed CSPs from only 
sterile starting components • < 4 hours • < 4 hours 
• Not 
Applicable 
• Category 1 CSPs  
o Aseptically processed CSPs from only 
sterile starting components  • < 12 hours • < 24 hours • Not 
Applicable 
• Category 2 CSPs - not requiring sterility testing 
o Aseptically processed CSPs from 
ONLY sterile starting components • 4 Days • 10 Days • 45 Days 
o  
BUDs are assigned by Compounding Personnel with consideration for factors that could impact the 
CSP quality or sterility including, but not limited to: 
Chemical and physical stability of the components and/or formulation 
Container closure system and compatibility with the final preparation and storage conditions 
Compounding environment in which the CSP is prepared 
Aseptic processing and sterilization method 
Sterility of starting components 
Whether or not sterility testing is performed (if applicable) 
Storage conditions   
When the chemical or physical stability of the CSP is shorter than the maximum BUD, the most 
conservative dating becomes the BUD.   
Chemical stability is based on available manufacturer’s data, published literature, and industry 
references.  
Packaging is selected for the CSP to preserve sterility, chemical stability, and potency. 
CSPs stored under or moved to different storage conditions before they are used assume the new 
shorter BUD of the storage condition(s) which does not to exceed the original BUD placed on the 
CSP at the time of preparation BUDs are not additive; administration is initiated before the BUD is exceeded or the CSP is 
promptly and appropriately discarded 
Once a CSP has been stored under a new storage condition requiring a shorter BUD, the CSP is 
used within the shortened timeframe 
Storage conditions per USP <659> Packaging and Storage Requirements:  
Controlled Room Temperature: 20oC to 25oC  
Refrigerated: 2oC to 8oC  
Frozen: -25oC to -10oC   
Multiple-dose CSPs, including topical ophthalmic CSPs, meet the following criteria:  
Prepared as Category 2  
Preserved unless prepared specifically for a sterile topical application (including ophthalmic use). 
Preservatives are appropriate for the dosage form, intended patient population, and route 
of administration. 
Non-preserved topical CSPs are only prepared for a single patient and labeled with a Discard by 
Date (or “in-use” date) 
Dispensed in a multi -dose container closure system that has been evaluated for and conforms 
with container closure integrity testing (per USP <1207>; except for sterile multi -dose 
topical applicators such as eye droppers) 
Assigned a maximum BUD per USP <797> (see Section 2.2) and labeled with a Discard by Date as 
follows: 
• Multi-Dose CSPs  
• Maximum BUD  
• (from compounding 
date) 
• Discard By Date  
• (or “in-use” time once 
opened) 
• Nonaqueous multi-dose 
CSPs 
• Per USP <797> BUDs 
• (see Section 2.2) 
• No longer than 28 Days* or 
the Labeled BUD  
• (whichever is shorter) 
• Non-preserved aqueous 
multi-dose CSPs for topical 
use 
• Per USP <797> BUDs 
• (see Section 2.2) 
• No longer than: 
• 24 hours stored at room 
temp OR  
• 72 hours if stored 
refrigerated 
*28 Days at room temperature or storage temperature per manufacturer’s specifications 
Conventionally manufactured sterile products or components used in the preparation of CSPs adhere 
to the following BUDs, use and storage requirements: 
• Conventionally Manufactured Products & Components 
 • Expiration 
Date 
• Use and Storage Conditions 
• Single-dose 
containers 
• 12 hours • Punctured and entered within an ISO Class 5 
PEC 
• Stored per labeled storage conditions  
• Ampule  • Discard 
immediately 
after use 
• Punctured and entered within an ISO Class 5 
PEC 
 • Conventionally Manufactured Products & Components 
 • Expiration 
Date 
• Use and Storage Conditions 
• (or  open 
plastic luer 
lock vials) 
• Multi-dose 
containers 
• 28 days 
• (unless otherwise 
specified by 
manufacturer’s 
labeling) 
• Punctured and entered within an ISO Class 5 
PEC 
• Stored per labeled storage conditions 
• Pharmacy 
bulk 
packages 
• Per 
manufacturers 
labeling 
• Punctured and entered within an ISO Class 5 PEC 
• When manufacturer provides a shorter 
expiration time after puncture or entry, use the 
shorter dating and clearly label on packaging 
• Proprietary 
bag & vial 
systems 
• Docking and activation for immediate use – is NOT considered 
compounding (no BUD assignment required) and can be performed in 
a non-classified area. 
• Docking for future activation and use – performed in an ISO Class 5 
PEC and assigned a BUD that does not exceed the BUD specified in the 
manufacturer’s labeling. 
 
 
 
 
CSPs compounded as components for use in other CSPs are initially assigned BUDs per USP <797> (see 
Section 2.2) and adhere to the following BUDs, use, and storage conditions once entered or 
punctured for use in a Final CSP; the BUD of the Final CSP is not impacted by the component 
CSP.  
o CSPs Compounded as a Component in a Final CSP 
 • BUD of 
Component CSP 
Once Punctured 
• BUD of Final 
CSP Using 
Component 
• Use and Storage 
Conditions of Component 
• Preserved  
• multi-dose 
Component 
CSP 
• No longer than 
28 Days or the 
Component 
BUD 
• (whichever is 
shorter) 
• Per USP <797> 
• (not impacted by 
the Component 
BUD) 
• Punctured and entered 
within an ISO Class 5 PEC 
• Stored per conditions 
intended for the initial 
BUD o CSPs Compounded as a Component in a Final CSP 
 • BUD of 
Component CSP 
Once Punctured 
• BUD of Final 
CSP Using 
Component 
• Use and Storage 
Conditions of Component 
• Single-Dose 
& CSP 
Stock 
Solutions 
• < 12 Hours or 
the Component 
BUD 
• (whichever is 
shorter) 
• Per USP <797> 
• (not impacted by 
the Component 
BUD) 
• Punctured and entered 
within an ISO Class 5 PEC 
• Stored per conditions 
intended for the initial 
BUD  
• Remainder is discarded 
 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
      3.1 The Designated Person(s): 
Ensures all CSPs compounded at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies are assigned the 
correct and appropriate BUD by careful consideration and research pertaining to 
component and final CSP stability, sterility of components and sterilization method used (if 
appropriate), container closure system, and compounding conditions 
Ensures Master Formula Records (MFRs) and/or IV Workflow Systems have the correct BUD, CSP 
storage, and drug stability information and instructions 
Ensures Compounding Personnel are educated on how to accurately determine and document 
BUDs and storage conditions for CSPs and conventionally manufactured and compounded 
components used in compounding Final CSPs 
Ensures individuals (e.g., practitioners, patients, caregivers, other support staff) transporting, 
storing, or administering mediations understand how to interpret and/or adjust BUDs if 
conditions warrant 
3.2 Compounding Personnel 
Determine and properly record the BUD on the immediate product label and affix all appropriate 
auxiliary labels confirming required storage conditions 
Conduct all aseptic manipulations in an ISO 5 environment and store CSPs and components 
appropriately 
4. Procedures 
 
4.1 Immediate Use Compounds 
See Immediate-Use Compounding policy for the conditions that must be met to utilize immediate 
use dating 
4.2 Category 1 Compounded Sterile Preparations  
Determine the appropriate BUD for Category 1 CSPs (refer to Section 2.2 adapted from Table 12 
of USP <797>).  Category 1 CSPs meet the following criteria: 
Compounded in a Segregated Compounding Area (SCA) 
Compounded in a certified ISO Class 5 Primary Engineering Control (PEC)  
Compounded aseptically by qualified Compounding Personnel 
Compounded using only sterile starting components    
Stored in conditions associated with the assigned BUD  At the direction and discretion of the Designated Person(s), assign Category 1 CSP BUDs to 
preparations made in a sterile compounding suite under the following circumstances 
including:  
Assign Category 1 BUDs to all compounds prepared in a sterile suite when facilities and/or 
environmental conditions are out-of-specification.   
Sterility and endotoxin testing is not required for Category 1 CSPs  
4.3 Category 2 Compounded Sterile Preparations 
Determine and assign the appropriate BUD for Category 2 CSPs (refer to Section 2.2 adapted from 
Table 13 of USP <797>). Category 2 CSPs meet the following criteria: 
Compounded in a cleanroom suite 
Compounded in an ISO Class 5 PEC located in ISO Class 7 Buffer Room 
Compounded aseptically by qualified Compounding Personnel 
Aseptically processed utilizing sterile and/or non-sterile starting components  
 
4.4 Preserved Multi-dose CSPs: 
If a multi-dose CSP meets the requirements of antimicrobial effectiveness testing per USP <51>, 
the maximum BUD does not exceed the assigned BUD or 28 days from initial puncture, 
whichever is shorter. 
4.5 Topical Ophthalmic CSPs (and other non-preserved topical CSPs): 
Preserved topical ophthalmic CSPs with proven antimicrobial effectiveness testing results per USP 
<51> are assigned a maximum BUD of 28 days. 
Non-preserved topical ophthalmic CSPs are assigned a maximum BUD of 28 days but must carry 
the following BUD adjustment labeled on the CSP container: "Discard 24 hours after first 
opening when stored at controlled room temperature or after 72 hours when stored under 
refrigeration".    
4.6 CSPs Compounded as a Component or Stock Solution: 
When the CSP component or stock solution is stored according to its originally assigned BUD and 
only punctured or entered in an ISO 5 PEC for use in a Final CSP: 
Preserved, multi-dose component CSPs can be used for up to 28 days  
Single-dose (non-preserved) component CSPs or stock solution can be used for up to 12 hours 
or the originally assigned BUD, whichever is shorter.  Any remaining CSP from the 
original component or stock solution is discarded. 
Final CSPs compounded from multi -dose, single-dose, or stock solution CSPs are assigned BUDs 
consistent with USP <797> (refer to Section 2.2); the BUD of the component CSP does not 
affect the determination of the BUD for the Final CSP. 
 
 
 
4.7 Epidural, intrathecal and intraventricular CSPs: 
Due to the highly sensitive nature and potential life -threatening impacts of medication 
administered via these routes, CSPs prepared for administration do not exceed the 
following:   
• Epidural, intrathecal, 
or intraventricular CSPs 
• Controlled 
Room 
Temperature 
• [ 20°C - 25°C] 
• Refrigerated 
Temperature 
• [2°C- 8°C] 
• Frozen 
Temperature 
• [-25°C - -
10°C] • Epidural or Intrathecal • <24 hours • <24 hours • NA 
• Intraventricular • <8 hours • <8 hours • NA 
 
4.8 Proprietary bag and vial systems: 
Docking of proprietary bag and systems for FUTURE activation and administration is considered 
compounding and is compounded in an ISO Class 5 PEC. BUD assignment does not exceed 
the BUD stated in the manufacturer’s labeling. 
Docking and activation of proprietary bag and vial systems for IMMEDIATE administration is not 
considered sterile compounding and is not assigned a BUD.  
4.9 Conventionally Manufactured Products, APIs, and Components used in CSPs 
BUDs for entered or punctured commercially manufactured products used to compound a CSP do 
not exceed the values listed in Section 2.9.   
Inspect for damage or visible defects to the packaging or the product prior to use. 
Puncture or enter in an ISO Class 5 PEC.  
Commercially manufactured products are stored per the labeled instructions. When storage 
temperature and/or condition deviations are known or suspected, consult with the 
Designated Person(s) or the manufacturer’s healthcare support line. Discard the produc t if 
data validating the safety and stability of the medication under the excursion conditions 
cannot be attained.  
5. Definitions 
 
Administration: The direct application of a sterile medication to a single patient by injecting, infusing, 
or otherwise providing a sterile medication in its final form.   
Beyond-Use Date (BUD):  The date and time after which a CSP shall not be used, stored, or 
transported. The date is determined from the date and time the preparation is compounded.  
Category 1 CSP: A CSP that is assigned a BUD of 12 h or less at controlled room temperature or 24 h 
or less refrigerated that is compounded in accordance with all applicable requirements for 
Category 1 CSPs in this chapter.  
Category 2 CSP : A CSP that may be assigned a BUD of greater than 12 h at controlled room 
temperature or greater than 24 h refrigerated that is compounded in accordance with all 
applicable requirements for Category 2 CSPs in this chapter.  
Category 3 CSP : A CSP that may be assigned a BUD exceeding the limits in Table 13 for Category 2 
CSPs and is compounded in accordance with all applicable requirements for Category 3 CSPs in 
this chapter. 
Component: Any ingredient used in the compounding of a preparation, including any active 
ingredient, added substance, or conventionally manufactured product.   
Compounded sterile preparation (CSP):  A preparation intended to be sterile that is created by 
combining, admixing, diluting, pooling, reconstituting, repackaging, or otherwise altering a drug 
product or bulk drug substance.  
Conventionally manufactured product: A pharmaceutical dosage form, usually the subject of an FDA 
approved application, and manufactured under current good manufacturing practice conditions.  Immediate Use CSP: CSP aseptically compounded outside of ISO classified air for direct and immediate 
administration to a single patient with a maximum BUD of 4 hours from the initiation of 
compounding.  
Stability: The extent to which a product or preparation retains physical and chemical properties and 
characteristics within specified limits throughout its expiration or BUD. 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
 
United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <7> Labels and Labeling for Products in Other 
Categories, Expiration Date and Beyond Use Date. Current version. 
United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <51> Antimicrobial Effectiveness Testing. Current 
version. 
United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <71> Sterility Testing. Current version. 
United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <85> Bacterial Endotoxin Testing. Current version. 
United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <659> Packaging and Storage Requirements. Current 
version. 
United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <788> Particulate Matter in Injections. Current version. 
United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <789> Particulate Matter in Ophthalmic Solutions. 
Current version. 
United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <1163> Quality Assurance in Pharmaceutical 
Compounding. Current version. 
United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <1207> Package Integrity Evaluation – Sterile Products. 
Current version. 
United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <1225> Validation of Compendial Procedures. Current 
version. 
7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2024 
 
Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2022.  
Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
Reviewed 11/2024 with no changes. 
 