OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Designated Person for Hazardous Drugs Policy Reference #: PH0556 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the primary roles and responsibilities for the Designated Person responsible 
for the oversite of Hazardous Drug (HD) procedures and compliance within FMOLHS Baton Rouge 
Market Pharmacies.  
2. Policy  
2.1 FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies will designate one or more individuals (i.e., the 
Designated Person (DP)) who is qualified and trained to be responsible for the performance and 
operation of the facility and personnel in all functions pertaining to hazardous drugs.   
2.2 The DP for HDs will have the following qualifications:  
• Initial completion of 30 CE hours in the area of sterile compounding 
• Ongoing completion of CriticalPoint® training modules 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Persons for hazardous drugs are listed in Appendix A.  
3.2 The DP is responsible for:  
• Overall compliance with USP <800>, applicable federal and state laws and regulations and 
accreditation standards. 
• Oversight of personnel training and competency for those involved in handling any form of 
HDs within the facility/organization. 
• Monitoring and observing HD handling activities and taking immediate corrective action if 
deficient practices are observed. 
• Ensuring HD standard operating procedures (SOPs) and/or policies are fully implemented, and 
that follow-up is carried out if problems, deviations, or errors are identified.  
• Ensuring all departments who handle HDs within the organization have been trained and 
demonstrate competency pertaining to job-specific roles. 
3.3 Pharmacy Management is responsible for: • Ensuring adequate personnel resources for training and adherence to FMOLHS Baton Rouge 
Market Pharmacies’ Hazardous Drug procedures. 
• Ensuring adequate equipment and facilities to comply with USP <800> standards. 
• Coordinating with the DP for HDs for local site implementation, monitoring, or concerns with 
HDs.   
 
4.  Procedures 
4.1 Training and Competency Evaluation: 
• The DP creates, implements, and oversees training of personnel who have direct oversight of 
all personnel who handle HDs. The DP ensures all personnel who handle HDs complete 
training and demonstrate competency in handling HDs specific to job-related duties.  
4.2 Hazardous drug list and assessment of risk: 
• The DP ensures an organizational list of HDs dispensed at the facility is identified and 
maintained at least annually.  
• The DP ensures all HDs not handled with full USP <800> precautions have a completed and 
approved Assessment of Risk (AoR). AoRs are reviewed annually. 
• The DP ensures the organizational HD list and AoRs are available to all personnel who handle 
HDs within the organization. 
• The DP ensures there is a Safety Data Sheet (SDS) for every drug on the organizational HD list 
available to all personnel who handle HDs within the organization.    
4.3 Hazardous Drug Standard Operating Procedures: 
• The DP develops SOPs for handling HDs per USP <800> requirements, and other applicable 
laws and regulations within the organization that include: 
o Hazard communication program 
o Occupational safety program 
o Designation of HD areas 
o Receipt of HDs 
o Storage of HDs 
o Compounding of HDs 
o Use and maintenance of proper engineering controls (e.g., C-PECs, C-SECs, and CSTDs)  
o Hand hygiene and use of PPE based on HD activity (e.g., receipt, transport, 
compounding, administration, spill, and disposal of HDs) 
o Deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection of HDs 
o Dispensing 
o Transport 
o Disposal 
o Spill Control 
• The DP ensures all HD SOPs are implemented throughout the organization, which includes 
ensuring that personnel demonstrate competency in performing every procedure that relates 
to their job-specific functions. 
• The DP ensures that corrective actions are taken if problems, deviations, HD contamination, 
failures, or errors related to HDs are identified, and documents corrective actions as 
necessary. • The DP reviews HD SOPs at least every 12 months to ensure they reflect current practices. 
The review is documented on LakeLink. 
• Any changes or alterations to HD SOPs are made only by the DP and must be documented.  
4.4 Facility Design and Environmental Control: 
• The DP ensures that each area where HDs are prepared meets the classified air quality and 
containment standards appropriate for the activities. 
• The DP ensures that each area where HDs are stored meets the containment criteria listed in 
USP <800>. 
4.5 Personal Protective Equipment (PPE): 
• The DP ensures all HD PPE is appropriate for use and complies with USP <800> and 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) requirements.  
• The DP ensures personnel are fit tested for respirators requiring fit testing prior to use.   
4.6 Hazardous Drug Contamination: 
• The DP ensures that all HD spills are properly documented, contained, and cleaned per HD 
spill policy. 
• DP ensures receiving personnel follow procedures when HD contaminated drugs are received 
from the wholesaler.  
4.7 HD Deactivation, Decontamination, and Cleaning: 
• The DP ensures all deactivation and decontamination chemicals in use are appropriate for use 
with the HDs at the organization.  
• The DP ensures all deactivation, decontamination, and cleaning procedures are applicable for 
all instances of HD spills and contamination possible within the organization.  
• The DP ensures that all personnel who respond and clean HD spills are properly trained and 
demonstrate competency before attending to HD spills.  
 
5. Definitions 
5.1 Assessment of Risk (AoR) : Evaluation of risk to determine alternative containment strategies 
and/or work practices. 
5.2 Safety Data Sheet (SDS):  An informational document that provides written or printed material 
concerning a hazardous chemical. The SDS is prepared in accordance with the Hazard 
Communication Standard (HCS).  
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <795> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.3 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings. 2019 version.  
6.4 Kienle P. The Chapter <800> Answer Book. Bethesda, MD: ASHP; 2017. 
7. Approval and Review Summary  
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2025 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2023.  
7.2 Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
7.3 Reviewed with no changes 11/2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix A: Designated Persons per Facility 
 
 
• OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy – Pharmacy Manager 
• OLOL Cancer Institute Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy – Pharmacy Supervisor 
• OLOL Non-Oncology Infusion – Pharmacy Supervisor 
• OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy – Pharmacy Manager 
• North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy – Pharmacy Supervisor 
• OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient Pharmacy – Staff Pharmacist, as determined by Pharmacy 
Director 
• OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy – Staff Pharmacist, as determined by 
Pharmacy Director 
 
 
 