OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Facilities and Engineering Controls for 
Hazardous Drugs 
Policy Reference #: PH0549 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the design standards and acceptance criteria for hazardous drug sterile 
compounding, hazardous drug nonsterile compounding, and hazardous drug storage facilities and 
engineering controls within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
• Sterile compounding facilities must be designed, outfitted, and maintained properly to 
minimize the risk of contamination of compounded sterile preparations (CSPs).  
• An area must be designated for nonsterile compounding. The area should be designed, 
arranged, and used in a way that minimizes cross contamination from non-compounding 
areas and other compounded nonsterile preparations (CNSPs). 
• Facilities that contain hazardous drugs (HD) must be designed, outfitted, and maintained 
properly to minimize the risk of HD contamination to personnel, patients, and the 
environment.  
1.2. Design standards and specifications guide new construction, remodels, and maintenance of 
existing spaces to ensure compliance with USP <800>, Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) standards, and other applicable standards or regulations  
1.3. Containment Primary Engineering Controls (C -PEC) and Containment Secondary Engineering 
Controls (C-SEC) aid in achieving required air quality classifications and containing the HD while 
Supplemental Engineering Controls (Closed System Transfer Devices) solely aid in containing the 
HD. 
• Containment Primary Engineering Controls (C -PEC) are devices that HDs are compounded 
within. Types of C-PECs are: 
o Biological Safety Cabinet (BSC)  provide ISO Class 5 environment for sterile HD 
compounding (nonsterile HD compounding can also occur in limited circumstances)  
o Compounding Aseptic Containment Isolator (CACI) ISO Class 5 environment for sterile 
or nonsterile HD compounding  
o Containment Ventilated Enclosure (CVE)  non-classified environment for nonsterile HD 
compounding 
• Containment Secondary Engineering Controls (C -SEC) is the room in which the C -PEC is 
placed. Types of C-SECs are: o Sterile compounding suite with an ISO Class 7 ante room and an ISO Class 7 negative 
pressure buffer room  
o Containment Segregated Compounding Area (C -SCA) are unclassified areas without 
an ante room or buffer room, has fixed walls, is vented to the outside, and has at least 12 
ACPH.  
• Supplemental Engineering Controls  are adjunct controls {e.g., Closed System Transfer 
Devices (CSTDs)} used during HD compounding to offer additional levels of protection. CSTDs 
mechanically prohibit the transfer of environmental contaminants into the system and 
prohibit the escape of HD or vapor concentrations outside the system. 
• The ISO standards for air quality in controlled environments are provided below and 
referenced throughout this policy.  
ISO CLASSIFICATION OF PARTICULATE MATTER IN ROOM AIR 
ISO Class Particle Count per Cubic Meter 
3 35.2 
4 352 
5 3520 
6 35,200 
7 352,000 
8 3,520,000 
• Refer to the Sterile Compounding Program Overview for a summary of the types of C -PECs 
and C-SECs used at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
2. Policy  
2.1 Designated areas must be available for the following HD activities: 
• Receipt and unpacking of HDs 
• Storage of HDs 
• Nonsterile HD compounding 
• Sterile HD compounding 
2.2 Since many of the engineering controls for HDs require negative pressure environments, 
FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies have redundancy built into the ventilation system as 
to always maintain uninterrupted power.  
2.3 When the negative pressure buffer room is used for HD storage, the room is adequately sized 
for the storage contained within, maintains proper ISO classification, and has proper airflow 
within the room.  
2.4 HD receiving area(s) are neutral or negative pressure to the surrounding areas. Receiving HDs 
does not occur in the sterile compounding areas or a positive pressure environment. 
2.5 Design and Acceptance Criteria for C-PECs: 
• All design requirements of PECs for Compounded Sterile Preparations (CSPs) and 
Compounded Nonsterile Preparations (CNSPs) outlined in USP <797> and <795> policies are 
followed in addition to the requirements of this policy. 
• The C-PEC operates continuously if it supplies some or all of the negative pressure in the C -
SEC or if the C-PEC is used for sterile compounding. • When C-PECs are turned off, turn unit on and after manufacturer-specified recovery time, C-
PEC is decontaminated, cleaned, and disinfected (if used for sterile compounding) prior to 
use.   
• C-PEC for sterile compounding must be externally vented.  
• C-PEC for nonsterile compounding must be externally vented or have redundant HEPA filters 
in series.  
• BSC used for sterile compounding must be Class II and BSC (if used) for nonsterile 
compounding can be either Class I or II. 
• If a C-PEC is used for non-HD compounding, the non-HD preparation is handled as if it is a HD 
preparation with full USP <800> precautions per USP <800> policies.   
2.6 Design and Acceptance Criteria for C-SECs and HD Storage: 
• All design requirements of SECs for CSPs and CNSPs outlined in USP <797> and <795> policies 
are followed in addition to the requirements of this policy. 
• The C-SECs used for sterile and nonsterile compounding and the HD storage room must: 
o Be externally vented 
o Be physically separated from other preparation areas 
o Have appropriate air exchange (Air Changes Per Hour or ACPH) 
o Have a negative pressure between 0.01 and 0.03 inches of water column to all adjacent 
areas 
 C-SEC Type C-SEC Requirements 
Sterile Hazardous 
Drug 
Compounding 
ISO 7 buffer room  
-Externally vented 
-30 ACPH 
-Negative pressure between 0.01 and 0.03“ w.c. 
Nonsterile 
Hazardous Drug 
Compounding 
Unclassified room 
or ISO classified 
storage room 
-Externally vented 
-12 ACPH 
-Negative pressure between 0.01 and 0.03“ w.c. 
HD Storage  
Unclassified room 
or ISO classified 
storage room 
-Externally vented 
-12 ACPH 
-Negative pressure between 0.01 and 0.03“ w.c. 
 
• C-PECs used for CSPs and CNSPs are located in different C-SECs.  
• If C-PECs used for sterile and nonsterile compounding are located in the same C -SEC, testing 
demonstrates that ISO Class 7 is maintained in the C -SEC throughout the nonsterile 
compounding activity.  Refer to the 795 policy Nonsterile and Sterile Compounding 
Considerations for further criteria.  
• If C-PECs used for sterile and nonsterile compounding are located in the same C -SEC, the C-
PECs are placed at least 1 meter apart from each other and particle -generating activity does 
not occur at the same time as sterile compounding. 
• All surfaces of the C-SEC for nonsterile compounding are smooth, impervious, free from cracks 
and crevices, and non-shedding. 
2.7 HD Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Doffing Area:  • All HD handling areas within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market pharmacies  have a doffing area 
for PPE removal that has been worn when handling or compounding HDs.  
• Doffing area is required by USP <800> for negative-pressure HD buffer rooms that are entered 
through the positive-pressure non-HD buffer rooms.  
• Doffing area is immediately next to the door where you exit the negative pressure room.  
• The chemotherapy gown and the outer pair of shoe covers are doffed inside the doffing area 
immediately prior to leaving the room. 
• A trace HD waste receptacle is positioned near the doffing area for proper disposal of trace 
HD waste. 
2.8 Water Sources: 
• Sink for handwashing and eyewash location is located: 
o In the ante room of a cleanroom suite at least 1 meter from the entrance to the negative 
pressure buffer room. 
o In the C-SCA or directly outside the C-SCA at least 1 meter from the C-PEC. 
• Sink and eyewash should be hands-free use. 
2.9 Containment Supplemental Engineering Controls - CSTDs: 
• FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies provide adjunct controls to offer an additional level 
of protection during compounding and administration. 
• CSTDs are not used as a substitute for a C-PEC when compounding. 
• CSTDs are used during HD compounding, when the dosage form allows. 
• CSTDs are required to be used during HD antineoplastic administration when the dosage form 
allows. 
• CSTDs known or suspected to be physically or chemically incompatible with a specific HD are 
not used for that HD compounding or administration.  
2.10 Other design considerations for maintaining the HD compounding environment:  
• Sterile compounding facilities must be designed to provide a well -lighted and comfortable 
working environment. Refer to USP <1066> : Physical Environment That Promote Safe 
Medication Use for additional details and considerations. 
• Temperature and humidity:  
o Refer to <797> and <795 > and their supporting Facility Policies for temperature and 
humidity requirements for compounding and drug storage areas.  
• Pressure: Pressure differentials minimize airflow between areas of different classifications. 
o Negative pressure between 0.01 and 0.03” w.c. is required for HD storage and 
compounding rooms (negative pressure buffer room in a cleanroom suite or a C-SCA). 
o Where pressure differentials are required, a monitoring device must be used to 
continuously monitor the pressure differential. Results must be reviewed and 
documented at least daily on the days when compounding occurs. 
2.11 Refer to applicable regulations and laws in pharmacy/organization jurisdiction for additional 
HD drug storage and compounding facility requirement.  
 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Person (DP): • Ensures each area related to HD compounding and HD storage areas are operated, 
maintained, monitored, and certified to have appropriate air quality and containment 
engineering controls. 
• Coordinates with building facilities and certification professionals to ensure preventative 
maintenance activities and/or repairs are completed with minimal impact to pharmacy 
operations. 
• Directs corrective action and preventive action procedures to ensure facilities remain or 
return to designed specifications.  
• Ensures CSTDs used are appropriately used and ensures CSTD compatibility with all HDs 
compounded including investigational agents (if applicable).  
3.2 Personnel who compound and/or handle HDs: 
• Know appropriate operating conditions for C -PECs and values and ranges for pressure 
differentials for HD containment areas. 
• Know appropriate use of CSTDs.  
• Record environmental monitoring data. 
• Report out of specifications facility issues to the DP for corrective action.  
4.  Procedures 
4.1 Documentation of Environmental Monitoring Specifications: 
• Pharmacy personnel document temperature, humidity, and pressure in SoleSource® Simplifi 
797® for each compounding area daily on days of operation. 
• If any value is out of specifications, report to the Designated Person or charge pharmacist and 
follow the procedure described in the 797 Out of Specifications policy. 
4.2 Preventative Maintenance for C-PECs: 
• Change prefilters for all C -PECs every six (6) months  or as indicated by the manufacturer or 
operating conditions. Changes are documented on semiannual Allometrics® recertification 
reports. 
• Visual inspection of HEPA filters through the protective screen for staining, rips or tears occurs 
every six months by Allometrics® during semiannual recertification.  
• Visually assess all inside and outside surfaces C-PEC during the monthly clean, inspecting for 
signs of rust or damage. 
4.3 Certification requirements for C-PECs, C-SECs, and HD Storage: 
• Biannually certify all C-PECs and C-SECs for all required parameters per USP <797>. 
• Biannually certify HD Storage locations for: 
o Negative pressure between 0.01 and 0.03“ w.c. 
o At least 12 ACPH 
o External ventilation 
5. Definitions 
5.1 ACPH: Air Changes Per Hour 
5.2 Biological Safety Cabinet (BSC) : A ventilated cabinet often used for preparation of hazardous 
drugs. These cabinets are divided into three general classes (Class I, Class II, and Class III). Class II 
BSCs are further divided into types (Type A1, Type A2, Type B1, and Type B2). 5.3 Compounding Aseptic Containment Isolator (CACI): A specific type of CAI that is designed for the 
compounding of sterile HDs. The CACI is designed to provide worker protection from exposure to 
undesirable levels of airborne drugs throughout the compounding and material transfer processes 
and to provide an  aseptic environment with unidirectional airflow for compounding sterile 
preparations. 
5.4 Containment Primary Engineering Controls (C-PEC): A ventilated device designed and operated 
to minimize worker and environmental exposures to HDs by controlling emissions of airborne 
contaminants. 
5.5 Containment Secondary Engineering Controls (C-SEC): The room with fixed walls in which the C-
PEC is place. It incorporates specific design and operational parameters required to the contain 
the potential hazard within the compounding room.  
5.6 Containment Segregated Compounding Area (C-SCA): A type of C-SEC with nominal requirements 
for airflow and room pressurization as they pertain to HD compounding. 
5.7 Containment Ventilated Enclosure (CVE): A full or partial enclosure that uses ventilation 
principles to capture, contain, and remove airborne contaminants through HEPA filtration and 
prevent release into the work environment.  
5.8 Personal Protective Equipment (PPE): Items such as gloves, gowns, respirators, goggles, 
faceshields, and others that protect individual workers from hazardous physical or chemical 
exposures. 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <795> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.3 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings. 2019 version.  
6.4 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <1066> Physical Environments that Promote Safe 
Medication Use. 2015. Retrieved 12/30/2022. 
6.5 Kienle P. The Chapter <800> Answer Book. Bethesda, MD: ASHP; 2017. 
6.6 American Society of Health-System Pharmacists. ASHP Guidelines on Handling Hazardous Drugs. 
Am J Health-Sys Pharm. 2018; 75:1996-2031. Retrieved 12/20/22.  
7. Approval and Review Summary 
 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2025 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2023.  
7.2 Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
7.3 Reviewed with no changes 11/2024. 
 