OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Certification and Recertification of Sterile 
Compounding Areas 
Policy Reference #: PH0535 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 05/30/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
• Overview and Scope 
1.2. This policy describes the procedures for certification and recertification of Primary Engineering 
Controls (PECs) and Secondary Engineering Controls (SECs) within FMOHLS Baton Rouge Market 
Pharmacies. Certification indicates that the equipment and compound ing area is meeting its 
design and air quality specifications.  
Refer to the Facility and Engineering Controls policy  for design specifications and acceptance 
criteria for Primary Engineering Controls (PECs), Secondary Engineering Controls (SEC) and 
compounding areas.  
 
2. Policy  
 
2.1 Before a compounding area is used to compound either Category 1, Category 2, or Category 3 
Compounded Sterile Preparations (CSPs), it must be independently certified following the 
requirements in this policy and when applicable, manufacturer specifications.  
2.2 Certification of the classified areas including the PEC must be performed initially, and 
recertification must be performed at least every 6 months, and must include:  
• Airflow testing: to determine acceptability of the air velocity, room air exchange rate, and 
room pressure differential in doorways between adjacent rooms to ensure consistent 
airflow; and that the appropriate quality of air is maintained under dynamic operating 
conditions.  
• Air changes per hour (ACPH)  and their sources e.g., HVAC, PEC and total, must be 
documented on the certification report. 
• HEPA filter integrity testing : HEPA filters must be leak tested at the factory, after 
installation, and as part of recertification. 
• Total particle count testing : performed under dynamic operating conditions using 
calibrated electronic equipment.  
• Dynamic airflow smoke pattern testing : performed for each PEC during dynamic 
operating conditions to demonstrate unidirectional airflow and sweeping action over and 
away from the preparation(s).  
2.3 The Designated Person (DP) immediately addresses any out of specification results determined 
by the certification professional or vendor at the time of recertification per Out of Specifications 
policy and QA/QC policy. 2.4  Classified areas additionally must be recertified if there are changes to the area such as redesign, 
construction, replacement or relocation of any PEC, or alteration in the configuration of the room 
that could affect airflow or air quality.  
• Before any of the above activities, the DP(s) consults with the certification professional to 
confirm need for recertification and schedule availability.    
2.5 All certification and recertification records are reviewed by the DP(s) to ensure the classified 
environments meet USP <797> and USP <800> requirements and documents are readily 
retrievable.  
2.6 All certification activities are completed or supervised by vendors and professionals that are 
credentialed by the Controlled Environment Testing Association (CETA) National Board of Testing 
(CNBT).  Credentials are readily available from the vendor and/or Designated Person. 
2.7 All equipment for testing and certification is calibrated per In stitute of Environmental Sciences 
and Technology (IEST) standards or manufacturer’s recommendations and calibration dates are 
included in the certification report.  
 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
 
3.1 Designated Person(s) (DP): 
• Review all certification and recertification records) to ensure the classified environments 
meet USP <797> and USP <800> requirements and documents are readily retrievable.  
• Initiate a corrective action for any out -of-specification results and ensures the actions 
taken have been effective.   
• Determine dynamic operating conditions for each PEC and SEC in use.  
3.2 Certification professional or vendor: 
• Coordinates schedule for certification with DP or designee to ensure completion within 
due time and for minimal disruption of pharmacy workflow. 
• Follows facility hand hygiene and garbing and material handling and cleaning procedures. 
• Reviews facility sampling diagram with DP or designee prior to each certification activity 
to ensure consistent sampling plan. 
• Notifies DP of any out -of-specification criteria and any immediate corrective actions 
completed before leaving the facility.  
 
4. Procedures 
 
4.1 Initial Certification of Compounding Areas  
• Prior to certification, all construction areas are thoroughly cleaned and approved by the 
DP and Infection Control. 
• At completion of construction, compounding areas are certified under static or as -built 
conditions.  The goal of this certification is to ensure airflow and air exchanges are 
functioning as designed and that PECs and SECs meet ISO classification.  
4.2 Recertification of Compounding Areas 
• Routine recertification of PECs and SECs occurs at a minimum of every 6 months. 
Recertification is considered on time if completed by the last day of the month when 
certification is due.  
• Recertification occurs under dynamic operating conditions.  • DP determines the maximum number of personnel normally working in the classified 
area. Recertification is performed with that determined number of personnel.  
• Ensure the number of personnel in the space at the time of recertification is recorded on 
the recertification report. 
• Recertify PECs whenever the equipment requires a signficant move such that the air 
quality or function may be disturbed.  Consult with a certification professional if uncertain 
of the impact.   
• Recertify SECs following construction, redesign, or alteration of the configuration of the 
room that could affect airflow or quality.  
4.3 Review of Certification Report 
• The DP reviews preliminary and final certification reports for every PEC and SEC under the 
scope of FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies’ sterile compounding program within 
3 business days of receipt.  
• The DP begins a corrective action plan for all certification criteria items that are found to 
be out of specification on the certification report. 
o See Out of Specifications policy and QA/QC policy for procedures when review 
of certification report features sterile compounding areas out of compliance with 
USP <797> and USP <800> design specifications and acceptance criteria. 
• Once corrective action plan remediations are complete, schedule recertification testing 
to determine effectiveness of remediation efforts.  
• Review certification report after remediation to determine if all areas found out of 
specification are now within acceptable design specifications and acceptance criteria. 
Record successful remediation on corrective action. 
• Document the review by initialing and dating each page of the report and file for 
regulatory review.  
4.4 PEC Certification Criteria 
• Airflow velocity testing, including verifying unidirectional airflow utilizing smoke pattern 
testing under static and dynamic conditions 
• Nonviable particle counts meeting ISO class 5 or better air quality  
• HEPA filter integrity test 
• Induction/back streaming test  
• Down-flow velocity profile test 
• Inflow velocity profile test 
• Site assessment test, BSC exhaust alarms 
4.5 SEC Certification Criteria 
• Airflow testing and directional indication such as via smoke pattern testing 
• Air changes per hour (ACPH) including ACPH from PECs, HVAC (room supply) and total ACPH  
• Pressure differential 
• HEPA filter integrity testing 
• Non-viable particle counts meeting intended ISO classification 
4.6 Segregated Compounding Area (SCA) Certification Criteria: 
• Non-Hazardous SCA: no minimum air requirements 
• Hazardous Containment SCA: 
o Air changes per hour 
o Pressure differential  5. Definitions 
5.1 Biologic safety cabinet (BSC): A ventilated cabinet that may be used or compounding. These 
cabinets are divided into three general classes (Class I, Class II, and Class III). Class II BSCs are 
further divided into types (Type A1, Type A2, Type B1, Type B2, and Type C1). 
5.1 Dynamic operating conditions: Conditions in the compounding area in which operating personnel 
are present and simulating or performing compounding. The conditions should reflect the largest 
number of personnel and highest complexity of compounding expected during routine 
operations.  
5.2 High-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration (HEPA Filter): Being, using, or containing a filter 
designed to remove 99.97% of airborne particles measuring 0.3 -micron or greater in diameter 
passing through it. 
5.3 Primary Engineering Control (PEC): A device or zone that provides an ISO Class 5 air quality 
environment for sterile compounding. 
5.4 Secondary Engineering Control (SEC): The area where the PEC is placed (e.g. a cleanroom suite or 
SCA). It incorporates specific design and operational parameters required to minimize the risk of 
contamination within the compounding area. 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
6.3 Controlled Environment Testing Association (CETA) Application Guide CAG -003:2022. 
Certification of Sterile Compounding Facilities for USP Compliance.  
7. Approval and Review Summary 
 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 05/2025 
 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2023.  
7.2 Revised 05/2024 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
 
 
 