OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Receiving and Storage of Hazardous 
Drugs 
Policy Reference #: PH0552 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the procedures for receiving and storage of Hazardous Drugs (HDs) where 
HDs are prepared and/or handled within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
• Receiving is defined as acceptance of HDs from the wholesaler, distributor, manufacturer, 
or other source, inspection of the shipment, and removal from shipping containers, and 
identification of and delivery to the storage destination.  
• Storage is defined as the retention of HDs into the pharmacy/organization inventory for 
future use, within a designated location, and at the appropriate temperature.  
1.2. Harm to healthcare personnel from occupational exposure to HDs can occur throughout the 
medication-use process including receipt  and storage. Even when a HD is received in proper 
packaging, there is still the potential for risk for HD contamination to personnel and the 
environment. Therefore, it is important to don proper Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) for 
personnel safety when receiving and storing HDs.  
1.3. This policy refers to receipt and storage of all HD active pharmaceutical ingredients (API), 
antineoplastic HDs requiring manipulation (beyond counting or repackaging), and other non -
antineoplastic and reproductive risk only HD dosage forms for which an Assessment of Risk (AoR) 
has not been performed. 
2. Policy  
2.1 HDs are received and stored using methods that protect employees, the surrounding 
environment, and others who may encounter these HDs within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market 
Pharmacies. 
• Corrugated cardboard or external shipping containers are not allowed in any negative 
pressure areas.  
2.2 Access to areas where HDs are received, stored, and prepared is limited to authorized staff only. 
2.3 HD storage areas have proper signage indicating that HDs are stored inside.  
2.4 HDs are stored separately from nonhazardous drug inventory except where stipulated in the AoR. 2.5 HDs are never stored on the floor.  
2.6 Unless the storage area is defined differently in an AoR, HD storage occurs in a room (with fixed 
walls) that is negative pressure to the areas adjacent, is vented to the outside, and has at least 12 
air changes per hour (ACPH) to ensure the adequate dilution of vapors and removal of 
contaminants. HDs may be stored inside C-SCAs or HD buffer rooms. The storage room is not ISO 
classified unless the HD storage room is located inside cleanroom suite. 
2.7 Any personnel who may be expected to handle any form of HDs during receiving, stocking, and 
inventory wears appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) as defined in this policy. 
2.8 Any personnel who may be expected to handle any form of HD during receiving and storing of 
HDs are trained on proper handling of HDs, competency evaluated, and documented in 
SoleSource® Simplifi 797® at least annually. Training includes: 
• Identifying HDs according to the FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies HD list  
• Use of required PPE 
• Response to exposure of HDs, spill management, and proper disposal of HDs 
• HD materials movement and handling 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Person (DP): 
• Ensures all HDs are identified per the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) list and maintains the list of HDs specifically handled at this facility annually. 
• Ensures all personnel have education and training in the foundational knowledge and skills 
needed to handle HDs and perform receiving and storage job duties successfully and safely; 
per this policy and in order to minimize HD exposure in the facility. 
• Provides immediate access to the SOPs, USP <800> and supporting Chapters and supporting 
regulations, and other expert documentation to perform job duties successfully and safely.  
3.2 Receiving Personnel and other personnel involved in handling HDs during the receipt and storage: 
• Remain current and in good standing on all required education, trainings, evaluations, and 
assessments pertaining to handling HDs.  
• Ensure proper handling, receipt and storage of all HDs per all HD policies and/or drug-specific 
AoR. 
4.  Procedures 
Receipt of Hazardous Drugs: 
4.1 PPE worn when receiving HDs: 
• Don rear opening chemotherapy gown and secure fasteners to ensure gown stays in place 
during HD drug handling tasks. 
• Don one pair of chemotherapy gloves over the cuff of the gown.  
o Perform hand washing after doffing gloves worn to receive HDs. 
• Additional PPE when the integrity of the shipping container is not known or is in question:  
Don two pairs of chemotherapy gloves (one pair under the cuff and one pair over the cuff of 
a chemotherapy gown), a chemotherapy gown, eye protection, and an elastomeric half-mask 
with multi-gas cartridge and P100 filter respirator  o Fit test receiving personnel (with exact respirator in use), prior to using respirator per 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) respiratory protection 
standard (29 CFR 1910.134) 
o Perform hand washing after doffing gloves worn to receive HDs. 
4.2 Receive HDs in a location that is neutral or negative pressure. Receipt does not occur in a positive 
pressure area. Inspect shipping container for any signs of damage or HD residue or leakage or 
evidence of broken glass.  
4.3 The location where HDs are received into stock contains the following items: 
• Trace HD waste receptacle 
• Multiple sizes of nonsterile, chemotherapy gloves 
• Chemotherapy gowns 
• Disposable, plastic backed, preparation mats, as needed, on which to place HD containers as 
they are removed from the packaging in which HDs are shipped 
• Spill kit 
• Agents for decontamination, cleaning, and decontamination; including low -lint wipers for 
applying agents 
4.4 When the shipping container is intact and there is no evidence of HD leakage:  
• Receipt in negative pressure storage room: 
o Don chemotherapy gown and chemotherapy gloves. 
o Move shipping containers into negative pressure storage room.  
o Place disposable, plastic backed, preparation mats on the receiving counter/table. 
o Before opening impervious bags, inspect the inside contents for broken HD.  
o If contents inside bag are intact, remove items from bag and place onto disposable, 
plastic backed, preparation mat as needed. 
o Wipe outside of HD packaging with decontaminating agent. Discard used wipers into 
trace waste receptacles.  
o Decontaminate gloved hands.  
o Scan HD items into inventory. If scanner/computer moves throughout inventory 
locations, make all effort to not contaminate scanner/ computer and wipe 
scanner/computer with decontaminating wiper after use. If scanner works from inside 
a plastic bag, utilize plastic bag to protect the scanner from HD residue.  
o Decontaminate the bins used to transport impervious bags into the negative pressure 
storage room. 
o Once all items are checked into inventory, move items to the storage location inside 
the negative pressure storage room either inside bins at room temperature or inside 
the refrigerator. Move items that are not stored in the negative pressure storage room 
to their storage location with the non -hazardous inventory by placing inside the 
decontaminated bins and moved out of negative pressure storage room. 
o Dispose of disposable, plastic backed, preparation mat, if used, in the trace HD waste 
receptacle.  
o Remove gown by releasing the fastener, then grasp the gown at the hip area and pull 
gown down and away from body.  Once the gown is off the shoulders, pull one arm at 
a time from the sleeves so the gown arms are bunched at the wrist.  Then roll the exposed side of the gown inward until it is a tight ball.  Dispose of gown in trace HD 
waste receptacle. 
o Remove gloves by slowly removing the first contaminated glove and place into the 
other gloved hand. Slide index finger under the remaining glove, and slowly pull the 
glove off inside out without touching glove surface to ungloved hand or fingers making 
a packet of the two gloves, and discard into trace HD waste receptacle. Wash hands 
with soap and water.  
o When HD inventory is being stored with non-hazardous inventory, don chemotherapy 
gloves prior to placing item into correct storage bin. Doff gloves as described above, 
then wash hands with soap and water. 
• Receipt in neutral location: 
o Determine the location to receive HDs that is separate from receipt of other 
medication inventory. 
o Place disposable, plastic backed, preparation mats on the receiving counter/table. 
o Don chemotherapy gown and chemotherapy gloves. 
o Open shipping container and look inside for visible signs of damage. If damage is seen, 
stop receipt and follow steps for damaged container receipt. 
o Remove impervious plastic bag from shipping container and place onto disposable, 
plastic backed, preparation mat as needed. 
o Before opening impervious bags, inspect the inside contents for broken HD.  
o If contents inside bag are intact, remove items from bag and place onto disposable, 
plastic backed, preparation mat as needed. 
o Wipe outside of HD packaging with decontaminating agent. Discard wipers used into 
trace waste receptacles.  
o Decontaminate gloved hands. 
o Scan HD items into inventory. If scanner/computer moves throughout locations, make 
all efforts to not contaminate scanner/ computer and wipe scanner/computer with 
decontaminating wiper after use . If scanner works from inside a plastic bag, utilize 
plastic bag to protect the scanner from HD residue. All effort is made to not 
contaminate the scanner. Decontaminate scanner after use. 
o Once all items are checked into inventory, place items back into impervious plastic 
sealed bags for transport into the negative pressure buffer room for storage or place 
items into their storage location with the non-hazardous inventory. 
o Disinfect the outside of the impervious bag containing the HDs by wiping with and a low-
lint wipe saturated with sporicidal disinfectant prior to moving into the sterile 
compounding suite. 
▪ Chemotherapy gloves are worn when wiping down outside of the bag. 
▪ Sporicidal disinfectant remains on the bag for the proper contact time. 
o Disinfected impervious bag containing HDs are placed inside the interlocking pass-through 
into the negative pressure buffer room.  
o Disinfected impervious bags containing the HDs are moved into the ante room by opening 
the ante room door placed on a cart or table on the inside of the ante room. The bag is 
then moved into the negative pressure drug storage or buffer room through the neg ative 
pressure room door.  o Properly garbed personnel wipe down the outside of the drug primary packaging before 
placing the drug into the storage location either inside bin at room temperature or inside 
the refrigerator.    
o PPE is doffed as described above.  
4.5 If the shipping container is damaged or there is evidence of HD residue or leakage and none of 
the contents need to be removed: 
• If the transport packaging is still intact and HD residues are not leaking from the primary 
packaging or transport packaging, then continue with the steps below. 
• Enclose the transport packaging in an impervious container and seal the container without 
further manipulation. 
• Label the outer container as “Hazardous Drug.” 
• Place the impervious container in the segregated area that has been designated as 
intermediate storage for drugs and supplies being returned to the supplier or distributor. 
• If the supplier/distributor does not want the damaged primary packages returned, dispose of 
the impervious container in the appropriate HD container for disposal. 
• Since these drugs are more than trace waste, regardless of the drug (s) involved, dispose in 
black RCRA waste. 
 
4.6 If the shipping container is damaged and must be opened (e.g., to remove other HDs that are not 
broken), the following steps are taken: 
• Notify the DP of the damaged packaging. This is handled as a HD spill. See HD Spill policy.  
• Don all appropriate PPE in the order and manner required to work in the location of the C -
PEC and as described above. All hand hygiene and garbing and materials movement policies 
and procedures are followed when working in a sterile suite. 
• Transport the package in an impervious container to a C -PEC and place it on a disposable, 
plastic-backed preparation mat.  
• Carefully open the package. 
• Carefully remove the drug package(s) that are intact and undamaged.  
• Decontaminate each of these items with a low -linting wipe(s) that has been saturated with 
the designated decontamination agent, and place the decontaminated items in an area in the 
C-PEC that is not contaminated with HD residue. 
• Leave the damaged item inside the packaging and place it in an impervious container. 
• Decontaminate gloved hands and the impervious, sealed container and transfer it out of the 
C-PEC. 
• Doff outer pair of gloves. 
• Label the impervious container as “Hazardous Drug.” 
• If the distributor wants it back to verify breakage, place the container in the segregated area 
that has been designated as intermediate storage for drugs and supplies being returned to 
the supplier or distributor. 
• If the supplier/distributor does not want the container returned, dispose of the container in 
the appropriate HD container for disposal. 
• Since these drugs are more than trace waste, regardless of the drug (s) involved, dispose in 
black RCRA waste.   
• The receiving personnel complete at Hazardous Drug Spill Report Form and the DP completes 
the remainder of the form. • After the spill is thoroughly cleaned and before sterile compounding is resumed, the C-PEC is 
deactivated and decontaminated. C -PEC is then cleaned and disinfected with an EPA 
registered one-step sporicidal disinfectant cleaner. After the dwell time is ach ieved, wipe all 
surfaces inside the C-PEC with sterile IPA. 
 
 
Storage of Hazardous Drugs: 
4.7 PPE worn when storing HDs: 
• If storing HDs in a negative pressure storage location, don one pair of chemotherapy gloves 
before placing inventory into storage locations. 
• If storing HDs in a negative pressure buffer room, follow all hand hygiene and garbing 
procedures prior to entering the negative pressure drug storage location, see Hand Hygiene 
and Garbing policy and HD PPE policy for all required procedures. Don hair cover, facial hair 
cover, mask, two pairs of shoe covers, chemotherapy gown, and chemotherapy gloves before 
placing inventory into storage locations.     
4.8 Configure all bins, drawers, or storage containers where HDs are stored to reduce the risk of 
breakage and facilitate the containment of spills in the event of container leakage.  
4.9 Store HD vials and other dosage forms inside their primary packaging (e.g., manufacturer’s 
plastic-coated box) to further safeguard the dosage form from breakage and spills should it fall 
or be dropped. 
4.10 Store antineoplastic HDs that require further manipulation (other than counting or repackaging 
final dosage forms) and any HD active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) separately from non -
HDs. 
4.11 The storage location for antineoplastic HDs that require further manipulation (other than counting 
or repackaging final dosage forms) and any HD API includes all of the following: 
• Fixed walls 
• Maintains a negative pressure of 0.01” to 0.03” w.c. to the adjacent spaces 
• Has at least 12 air changes per hour (ACPH) 
• Exhaust is externally vented outside of the building terminating 10 feet above the roof and 
not located near any air intake per appropriate building codes and standards.   
4.12 Where not defined differently in an AoR; storage of HDs occurs in a separate negative -pressure 
HD storage area, a negative -pressure buffer room, or Containment Segregated Compounding 
Area (C-SCA) designated for HD compounding. 
• When stored in the negative-pressure buffer room there is adequate room for storage and 
the room maintains all required standards for certification.  
4.13 Store non -antineoplastic (NIOSH Table 2), reproductive risk -only (NIOSH Table 3), and final 
dosage forms of antineoplastic dosage forms with other non -hazardous inventory, as 
determined by the AoR. Disinfect the outer packaging before placing inside plastic bins.  
4.14 HDs used for nonsterile compounding are not stored in the areas designed for sterile 
compounding, as the additional activity of personnel coming to get inventory may negatively 
affect these areas. 4.15 Store refrigerated antineoplastic HDs that require further manipulation (other than counting or 
repackaging final dosage forms) and any HD API in a dedicated refrigerator in a negative pressure 
area with at least 12 ACPH (i.e., containment storage room, HD buffer room, or C-SCA). 
• If the refrigerator has a compressor, then the refrigerator should be placed adjacent to an 
exhaust in the room. Ideally, the exhaust placement is aligned with the location of the 
compressor (top or bottom) in the refrigerator. 
• If the refrigerator is solid state (does not have a compressor), then it may be placed in a 
location within the C-SCA or HD buffer room that is most advantageous to the workflow. 
4.16 Multidose vials (MDV) of antineoplastic HDs requiring manipulation that have been partially used are stored in the 
C-PEC, C-SCA, dedicated HD refrigerator, or hazardous buffer room consistent with the storage conditions described 
in the package insert. 
• CSTD vial spike remains in the MDV  
• Decontaminate vial surfaces, place vial inside sealed bag if needed. 
• Move MDV inside sealed bag to proper storage location within the HD buffer room.     
4.17 Never load Antineoplastic HDs into an Automated Dispensing Cabinet (ADC) unless otherwise 
specified in the AoR.   
 
5. Definitions 
5.1 Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (API): Any substance or mixture of substances intended to be 
used in the compounding of a drug preparation, thereby becoming the active ingredient in that 
preparation and furnishing pharmacological activity or other direct effect in the diagnoses, cure, 
mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans and animals or affecting the structure 
and function of the body.  
5.2 Assessment of Risk (AoR) : Evaluation of risk to determine alternative containment strategies 
and/or work practices. 
5.3 Containment segregated compounding area (C-SCA): A type of C-SEC with nominal requirements 
for airflow and room pressurization as they pertain to HD compounding. 
5.4 Chemotherapy glove: A powder -free medical glove that meets the ASTM Standard Practice for 
Assessment of Resistance of Medical Gloves to Permeation by Chemotherapy Drugs (D6978) or 
its successor. Gloves are either sterile or non-sterile depending on use.  
5.5 Chemotherapy gown : Gown used for handling HDs that is disposable, polyethylene -coated 
polypropylene (or a similar laminate) to resist permeation by HDs, seamless, closes in the back, 
has long sleeves, and has cuffs made of elastic or a knit material.    
5.6 NIOSH: National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health 
5.7 Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA): The public law that creates the framework for 
the proper management of hazardous and non-hazardous solid waste  
5.8 Trace HD Waste : Materials that have come into contact with or may contain only a residual 
amount of HD. Usually less than 3% of HD material by weight.   
 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <795> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.3 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
6.4 Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) respiratory protection standard (29 CFR 
1910.134) 
6.5 American Society of Health-System Pharmacists. ASHP Guidelines on Handling Hazardous Drugs. 
Am J Health-Sys Pharm. 2018; 75:1996-2031. Retrieved 12/20/22.  
6.6 Kienle P. The Chapter <800> Answer Book. Bethesda, MD: ASHP; 2017. 
7. Approval and Review Summary 
 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2025 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2023.  
7.2 Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
7.3 Reviewed with no changes 11/2024. 
 
 