OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: CSP Release Inspections & Testing Policy Reference #: PH0541 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the procedures for Compounded Sterile Preparations (CSP) release 
inspections, quality control testing, and final verification of CSPs prepared within FMOLHS Baton 
Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
1.2. Release inspections and testing are an important component of product quality control measures 
and the final verification of CSPs prior to release and dispensing.  Release inspections and testing 
includes, but is not limited to: 
• Visual inspections – physical product characteristics, labeling, container closure system 
• Quality control tests – pH, tonicity (osmolarity), refractive index, sterility, endotoxin level  
• Physical measurements of final CSP / batch yield – weight and/or volume  
• Calculations and conversions verification 
1.3. This policy addresses the release inspection and testing requirements stated in the current 
version of USP <797> and in accordance with the Louisiana Board of Pharmacy and related state 
statutes governing sterile compounding.   
2. Policy  
2.1. Release inspections of and tests on CSPs are performed by: 
• Compounder during and immediately after compounding 
• Verifying Pharmacist conducting in-process and/or final CSP verification and sign -off prior 
to release and dispensing. 
• Pharmacist prior to release and dispensing if CSP is released and dispensed more than 24 
hours after completion of compounding 
2.2. CSPs undergo visual inspection prior to release and dispensing to ensure preparation has no 
visual defects and its appearance meets expectations as characterized in the manufacturer’s 
labeling, Master Formula Record (MFR) or IV Workflow System. 2.3. CSP labeling is visually inspected and compared to the prescription or medication order to ensure 
accuracy.  Label positioning is checked to ensure important device measurements and 
manufacturer labeling and product identification is not obstructed. 
2.4. CSP container closure systems (i.e., final dispensing container and packaging) are visually 
inspected to ensure they are free of leaks, cracks, improper seals, and other defects that could 
affect sterility, stability, or CSP quality. 
2.5. CSPs with observed defects are promptly rejected, clearly labeled as rejected, and segregated 
from active stock to prevent use before disposal occurs. Appropriate disposal of the rejected CSP 
according per policy. 
2.6. When CSPs are not released or dispensed on the day of preparation and verification, a visual 
inspection of the preparation, label, and container closure system occurs immediately before it 
is released or dispensed. Attention is given to defects that occur during storage including 
precipitation, cloudiness, separation/loss of homogeneity, or leakage.  
2.7. CSPs compounded at FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies are not released or dispensed 
prior to the successful completion and documentation of required release inspections and tests 
2.8. CSP defects indicating sterility or stability issues which are detected prior to release or dispensing 
are investigated to determine the cause of the defect(s) and corrective actions are taken if 
appropriate. During the investigation, CSPs are quarantined pending the outcome. Results of the 
investigation, corrective actions, and disposition of the quarantined CSPs are documented and 
readily retrievable. 
2.9. Compounding Personnel who perform release inspections and testing receive foundational 
knowledge education, hands -on training and skills development, and undergo an observed 
competency assessment prior to performing job duties independently.   
• Ongoing training and education are provided when new or modified release criteria are 
introduced and at the discretion of the Designated Person(s).    
• Ongoing competency assessment is successfully completed at least once annually.  
• Documentation of training, and competency assessments is retained and readily retrievable. 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1. Designated Person(s) (DP): 
• Determine appropriate release inspections and tests for CSPs and ensure release criteria, 
procedures, and documentation requirements are clearly described in internal references, 
the Master Formula Record and/or IV Workflow System. 
• Ensure personnel conducting release inspections and tests receive appropriate education 
and training and undergo competency assessment on the skills and techniques necessary to 
successfully perform these techniques prior to performing them independently an d on an 
ongoing basis. 
• Identify, vet, and partner with analytical labs and release inspection and testing supply and 
equipment vendors. 
• Review release inspection and testing results and trends.  Identify deficiencies, oversee 
investigations and corrective actions, and ensure proper documentation.  
• Ensure release inspection and testing data is accurately and fully documented.  
3.2. Compounding Personnel: • Comply with all aspects of the release inspection and testing requirements for each CSP. 
• Ensure complete, accurate, and timely documentation of release inspection and testing 
results per this policy. 
• Conduct final visual verification of CSP and container closure system. 
• Report known or suspected deficiencies in the equipment, supplies, or vendors used in 
release inspections and testing to the DP. 
• Report CSP release inspection failures to the DP and quarantine products in a timely manner 
per this policy. 
3.3 Verifying Pharmacist:  
• Perform double check of all calculations, measurements, and conversions.  
• Conduct final visual verification of CSP label.  
4. Procedures 
4.1. CSP Release Inspection & Test Determination 
• Identify required release inspections and tests for each CSP, formulation, and/or container 
closure system. 
Required? Category Release Inspection or Test 
All CSPs 
 
 
Visual 
Inspections 
1. CSP Final Prep: free of visible particulates, foreign 
matter, or precipitate; discoloration; homogeneity of 
mixture (no separation); viscosity and characteristics 
2. CSP Label(s): match to prescription or med order, 
placement (not covering device or diluent product 
name and id or calibrated measures) 
3. CSP Container Closure System: leaks, cracks in 
packaging or seals, deformities impacting dispensing. 
• Determine specific physical and chemical release inspections, tests, and expected results for 
each CSP formulation by referring to USP-NF drug monographs, internal resources, or other 
recognized sterile compounding formulation and stability resources. CSP release inspections 
and tests for sterile dosage forms include the following adapted from Table 2 of USP <1163> 
Quality Assurance in Pharmaceutical Compounding: 
 Injections Irrigations Inhalations Ophthalmics Gel 
Implants 
Solid 
Implants 
Visual Particulate 
Matter ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓     
Volume ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
• Considerations for selecting and defining release criteria procedures and expected results: 
o CSP Category 
o Compatibility and appropriateness of release inspections, tests, and testing 
apparatus/supplies for the given CSP formulation, dosage form, and final drug yield  
o CSP stability under testing conditions 
o Potential for final CSP and/or route of administration to cause patient harm (e.g., 
intrathecal versus intramuscular injection) 
o Time-sensitivity of CSP administration (e.g., stat drug for patient in the E.D. or O.R.) 
o Additional regulatory and statutory requirements 
o Number/quantity of sample(s) needed for testing and the impact to the total 
compounded quantity or yield  • Document selected release inspections and testing requirements, including procedures, 
testing apparatus, and expected results in the appropriate system and/or formulation 
record for each CSP including: 
o Master Formula Record (MFR) - for CSPs compounded from one or nonsterile starting 
ingredients or repackaged CSPs 
o IV Workflow Management System (IVWS) (or similar) 
o Compounding System (CS) 
4.2. CSP Release Inspections & Testing 
• Conduct the specific release inspections and testing defined for each CSP according to the 
MFR, IVWS, or CS procedures and instructions.  
4.3. Visual Inspections - Liquid Dosage Forms 
• Wipe the container closure system with a low-lint wipe to remove any external particles. 
• Gently agitate and/or swirl the CSP and hold in front of both a black and white background.   
• Observe for color, clarity, precipitate/foreign matter, phase separation, etc.  Use magnifying 
glass if needed. 
• Reject CSP if any deviations are observed and document results on CR, IVWS, or CS.   
4.4. Documentation and Follow Up to Release Inspections and Testing 
• Document actual and expected (if applicable) release inspection and test results on the CR, 
IVWS, or CS. 
• Pharmacist verification, whether manual or through DoseEdge®, signifies that all release 
inspection criteria have been met. 
• Reject CSPs failing or not achieving expected results and quarantine CSPs.   
• Ensure rejected CSPs are stored in a clearly marked area to ensure CSPs are not accidently 
released or dispensed. 
• Promptly report release testing failure(s) to DP for determination if additional processing, 
retesting, investigations, and/or corrective actions are warranted.  
4.5. Final CSP Verification 
• Refer to Workflow and Aseptic Technique policy for the CSP final verification procedure. 
5. Definitions 
5.1. Acceptance Quality Limit (AQL): The maximum number of defective units allowed; beyond which 
the entire batch is rejected. 
5.2. Batch: A specific quantity of CSPs prepared as described in the MFR in a single, discrete process, 
and expected to have uniform character and quality, within specified limits. 
5.3. Container closure system: Packaging components that together contain and protect the dosage 
form. This includes primary packaging components and secondary packaging components if the 
latter are intended to provide additional protection. 
5.4. Formulation: The specific qualitative and quantitative composition of the final CSP. 
5.5. Meniscus: The lowest point of the curvature of a liquid’s surface inside of graduated cylinder and 
the point at which liquid measurements are determined.  5.6. MFR: Master formulation record 
5.7. Monograph: A quality documentary standard within USP -NF that articulates the quality 
expectations for a medicine including for its identity, strength, purity, and performance. It also 
describes the tests to validate that a medicine and its ingredients meet these criteria. 
5.8. Quality control (QC): The sampling, testing, and documentation of results that, taken together, 
ensure that specifications have been met before release of the CSP 
5.9. Release inspection and testing:  Visual inspection and testing performed to ensure that a 
preparation meets appropriate quality characteristics 
5.10. Refractive index (RI): A physical property characterizing the ability of substance to “bend” 
or refract light. The refractive index is the measure of the solute concentration of a substance or 
CSP and is used to help determine uniformity and conformance with a known RI value. 
5.11. Specific Gravity (SG): A unitless ratio of the density of a substance to the density of water 
at 4°, or [(g of substance/mL)/ 1.00 g/mL]. If known, can be used to help calculate density, 
volume, or weight of a substance. 
5.12. Specification: The tests, analytical methods, and acceptance criteria to which an API or 
other components, CSP, container closure system, equipment, or other material used in 
compounding CSPs must conform to be considered acceptable for its intended use. 
5.13. Stability: The extent to which a product or preparation retains physical and chemical 
properties and characteristics within specified limits throughout its expiration or BUD.  
5.14. Sterility: The absence of viable microorganisms.  
5.15. Workflow management system: Technology comprised of hardware and software that 
allows for automation to assist in the verification of components of, and preparation of, CSPs and 
to document components and processes. 
5.16. Verify: To confirm that a method, process, system, or equipment will perform as expected 
under the conditions of actual use.  
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version. 
6.3. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <788> Particulate Matter in Injections.  Current 
version. 
6.4. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <789> Subvisible Particulate Matter in Ophthalmic 
Solutions.  Current version. 
6.5. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <1163> Quality Assurance in Pharmaceutical 
Compounding.  Current version. 
6.6. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <1207> Packaging Integrity Evaluation – Sterile 
Products.  Current version. 
6.7. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <1211> Sterility Assurance.  Current version. 6.8. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <1225> Validation of Compendial Procedures.  
Current version.  
 
7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2025 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2022.  
7.2 Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
7.3 Reviewed with formatting changes 11/2024. 
 
 