OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Deactivation, Decontamination, Cleaning 
& Disinfection of Hazardous Drugs 
Policy Reference #: PH0554 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the procedures for deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection 
of Hazardous Drugs in areas where Hazardous Drugs (HDs) are handled within FMOLHS Baton 
Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
1.2. Surfaces where HDs are compounded and handled along with HD final products themselves are a 
potential source for HD residue contamination to personnel, patients, and the environment. In 
order to reduce the risk of contamination, all areas where HDs are han dled, all reusable 
equipment and all reusable devices are deactivated, decontaminated and cleaned. Additionally, 
sterile compounding areas and devices are subsequently disinfected.  
• Deactivation renders the HD inert or inactive. The HD residue is subsequently removed by 
decontamination. These two steps occur concurrently by wiping the surfaces with a 
deactivating agent and a low-lint wipe. 
• Cleaning removes organic and inorganic material from surfaces with the use of a cleaning 
agent and manual or mechanical action.  
• Disinfection involves using a chemical or physical agent on surfaces to destroy 
microorganisms including fungi, viruses, and bacteria. 
2. Policy  
2.1 Follow all cleaning procedures  for nonsterile and sterile compounding areas per USP <795>, 
<797> (including the use of a sporicidal agent), and all associated Cleaning Policies in addition to 
the deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection procedures outlined in this policy.  
2.2 All personnel involved in  deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection of HDs 
receive training and demonstrate competency in all steps, including appropriate procedures to 
protects themselves and the environment f rom HD contamination, at least annually. Refresher 
training is provided as needed and when changes in procedures or agents occurs.  
2.3 All deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection activities are performed by 
appropriately garbed personnel using facility -approved agents and procedures including frequency, method, and location of deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection 
activity. 
• Required garb for deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection includes: 
o Two pairs of chemotherapy gloves 
o Chemotherapy gown 
o Eye protection and face shield if splashing is likely 
o Respiratory protection if required by activity  
2.4 Gloves worn when performing deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection  are 
always ASTM Standard Practice for Assessment of Resistance of Medical Gloves to Permeation 
by Chemotherapy Drugs (D6978) or its successor. Gloves are either sterile or non -sterile 
depending on use. 
2.5 Sterile agents are used on the interior and all equipment housed inside of C-PECs.  
2.6 Agents used for deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection are selected based on 
the appropriateness if the agent for the type of HD contamination, location, and surface 
materials. 
• Agents used are compatible with the surface materials.  
o Manufacturer and supplier information for equipment and surfaces is reviewed to ensure 
compatibility with agents used.  
2.7 Agents and supplies used in C-PECs and C-SECs are assigned an expiration (or “in-use”) date once 
opened or prepared; expiration dates are clearly and permanently written on the bottle, 
container, or wrapping of the supply and do not exceed manufacturer exp iration dates or 
recommended “in-use” dates. 
2.8 Manufacturer’s directions or published data for the minimum wet contact time is followed for 
each of the agents used. 
2.9 All low-lint wipers used for deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection of HD areas 
are disposed into trace HD waste receptacles.  
2.10 Safety Data Sheets (SDSs) are retained for all chemicals used, included in training of cleaning 
personnel, and are readily retrievable by all staff members. 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1 The Designated Person (DP): 
• Ensures staff performing deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection  receive 
appropriate training and maintain current deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, 
disinfection, and HD related competencies. 
• Oversees selection of appropriate EPA -registered deactivating, decontaminating, cleaning, 
and disinfecting agents and ensures staff understands and adhere to appropriate dwell times 
for each agent. 
• Oversees correct procedures and order of steps are followed for the application of agents 
used in all activities of the deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection process.  
• Ensures the organization or facility maintains a current SDS for each agent in a readily 
retrievable format and location and ensures cleaning personnel understand how to access 
and use the SDS in case of a spill or accident. • Ensures compliance with deactivating, decontaminating, cleaning, and disinfecting  
procedures through spot-checking cleaning personnel while performing duties. 
3.2 Personnel who are responsible for deactivation, decontamination, and cleaning of HDs: 
• Undergo training and demonstrate competency initially and at least once annually in skills 
and competencies related to deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection. 
• Adhere to all deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection procedures including 
agent selection, frequency, method, and sequence of cleaning activities (i.e., cleanest to 
dirtiest). 
• Complete timely documentation of all deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and 
disinfection activities performed. 
 
4.  Procedures 
4.1 The agents used for deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection are: 
Deactivation and Decontamination 
Agent 
• Peridox RTU® 
• Surface Safe™ Two-Step Applicator Kit 
Cleaning Agent (contains 
surfactants) 
• Peridox RTU® 
• Surface Safe™ Two-Step Applicator Kit 
Disinfectants 
• Sterile 70% Isopropyl Alcohol 
• Peridox RTU® 
4.2 Frequency of deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and: 
 
 Deactivating and Decontaminating 
Frequency 
Cleaning and Disinfecting 
Frequency 
Inside C-PECs – including 
all surfaces, direct 
compounding area and 
work tray, and 
equipment used inside 
the C-PEC 
Daily on days when compounding 
occurs and when surface 
contamination is known or 
suspected.  
-The work surface of C-PEC 
between compounding different 
HDs 
-At the end of the shift 
Daily on days when compounding 
occurs and when surface 
contamination is known or 
suspected 
-sIPA after decontamination step 
between compounding different 
HDs 
Surfaces Underneath 
Removable C-PEC Work 
Tray (if applicable) 
Monthly - surfaces under the tray  Monthly - surfaces under the tray  
Pass Through(s) –  
all interior surfaces and 
external handles 
Daily on days when compounding 
occurs  
Daily on days when compounding 
occurs  
Work Surfaces Outside of 
C-PEC 
Daily on days when compounding 
occurs - all “high touch” surfaces 
daily 
Daily on days when compounding 
occurs - all “high touch” surfaces 
daily 
Floors Monthly  Daily on days when compounding 
occurs  Deactivating and Decontaminating 
Frequency 
Cleaning and Disinfecting 
Frequency 
Walls, Door(s), and Door 
Frame(s) inside C-SEC 
Monthly Monthly 
Ceilings of C-SEC Monthly Monthly 
Storage Shelves and Bins 
Inside C-SEC 
Monthly Monthly 
Equipment Outside of 
the C-PEC(s) 
Monthly Monthly 
 
• When working in a sterile compounding area, deactivation, decontamination, 
cleaning, and disinfection activities occur from cleanest to dirtiest areas.  
• After the application of a deactivation/decontamination, cleaning, or 
disinfectant, the agent is allowed to dwell, or maintain a wet contact time, 
for the minimum duration specified by the manufacturer or published data 
to ensure full action. 
• Daily d eactivation, decontamination , cleaning, and disinfecting occurs on days when 
compounding occurs. If compounding does not occur for more than 24 hours (e.g., over a 
weekend or holiday): 
o clean and disinfect the sink(s) before initiating hand hygiene and garbing  
o complete daily deactivation, decontamination, cleaning and disinfecting prior to the start 
of compounding on the day compounding resumes 
4.2 PPE worn when performing deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection 
steps: 
• Don full USP <797> garb per policy when performing steps inside the sterile compounding C-PEC 
and C-SEC  
• Two pairs of chemotherapy gloves 
• Chemotherapy gown (don over non-HD gowns and frocks) 
• Two pairs of shoe covers 
• Eye and face protection  
o While mixing agents 
o When spills or splashes can occur (i.e., performing steps on the ceiling and walls above 
eye level) 
• Appropriate respiratory support and/or eye protection when applying 
deactivation/decontamination agents to surfaces within the compounding area, including the 
following cleaning tasks:  
o When opening the C-PEC (i.e., cleaning under the C-PEC work tray and BSC sash is raised 
or opening front view screen of CACI)  
o Walls, ceilings, floors, and pass throughs of C-SEC 
o Walls, ceilings, and floors of C-SCA 
o Surfaces outside of C-PECs 
• Reusable PPE (goggles, respirators, etc.) must be decontaminated and cleaned after use. 
4.3 Deactivation, Decontamination, Cleaning and Disinfection inside the C-PEC • If needed, remove visible particles, debris, or residue with an appropriate 
solution (e.g., Sterile Water for Injection or Sterile Water for Irrigation) using 
sterile, low-lint wipers. 
• For deactivation and decontamination: Use a sterile low-lint wiper and apply 
a sterile appropriate agent (for the HD working with) to deactivate and 
decontaminate to equipment and all interior surfaces of the C -PEC used for 
sterile compounding. 
o If C-PEC is utilized for nonsterile compounding, the wipers and agents used do not need 
to be sterile if the C-PEC is located in a non-ISO classified area.  
• For cleaning and disinfecting: Use a sterile low-lint wiper and apply a sterile 
cleaning agent followed by a sterile disinfecting agent or apply an EPA -
registered (or equivalent) one-step disinfectant cleaner to equipment and all 
interior surfaces of the C-PEC used for sterile compounding. 
o If C-PEC is utilized for nonsterile compounding, the wipers and agents used do not need 
to be sterile if the C-PEC is located in a non-ISO classified area. 
• For application of a  sporicidal disinfectant: Follow USP <797> Cleaning and 
Disinfecting Policy. 
• Ensure the wet contact time specified by the manufacturer is achieved. 
• After the application of deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and 
disinfecting agent inside C -PEC, apply sIPA (or 70% IPA if not sterile 
compounding C -PEC) to equipment and all interior surfaces to remove 
residue. 
• Allow the surface to dry completely before beginning compounding. 
• Wipe agents onto surfaces in one direction with overlapping wipes, not in 
circles, as this action can spread contamination.  
4.4 Other Deactivation, Decontamination, Cleaning and Disinfection Considerations:  
• Deactivate/decontaminate, clean, and disinfect high touch surfaces outside 
of C-PECs in the C-SEC daily and all other surfaces plus the high touch surfaces 
monthly, including but not limited to: 
 
High Touch Surfaces* Other Surfaces 
o Horizontal work surfaces, tables, 
counters, or carts 
o Chair seats, arms, and backs 
o Keyboards/keypads, mouse, RF 
scanner, touch screen monitors or 
tablets 
o Telephones and other communication 
devices 
o Light switches, door handles or hands - 
free activator 
o Pass through handles 
 
o Exterior of PECs 
o Legs, underside of horizontal surfaces, 
and feet/wheels of work surfaces, 
tables, counters, carts, chairs, or 
benches 
o Trash bins and hazardous waste 
disposal containers 
o Doorframes, window ledges, and other 
irregular surfaces 
o DoseEdge® workstations *For Containment Segregated Compounding Areas, this includes all high touch surfaces within 
the perimeter line.  
• Deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfecting does not take place while active 
compounding is occurring. 
4.5 Selection and Use of Deactivation and Decontamination agents 
• Select and use deactivation and decontamination agents with careful 
consideration of compatibilities with cleaning agents, effectiveness, and user 
safety including, but not limited to, deactivation/decontamination activity, 
residue, shelf life, preparation requirements of the agent, and suitability for 
surfaces.  
• Use of ready -to-use and one step agents is preferred over those requiring 
dilution or separate steps.  
• Clean and disinfect sterile agent containers prior to introduction into the ISO 
5 environment. 
• Sterile agents and supplies (e.g., closed containers of sterile wipers, bottles 
of sIPA) can be used for up to 15 days once opened. Permanently and legibly 
write or label the expiration date on all cleaning supplies.  
4.6 Selection and Use of Cleaning Supplies and Tools 
•  Use sterile cleaning supplies and tools inside a C -PEC whenever possible; 
clean and disinfect prior to use (e.g., tool handles and holders). 
• Dedicate and do not remove reusable cleaning tools (e.g., mop frames and 
handles) from specific classified areas or C-SCAs. 
o Use dedicated mop frames, handles and cleaning tools in C-PECs, HD buffer rooms, HD C-
SCAs and HD storage rooms.  
• Cleaning supplies such as wipers, sponges, pads, and mop heads are made of 
low lint materials and, whenever possible are disposable. 
o Disposable cleaning supplies are discarded in trace HD waste receptacles after use. 
o Reusable tools are made of cleanable materials that are nonporous and are cleaned and 
disinfected before and after each use.  
4.7 Documentation of Deactivation, Decontamination, Cleaning, and Disinfection: 
• Document all deactivation, decontamination, cleaning, and disinfection in 
SoleSource® Simplifi 797® after completion of the task by personnel 
performing the work. Detailed records are retained and easily accessible.  
 
5. Definitions 
5.1 Biological Safety Cabinet (BSC ): A ventilated cabinet often used for preparation of hazardous 
drugs. These cabinets are divided into three general classes (Class I, Class II, and Class III). Class 
II BSCs are further divided into types (Type A1, Type A2, Type B1, and Type B2). 
5.2 Chemotherapy Gloves: A powder-free medical glove that meets the ASTM Standard Practice for 
Assessment of Resistance of Medical Gloves to Permeation by Chemotherapy Drugs (D6978) or 
its successor. Gloves are either sterile or non-sterile depending on use. 5.3 Chemotherapy Gowns: Gown used for handling HDs that is disposable, polyethylene -coated 
polypropylene (or a similar laminate) to resist permeation by HDs, seamless, closes in the back, 
has long sleeves, and has cuffs made of elastic or a knit material. 
5.4 Classified area: An area that maintains an air quality classification based on the ISO standards 
(see also the definition for ISO class). 
5.5 Compounding Aseptic Containment Isolator (CACI ): A specific type of CAI that is designed for 
the compounding of sterile HDs. The CACI is designed to provide worker protection from 
exposure to undesirable levels of airborne drugs throughout the compounding and material 
transfer processes and to provide a n aseptic environment with unidirectional airflow for 
compounding sterile preparations. 
5.6 Containment Primary Engineering Controls (C-PEC): A ventilated device designed and operated 
to minimize worker and environmental exposures to HDs by controlling emissions of airborne 
contaminants. 
5.7 Containment segregated compounding area (C -SCA): A type of C -SEC with nominal 
requirements for airflow and room pressurization as they pertain to HD compounding. 
5.8 Containment Secondary Engineering Controls (C-SEC): The room with fixed walls in which the C-
PEC is place. It incorporates specific design and operational parameters required to the contain 
the potential hazard within the compounding room. 
5.9 Containment Ventilated Enclosure (CVE) : A full or partial enclosure that uses ventilation 
principles to capture, contain, and remove airborne contaminants through HEPA filtration and 
prevent release into the work environment. 
5.10 Low-lint wiper: A wiper exhibiting few, if any, fibers or other contamination, visible without 
magnification, which is separate from, or easily removed from, the wiper material in a dry 
condition. 
5.11 Pass-through: An enclosure with sealed doors on both sides that should be interlocked. The pass-
through is positioned between two spaces for the purpose of minimizing particulate transfer 
while moving materials from one space to another. 
5.12 Trace HD Waste : Materials that have come into contact with or may contain only a residual 
amount of HD. Usually less than 3% of HD material by weight. 
 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <795> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.3 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings. 2019 version.  
6.4 Kienle P. The Chapter <800> Answer Book. Bethesda, MD: ASHP; 2017. 
6.5 American Society of Health-System Pharmacists. ASHP Guidelines on Handling Hazardous Drugs. 
Am J Health-Sys Pharm. 2018; 75:1996-2031. Retrieved 12/20/22.  
7. Approval and Review Summary  
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2025 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2023.  
7.2 Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
7.3 Reviewed with no changes 11/2024. 
 
 