OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy  Section: Sterile Products 
Title: Cleaning and Disinfecting Compounding 
Areas 
Policy Reference #: PH0537 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 11/1/2023 Last Date Reviewed: 11/4/2024 
Last Date Revised:  
             
  
*FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies include: OLOL Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Cancer Institute Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL Non-Oncology 
Infusion, North Baton Rouge Outpatient Infusion Pharmacy, OLOL at Ascension Inpatient Pharmacy, OLOL Children’s Hospital Inpatient 
Pharmacy, and OLOL Children’s Hospital St. Jude Affiliate Pharmacy 
 
1. Overview and Scope 
1.1. This policy describes the procedures for cleaning and disinfecting compounding areas where 
Compounded Preparations (CSP) are prepared within FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies.  
1.2. Surfaces in classified areas and segregated compounding areas are potential sources of microbial 
contamination. In order to reduce the risk of contact contamination, surfaces within classified 
areas used to prepare Category 1 and Category 2 CSPs are cleane d, disinfected, and have 
sporicidal disinfectants applied according to the processes and frequencies described in this 
procedure. 
• Cleaning involves removing organic and inorganic materials (e.g., dirt, debris, microbes, and 
residual drugs or chemicals) form surfaces with the use of a cleaning agent and manual or 
mechanical action. 
• Disinfecting involves using a chemical or physical agent on surfaces to destroy 
microorganisms including fungi, viruses, and bacteria. 
• Sporicidal disinfectants  are a chemical or physical agents that destroys all vegetative 
microorganisms including bacterial and fungal spores while applied at a sufficient 
concentration and for a specified “wet” contact time. 
1.3. Sterile 70% isopropyl alcohol (sIPA) is a staple in day-to-day compounding activities and plays a 
critical role in sanitizing and reducing the bioburden on gloved hands, surfaces, and materials 
through both chemical application and physical wiping. sIPA, however, is not a cleaning or 
disinfecting agent. While it does have some disinfectant properties, it does not possess the 
broad-spectrum coverage of cleaning, disinfecting, or sporicidal agents and requires a lengthy 
(and impractical) contact time to truly convey bactericidal or fungicidal activity.  
2. Policy 
2.1. Cleaning and disinfecting of all surfaces inside compounding areas, including sinks, as well as the 
application of a sporicidal disinfectant occur on a regular basis and at a minimum frequency as 
specified in USP <797> Pharmacecutical Compounding – Sterile Preparations 2022 and according 
to this policy (see Section 4.1). 2.2. Surfaces in compounding areas are cleaned prior to being disinfected with an EPA-registered (or 
equivalent outside of the US) agent.  An EPA -registered (or equivalent) one -step disinfectant 
cleaner is an appropriate alternative that allows for both processes to occur in one step. 
2.3. Sporicidal disinfecting agents are EPA-registered (or equivalent outside of the US) and allow for 
cleaning, disinfecting, and sporicidal activity concurrently in a single step.  
2.4. Manufacturer’s directions or published data for the minimum wet contact time is followed for 
each of the cleaning, disinfecting, and sporicidal agents used to ensure the agents have full 
microbial destroying action. 
2.5. If compounding (and cleaning) is not performed each day, cleaning and disinfecting is completed 
before reinitiating compounding. 
2.6. Cleaning and sanitizing is repeated when spills occur and when surfaces are visibly soiled. 
2.7. All personnel involved in cleaning and disinfecting of classified compounding and segregated 
compounding areas receive training and demonstrate competency in Hand Hygiene and Garbing 
initially and at least annually. Refresher training is provided as needed and when changes in 
procedures or agents occur. 
• Primary engineering controls (PECs) are cleaned by trained and qualified compounding 
personnel only. 
• Secondary engineering controls (SECs) or classified compounding areas can be cleaned by 
trained and qualified compounding personnel and/or internal or external contracted cleaning 
service who comply with all aspects of this policy. 
2.8. All cleaning and disinfecting activities are performed by appropriately garbed personnel using 
facility-approved agents and procedures including frequency, method, and location of cleaning 
activity.  
2.9. Sterile cleaning agents are used to clean the interior of, and all equipment housed inside of 
PECs.  
2.10.  Cleaning agents and supplies used in PECs and SECs are assigned an expiration (or “in-use”) date 
once opened or prepared; expiration dates are clearly and permanently written on the bottle, 
container, or wrapping of the supply and do not exceed manufacture r expiration dates or 
recommended “in-use” dates.  
Cleaning Agent or Supply Location Used Expiration Date 
(from initial puncture, use, or 
preparation) 
Ready-to-Use (RTU) STERILE Cleaning, 
Disinfecting, and Sporicidal Agents 
Inside PECs 15 Days 
Diluted & Aseptically Prepared STERILE 
Cleaning, Disinfecting, and Sporicidal Agents 
Inside PECs 15 Days 
RTU Nonsterile Cleaning, Disinfecting, and 
Sporicidal Agents 
All surfaces in SECs; 
Exterior of PECs 
15 Days 
Diluted Nonsterile Cleaning, Disinfecting, and 
Sporicidal Agents 
All surfaces in SECs; 
Exterior of PECs 
15 Days 
STERILE Premoistened or Low-Lint Dry Wipes Inside PECs 15 Days 
Nonsterile Premoistened or Low-Lint Dry Wipes All surfaces in SECs; 
Exterior of PECs 
30 Days 2.11.  Safety Data Sheets (SDSs) are retained for all cleaning supplies , included in training of cleaning 
personnel, and are readily retrievable by all compounding staff members. 
3. Roles & Responsibilities 
3.1. The Designated Person(s) (DP):   
• Ensures cleaning staff receives appropriate training and maintains current cleaning and 
related competencies.  
• Oversees selection of appropriate EPA -registered cleaning, disinfecting, and sporic idal 
agents and ensures staff understands and adheres to appropriate dwell times for each 
agent. 
• Ensures the organization or facility maintains a current SDS for each cleaning agent in a 
readily retrievable format and location and ensures cleaning personnel understand how to 
access and use the SDS in case of a spill or accident. 
• Determines appropriate remedial cleaning requirements for ad hoc and out-of-specification 
occurrences up to and including a triple clean of effected compounding areas including the 
following circumstances: 
• Actionable environmental findings from total particle counts, viable air sampling, or surface 
sampling results and/or trends. 
• Scheduled and unscheduled power and/or airflow disruptions directly impacting sterile 
compounding area(s). 
• Certification of sterile compounding area(s). 
• New or major construction or maintenance work performed within or adjacent to the sterile 
compounding area(s). 
3.2. Compounding personnel:  
• Undergo training and demonstrate competency initially and at least once annually in skills 
and competencies related to cleaning and disinfecting. 
• Adhere to all cleaning procedures including cleaning agent selection, frequency, method, 
and sequence of cleaning activities (i.e., cleanest to dirtiest). 
• Ensure appropriate use of sterile 70% IPA before, during, and after the compounding 
process. 
• Complete timely documentation of all cleaning activities performed. 
4. Procedures 
4.1. Frequency of Cleaning, Disinfection, and Application of Sporicidal Disinfectants – Adapted from 
USP <797> 2022 Table 8.  
 Cleaning and Disinfecting Applying Sporicidal Disinfectant 
 Frequency Who Frequency Who 
Inside PECs – 
including all 
surfaces, direct 
compounding area 
and work tray, and 
Daily on days when 
compounding 
occurs and when 
surface 
contamination is 
known or suspected 
Compounding 
Personnel 
Daily on days when 
compounding occurs  
Compounding 
Personnel  Cleaning and Disinfecting Applying Sporicidal Disinfectant 
 Frequency Who Frequency Who 
equipment used 
inside the PEC 
Surfaces Underneath 
Removable PEC 
Work Tray (if 
applicable) 
Monthly - surfaces 
under the tray  
Compounding 
Personnel  
Monthly Compounding 
Personnel  
Pass Through(s) –  
all interior surfaces 
and external handles 
Daily on days when 
compounding 
occurs  
Compounding 
Personnel  
Daily on days when 
compounding occurs  
Compounding 
Personnel} 
Work Surfaces 
Outside of PEC 
Daily on days when 
compounding 
occurs - all “high 
touch” surfaces 
daily 
Compounding 
Personnel  
Monthly – all 
surfaces including 
high touch and 
underneath of 
tables, chairs, and 
carts plus wheels. 
 
Compounding 
Personnel  
Floors Daily on days when 
compounding 
occurs 
Compounding 
Personnel  
Monthly 
 
Compounding 
Personnel  
Sinks Daily on days when 
compounding 
occurs 
Compounding 
Personnel  
Monthly 
 
Compounding 
Personnel  
Walls, Door(s), and 
Door Frame(s) 
Monthly Compounding 
Personnel  
Monthly Compounding 
Personnel  
Ceilings of Sterile 
Suite 
Monthly Compounding 
Personnel  
Monthly Compounding 
Personnel  
Ceilings of 
Segregated 
Compounding Area 
(SCA) 
When visibly soiled 
or if surface 
contamination is 
known or suspected 
Compounding 
Personnel  
When visibly soiled 
or if surface 
contamination is 
known or suspected 
Compounding 
Personnel  
Storage Shelves and 
Bins 
Monthly Compounding 
Personnel  
Monthly Compounding 
Personnel  
Equipment Outside 
of the PEC(s) 
Monthly Compounding 
Personnel  
Monthly Compounding 
Personnel  
• Cleaning activities occur from cleanest to dirtiest areas. 
• If cleaning and disinfecting are performed as separate steps, cleaning is performed prior to 
disinfecting. 
• After the application of a disinfectant, cleaning agent, or sporicidal disinfectant, the agent 
is allowed to dwell, or maintain a wet contact time, for the minimum duration specified by 
the manufacturer or published data to ensure full bactericidal, fungicidal, virucidal, and/or 
sporicidal action.  • Daily cleaning and disinfecting occurs on days when compounding occurs. If compounding 
does not occur for more than 24 hours (e.g., over a weekend or holiday): 
o clean and disinfect the sink(s) before initiating hand hygiene and garbing  
o complete daily cleaning and disinfecting prior to the start of compounding on the day 
compounding resumes 
• Monthly cleaning and application of sporicidal disinfectants occurs approximately every 30 
days, whenever possible, to ensure a regular and consistent cleaning schedule and is 
completed as one continuous process or, at a minimum, is completed with 72 hours to 
minimize the risk of cross-contaminating already cleaned areas. 
• Cleaning and disinfection of the inside of a PEC and any equipment housed and used inside 
a PEC occurs prior to and at the conclusion of daily and/or shift compounding.   
4.2. Cleaning, Disinfecting, and Applying Sporicidal Disinfectants in the PEC 
• If needed, remove visible particles, debris, or residue with an appropriate solution (e.g., 
Sterile Water for Injection or Sterile Water for Irrigation) using sterile, low-lint wipers. 
• For cleaning and disinfecting: Use a sterile low-lint wiper and apply a sterile cleaning agent 
followed by a sterile disinfecting agent or apply an EPA-registered (or equivalent) one-step 
disinfectant cleaner to equipment and all interior surfaces of the PEC.  
• For application of a sporicidal disinfectant : After cleaning and disinfecting, apply a sterile 
sporicidal disinfectant using a sterile low-lint wiper to all equipment, interior surfaces, and 
the area underneath the work tray; if the sporicidal disinfectant is an EPA -registered (or 
equivalent) one-step disinfectant sporicidal cleaner, separate cleaning and disinfecting steps 
are not required. 
• Ensure the wet contact time specified by the manufacturer is achieved. 
• After the application of cleaning, disinfecting, and/or sporicidal agent inside PEC, apply sIPA 
to equipment and all interior surfaces to remove residue. 
• Allow the surface to dry completely before beginning compounding. 
4.3. Use of Sterile 70% IPA inside of a PEC 
• Do not spray cleaning solutions, including sIPA, inside of a PEC to avoid deteriorating the 
integrity of the HEPA filter. Wet a sterile low -lint wiper with the cleaning solution or sIPA 
and apply directly with mechanical/manual action to the interior hood surfaces and 
equipment. 
• Apply sIPA to the horizontal work surface of each PEC and allow to dry before compounding:  
o Immediately before initiating compounding or a new compounding process  
o At least every 30 minutes if the compounding process takes 30 minutes or less  
o After completing a compounding process if the process takes more than 30 minutes  
4.4. Other Cleaning Considerations 
• Clean high touch surfaces outside of PECs on a daily basis and all other surfaces plus the high 
touch surfaces on a monthly frequency, including but not limited to: 
High Touch Surfaces* Other Surfaces 
o Horizontal work surfaces, tables, 
counters, or carts 
o Chair seats, arms, and backs 
o Exterior of PECs 
o Legs, underside of horizontal surfaces, 
and feet/wheels of work surfaces, o Keyboards/keypads, mouse, RF 
scanner, touch screen monitors or 
tablets 
o Telephones and other communication 
devices 
o Light switches, door handles or hands - 
free activator 
o Sink surfaces, drain, and faucet 
o Gowning bench and garb storage 
handles 
o Pass through handles 
o DoseEdge® Workstations 
tables, counters, carts, chairs, or 
benches 
o Trash bins and hazardous waste 
disposal containers 
o Doorframes, window ledges, and other 
irregular surfaces 
 
*For Segregated Compounding Areas, this includes all high touch surfaces within the 
perimeter line.  
• Cleaning, disinfecting, and the application of a sporicidal agent does not take place while 
active compounding is occurring.  
• Perform cleaning from cleaner to dirtier areas (e.g. ISO 5, ISO 7, and then ISO 8 areas).  
• For all sites, clean and disinfect as needed after spills and when surface contamination (e.g., 
splashes) is known or suspected. 
• Replace all garb that has become visibly soiled or when the integrity is compromised (e.g., 
becomes moist or wet due to splashing of cleaning agents and/or perspiration) after cleaning 
and prior to resuming compounding duties; at a minimum, repeat hand hygiene and replace 
sterile gloves before returning to compounding. 
• Use appropriate respiratory support (user-specific reusable half-mask respirators with 60923 
Particulate (P100)/Organic Vapor/Acid Gas cartridge filters) and eye protection when applying 
a sporicidal agent to surfaces within the compounding area, including the following cleaning 
tasks:  
o Inside PECs including under the work tray of a Biological Safety Cabinet (BSC) 
o Walls, ceilings, floors, and pass throughs 
o Surfaces outside of PECs 
4.5. Refer to USP <800> and related policies for decontamination steps if hazardous drugs are used. 
4.6. Remedial Cleaning for Out of Specification Conditions 
• As directed by the Designated Person or designee, perform and document remedial cleaning 
on an as needed basis.  Remedial cleaning ranges from cleaning and disinfection to 
application of a sporicidal disinfectant to triple cleaning effected compounding areas. 
o A triple clean consists of two separate and distinct applications of an approved one -
step disinfectant cleaner (allowing for full wet contact time between applications) 
followed by a separate application of an approved sporicidal disinfectant; remove 
cleaning agent residue with sIPA. 
• At a minimum, d ocument purpose, date, and cleaning agent(s) used when conducting 
remedial cleaning. Ensure remedial cleaning documentation is retained and  readily 
retrievable. 4.7. Selection and Use of Cleaning Agents 
• Select and use cleaning and disinfecting agents with careful consideration of compatibilities, 
effectiveness, and user safety including, but not limited to, antimicrobial activity, 
inactivation by organic matter, residue, shelf life, preparation requiremen ts of the agent, 
and suitability for surfaces being disinfected.  
• Use of ready -to-use and one -step disinfectant cleaner solutions is preferred over those 
requiring dilution or separate cleaning and disinfection steps. 
• Clean and disinfect sterile c leaning agent containers prior to introduction into the ISO 5 
environment. 
• Sterile cleaning and disinfecting supplies (e.g., closed containers of sterile wipers, bottles of 
70% sterile IPA) can be used for up to 15 days once opened.  Permanently and legibly write 
or label the expiration date on all cleaning supplies. 
• Store opened packages of sterile wipes inside of the PEC; if removed from a PEC once 
opened, they are no longer considered sterile and can only be used in ISO Class 7 and 8 
areas.  Disinfect sterile cleaning solution bottles stored outside of a PEC prior to introduction 
and use inside of the PEC with sIPA.  
4.8. Selection and Use of Cleaning Supplies and Tools 
• Use sterile cleaning supplies and tools inside a PEC whenever possible; clean and disinfect 
prior to use (e.g., tool handles and holders).   
• Dedicate and do not remove reusable cleaning tools (e.g. mop frames and handles) to 
specific classified areas or segregated compounding areas.  
o Use either dedicated mop frames in buffer and ante rooms or use the mop in the buffer 
room before use in the ante-area. 
o Dedicated mops and cleaning tools are used in hazardous areas. 
o Dispose of cleaning tools in a method that minimizes the chance of dispersing 
contaminants in the air. 
• Cleaning and disinfecting supplies such as wipers, sponges, pads, and mop heads are made 
of low lint materials and, whenever possible are disposable.  
o Disposable cleaning supplies are discarded after use.   
o Reusable cleaning tools are made of cleanable materials that are nonporous (excluding 
wood) are cleaned and disinfected before and after each use. 
4.9. Documentation of Cleaning 
• Document all cleaning, disinfecting, and application of sporicidal disinfectants in 
SoleSource® Simplifi 797® after completion of the task by the personnel performing  the 
work.  Detailed cleaning records are retained and readily accessible. 
5. Definitions 
5.1 Classified area: An area that maintains an air quality classification based on the ISO standards (see 
also the definition for ISO class).  
5.2 Cleaning agent: An agent for the removal of residues (e.g., dirt, debris, microbes, and residual 
drugs or chemicals) from surfaces.   
5.3 Compounding area: The area where compounding is occurring (i.e., a cleanroom suite or inside 
the perimeter of the SCA). 5.4 Garb: Items such as gloves, garments (e.g., gowns), shoe covers, head and facial hair covers, 
masks, and other items designed to reduce particle -shedding from personnel and minimize the 
risk of contamination of CSP(s).  
5.5 IPA: Isopropyl alcohol. 
5.6 Low-lint wiper : A wiper exhibiting few, if any, fibers or other contamination, visible without 
magnification, which is separate from, or easily removed from, the wiper material in a dry 
condition. 
5.7 One-step disinfectant cleaner: A product with an EPA-registered (or equivalent) claim that it can 
clean and disinfect a nonporous surface in the presence of light to moderate organic soiling 
without a separate cleaning step.  
5.8 Pass-through: An enclosure with sealed doors on both sides that should be interlocked. The pass-
through is positioned between two spaces for the purpose of minimizing particulate transfer while 
moving materials from one space to another. 
5.9 Primary engineering control (PEC):  A device or zone that provides an ISO Class 5 air quality 
environment for sterile compounding. 
5.10 Secondary engineering control (SEC): The area where the PEC is placed (e.g., a cleanroom suite 
or an SCA). It incorporates specific design and operational parameters required to minimize the 
risk of contamination within the compounding area. 
5.11 Segregated compounding area (SCA):  A designated, unclassified space, area, or room with a 
defined perimeter that contains a PEC and is suitable for preparation of Category 1 CSPs only. 
5.12 Sporicidal disinfectant: A chemical or physical agent that destroys bacterial and fungal spores 
when used in sufficient concentration for a specified contact time. It is expected to kill all 
vegetative microorganisms 
5.13 Triple clean : consists of two separate and distinct applications of an approved one -step 
disinfectant cleaner (allowing for full wet contact time between applications) followed by a 
separate application of an approved sporicidal disinfectant; remove cleaning agent residue with 
sIPA. 
6. Related Policies, Documents, References 
6.1 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc. <797> Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile 
Preparations. 2022 version. 
6.2 United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.  <800> Handling Hazardous Drugs in Health care 
Settings.  2019 version.  
7. Approval and Review Summary 
Approved by/date: Pharmacy Management, 11/2023 
Next review: 11/2024 
7.1 Initial version published by Wolters Kluwer 2022.  
7.2 Revised 11/2023 for use at all FMOLHS Baton Rouge Market Pharmacies. 
7.3 Reviewed with no changes 11/2024. 
 
 