 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Hazardous 
Substances 
Title: Preparation & Storage of Intrathecal 
Chemotherapy 
Policy Reference #: PH-06-08 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 09/18/2013 Last Date Reviewed: 6/22/2405/09/2018 
Last Date Revised: 05/09/2018 
  
PURPOSE: 
 
This document describes the proper method for preparation, storage and delivery of intrathecal 
chemotherapy doses within the Our Lady of the Lake Health system and areas of  
administration. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Intrathecal Administration - The injection of a therapeutic agent (in this case a 
chemotherapy agent) into the sheath surrounding the spinal cord 
Preservative Free (PF) – all medications and diluents used in the preparation of intrathecal 
doses cannot contain any of the usual preservatives in medications and diluents to increase 
their stability as these agents could cause harm to the patient. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
A. Preparation of chemotherapy intrathecal doses 
Intrathecal medication is not prepared during the preparation of any other agents.  
Intrathecal chemotherapy agents are prepared on the day of use and are given an expiration 
of 0000 (midnight). The workspace in the Biologic Safety Cabinet (BSC)  is cleaned per 
protocol prior to preparation of all intrathecal doses. 
 
Filtering:  All dilutions intended for intrathecal use are filtered through a 0.22 micron 
filter that has been approved by the manufacturer for that use before doses are prepared. 
 
B. Dispensing of chemotherapy intrathecal doses 
1. Only the Intrathecal dose should be dispensed and delivered to the treatment/procedure 
room for Pediatrics , interventional radiology, adult inpatient , or within the infusion 
department. Intrathecal for ommaya injection will be delivered directly to the provider 
that will administer the dose. 
2. Intrathecal doses should never be packaged with non -intrathecal doses in bags, 
pneumatic tubes or any other type of transportation or storage. 
3. No other chemotherapy medications (for the same or a different patient)  will be 
dispensed (delivered) at the same  time.  If the patient has other chemotherapy to be 
administered as well, they will not be sent up until after the administration of the 
intrathecal dose has been confirmed. 
   Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
C. Storage of chemotherapy intrathecal doses 
Once intrathecal doses are labeled, if not being immediately used, they are stored in 
isolated container bins that are uniquely identifiable for intrathecal medication only and 
located according to temperature requirements as specified by the medications’ 
manufacturer and specified.   There are separate bins located in the refrigerator and on 
shelving at room temperature to accommodate storage at the appropriate temperature 
specified by the USP.  Any unused product or returned preparations are destroyed. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. Jacobson, J., Polovich, M., et al. Revisions to the 2009 American Society of Clinical 
Oncology/Oncology Nursing Society Chemotherapy Administration Safety Standards:  
Expanding the Scope to Include Inpatient Settings.  Oncology Nursing Forum Vol. 39 
No.1 (2012): 31-38. 
 