 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 3 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Pediatric Services  
Title: Pediatric Transport Kit Policy Reference #: PH-08-03 
Supersedes #: PH-16-16O 
Date of Origination: 05/01/2012 Last Date Reviewed: 6/3/24 
Last Date Revised: 10/05/2022 
 
POLICY: 
 
The department of pharmacy provides, replaces, and charges medications used by the Pediatric ICU transport 
services. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. Transport services will be provided a pack of medications to be used during transport of a patient.  Transport 
medications should be stored in a drug case as a component of the transport packs.  Medications requiring 
refrigeration should be stored in a separate container placed in the transport pack at the time of dispensing.  The 
combination of the drug case and the refrigerated storage box should be known as the “Transport Kit.”  The 
contents of the transport kit should be determined per recommendations of the respective medical directors of 
the transport services and the Pharmacy Department.  The contents list should be reviewed and approved at 
least annually.   
 
2. A technician is responsible for filling transport pack within 24 hours of its return to the pharmacy.  A pharmacist 
will check the Transport Kit filled by the technician for accuracy and completeness.  A label should be affixed 
to the outside of the transp ort kit indicating the name and date of the first drug to expire, the initials of the 
technician filling and pharmacist checking the kit.  The Transport Kit Log will be maintained by the pharmacy 
and will include information regarding the filling, checking, and returning of the Transport Kits.  The log will 
be filled out with the following information: 
a. Kit Number  
b. Signature of the pharmacist and technician who checks and fills the kit 
c. Tamper-evident lock (blue) number that is placed on the completed kit by the pharmacist 
d. Tamper-evident lock (white) number that is placed in the completed kit by the pharmacist. 
e. Tamper-evident lock (yellow) number that is placed in the completed kit by the pharmacist to secure 
narcotics contained in the kit. 
 
3. A transport services representative can obtain the transport kit via the override function from the ED Pyxis 
machine upon commencement of the patient transport.  The override function will require a witness and for the 
patient name to be entered manually into the system.  A patient charge form/controlled substance reconciliation  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 3 
 
sheet should be included in the transport kit.  A tracking log for the release and return of the kit will be 
maintained by Pharmacy.  When a kit is dispensed through Pyxis, the following information must be 
electronically documented in the system: 
a. Date/time of pickup 
b. Electronic Signature of the individual and witness removing the kit 
c. First and Last Name of the Patient 
 
4. Upon immediate return to Hospital or nursing unit, the kit must be returned to main pharmacy.  Once the team 
is back on site, the use of the transport pack is unwarranted and does not meet regulatory bodies’ requirements.  
The Transport Kit should be locke d with the provided lock (white) for the return to pharmacy.  In main 
pharmacy, the Transport Kit Log, as indicated above will be completed with the following information: 
a. Return time and date 
b. Name/signature of pharmacist/transport services representative. 
c. The number of white tamper evident lock 
 
5. The patient charge form/narcotic reconciliation should be completed with a Patient Sticker or handwritten 
patient name, date of birth and Medical Record number and the Transport Nurse’s signature.   During transport, 
documentation of drug administration must be made on the Patient Charge/Controlled Substance reconciliation 
form.   
 
6. All kits returned to pharmacy must be inspected by the nurse returning the kit and a pharmacist to ensure the 
medication kit is intact or the documentation is complete.    Any Controlled Substances used during the transport 
should include a signature of th e person having administered the med as well as the signature of a witness.  
Waste should also be documented on the form in the same manner.  Any Controlled Substance discrepancies 
will be identified and reported to the respective assistant directors.  If the kit is intact and was not used, the 
pharmacist should verify that the serial number of the lock matches the number on the Transport Kit Log. 
 
7. Pharmacist should then remove the Controlled Substances and return them to the Pyxis C2 Safe. 
 
8. Patient Charge/Controlled Substance reconciliation form will be processed by a pharmacy team member and 
the charges will be posted to the patient ’s account.  Subsequently, the form will be filed and stored for future 
reference if needed.  
 
9. To complete the cycle, 4 kits will be maintained by pharmacy . All 4 kits  will be stored in the Emergency 
Department Pyxis station.  When a Pyxis stockout occurs, the technician should grab one of the kits and obtain 
the refrigerated medications.  Refrigerated items should be labeled with a room temperature expiration date.  
They should then revise the expiration sticker and initial it.  This Kit should be brought to a pharmacist to 
complete the remaining steps. 
 
10. The pharmacist should obtain the Controlled Substances from the Pyxis C2 safe and should place the serial  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 3 
 
number of the lock being used on the paperwork.   
 
11. The pharmacist should then lock the kit after reviewing the contents of the kit for completeness and verify the 
drug with the shortest expiration date is still the same, and should initial the expiration sticker on the outside of 
the kit. 
 
12. The pharmacist should finally verify that the Transport Kit Log has all the necessary elements documented 
before handing off to the technician. 
 
13. The technician should then refill the Pyxis machine in the Emergency Department. 
 
 