 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 3 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Formulary and 
Medication 
Procurement   
Title: Intracompany Transfer between Our 
Lady of the Lake owned Facilities 
Policy Reference #: PH-11-10 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination:  Last Date Reviewed: 05/15/2024 
Last Date Revised: 02/17/2022 
  
PURPOSE: 
Utilizing a central fill model from a primary pharmacy, drug inventories shall be transferred to various facilities by way of 
an intracompany transfer.   
 
DEFINITIONS: 
1. Registrant – an entity that is registered to hold a DEA License.   
 
2. Intracompany Transfer – a transfer between related companies under common ownership and control by a 
corporate entity.   
 
3. Corporate entity – for purposes of this policy, Corporate Entity is referring to Our Lady of the Lake owned and 
managed companies and/or facilities 
 
4. Invoice – a receipt from the primary filling pharmacy which contains the pharmacy registrant name, DEA 
registration number, and address, the receiving facility name, DEA registration number and address,  the name of 
the medication(s) being intracompany transferred, the dosage form, strength and quantity of each.  
 
5. Primary Filling Pharmacy – pharmacy responsible for oversight of medication access per designated facility owned 
by the OLOL Corporate Entity 
 
6. Power of Attorney – the authority to act for another person and/or facility for the transfer of controlled substances 
 
POLICY: 
 
This policy defines the transfer of medication products to various Our Lady of the Lake owned facilities.  This policy applies 
to controlled as well as non-controlled substances All intracompany transfers shall be transfers between this corporate entity 
facilities.  Each facility shall have at minimum the following license and or permit as applicable for controlled and/or non-
controlled substances: 
1. DHH License 
2. DEA Hospital Clinic License 
3. Controlled Dangerous Substance License 
4. Automated Dispensing License as it relates to the primary filling pharmacy permit 
 
PROCEDURE 
 
The primary filling pharmacy is responsible for supplying medications to surrounding facilities owned by OLOL with 
controlled and non-controlled substances, each facility maintains its own DEA registration and acquire its own DEA  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
form 222s.  The DEA form 222s are stored in the CII Safe, and/or controlled substance manager, at the primary filling 
pharmacy and each facility must be notified to reorder when they are below PAR.  A log will be used to maintain the 
inventory of DEA form 222s  at the primary filling pharmacy .  The pharmacist preparing the form will use the next 
sequential form and document the form number, their name, and the date on the log.  
 
1. Intracompany Transfer to a Facility involving Controlled Substances 
a. Schedule II Controlled Substances 
i. Transfers of C-II drugs shall be made with a DEA form 222 and accompanied by an invoice where 
appropriate 
1. Handling of DEA form 222 with Errors 
a. If an error is made while filling out a DEA form 222, it cannot be corrected and 
the form becomes unusable.  However, it should not be destroyed.  In order to 
ensure that it cannot be reused, “VOID” will be written across the form and it will 
be kept on file. This should also be noted in the DEA Form 222 tracking log.  
ii. For all Schedule II transactions, a pharmacist will access the CII Safe, and/or controlled substance 
manager, and/or controlled substance manager, and/or controlled substance filing system indicating 
the reason being to obtain DEA form 222   
iii. Pharmacist will acquire next sequential DEA form 222 for the corresponding Facility and document 
on log form number, their name, and the date along with the remaining balance of forms. 
iv. Pharmacist will select action of “Sale to outside pharmacy” from drop down menu in CII Safe, 
and/or controlled substance manager.   
v. Pharmacist will fill in the Facility’s Name and the DEA form 222 number and enter the medications 
and quantity being requested. 
vi. Once the information is saved, two copies of an invoice will be printed by the CII Safe, and/or 
controlled substance manager. 
vii. Printed invoice will be completed with the following information being documented for the primary 
filling pharmacy and the facility receiving the medication(s): 
1. Name of each registrant. 
2. Address of each registrant. 
3. DEA registration number of each registrant 
viii. Pharmacist will date & sign the invoice filing one copy for the primary filling pharmacy’s records 
and the other to be sent to the requesting facility. 
ix. For Schedule II controlled substances, the pharmacist will fill out the DEA form 222 and obtain a 
signature from an authorized pharmacist with Power of Attorney for the corresponding facility. 
x. Pharmacist will attach supplier’s copy (brown) of DEA form 222 to the primary filling pharmacy’s 
copy of the invoice, the purchaser’s copy (blue) of DEA form 222 to the requesting facility’s 
invoice, and will place the DEA copy (green) in the Administrative Assistant’s mailbox  where 
applicable. 
xi. The Administrative Assistant and/or Pharmacist in Charge will mail the DEA copies to the DEA. 
b. Schedule III-IV Controlled Substances 
i. Pharmacist will select action of “Sale to outside pharmacy” from drop down menu in CII Safe, 
and/or controlled substance manager.   
ii. Pharmacist will fill in the Facility’s Name and information  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
iii. Once the information is saved, two copies of an invoice will be printed by the CII Safe, and/or 
controlled substance manager. 
iv. Printed invoice will be completed with the following information being documented for the primary 
filling pharmacy and the facility receiving the medication(s): 
1. Name of each registrant. 
2. Address of each registrant. 
3. DEA registration number of each registrant 
v. Pharmacist will date & sign the invoice filing one copy for the primary filling pharmacy’s records 
and the other to be sent to the requesting facility. 
2. Intracompany Transfer from an OLOL owned Facility involving controlled substances 
a. Should a controlled substance medication at an OLOL owned facility expire or is no longer needed at the 
facility, the medication may be intracompany transferred back to the primary filling pharmacy.  The primary 
filling pharmacy will complete the request for controlled substance from the facility. 
b. For Schedule II controlled substances, the pharmacist will complete a DEA Form 222  for the Primary 
Filling Pharmacy and follow the same procedure as outlined above.  
c. The Primary Filling Pharmacy will retain a the original  DEA form 222 and send the a copy to the 
corresponding facility. A copy will be e-mailed to the DEA by the primary filling pharmacy.   
d. An invoice will be generated by utilizing the Pyxis ES server showing the transaction from the automated 
medication system at the corresponding facility.  The original DEA Form 222 will be attached to this invoice 
and maintained at the Primary Filling Pharmacy.  Document the quantity of drug received and the date on 
the purchaser’s copy  
e. A copy of the invoice and executed DEA Form 222 will be maintained at the corresponding facility.  
3. Intracompany Transfers of all non-controlled substances 
a. A hardcopy of the transfer information can be obtained via Pyxis ES server. Should the transaction be past 
90 days, the historical information should still be readily retrievable through Pyxis ES server.  During an 
audit, these reports may be run at the request of the auditor and serve as the invoice for the corresponding 
facility.   
 