 Policy 1905 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Billing and 
Finance 
Title: Outpatient Infusion Auditing Policy Reference #: PH1905 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 1/15/2016 Last Date Reviewed:  05/15/2024 
Last Date Revised: 8/23/22 
 
POLICY: 
Charges for outpatient infusions will be reviewed using various technologies to ensure that the dose 
administered to the patient is accurate, the dose is broken down to the correct billable unit and the charge 
contains the correct national drug code (NDC) as well as the vials used in the preparation of the admixture.   
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE: 
To ensure that there is a process in place for outpatient infusions such that they are billed accurately with 
regard to all of the requirements of any third-party payors.  Additionally, should the hospital choose to 
use the JW modifier to minimize loss from drug, this policy will outline the correct procedure. 
DEFINITIONS: 
NDC:  The National Drug Code is a unique 10 -digit, 3 -segment numeric identifier assigned to each 
medication listed under Section 510 of the US Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. The segments 
identify the labeler or vendor, product (within the scope of the labeler), and trade package (of this product). 
Billable Unit:  Billable Unit is the J -Code increment of NDC units to be entered on the claim. Each J -
code is priced in the billable unit to correspond to the CMS established definition for each medication.   
J Code:  Related to Permanent billing HCPCS codes used to report injectable drugs that ordinarily cannot 
be self-administered; chemotherapy, immunosuppressive drugs and inhalation solutions as well as some 
orally administered drugs. 
HCPCS:  The Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System is a set of health care procedure codes based 
on the American Medical Association's Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) used for billing. 
JW Modifier:  The JW Modifier is a billing code, similar to a J-Code, in which CMS will pay for both the 
administered and discarded drug and biological if specific criteria are met.  A HCPCS JW modifier can 
be billed if an unused portion of the drug/biological is approp riately discarded.  CMS acknowledges that 
there are circumstances where unused drugs or biologicals must be discarded.  HCPCS modifier JW, billed 
on a separate line, will provide payment for the amount of discarded drug or biological. 
DoseEdge:  The DoseEdge Pharmacy Workflow Manager is a solution that interfaces with Pharmacy 
Information System (PIS) to automate the process of routing, preparing, inspecting, tracking and reporting 
on IV and oral liquid doses.  Displays key preparation details, in cluding dose calculations, preparer, 
products used, lot numbers, NDC’s, and expiration dates. 
Epic:  OLOL software system used to electronically document a patient’s medical record.   EPIC is the 
electronic medical record, containing pertinent patient information such as  a patient account number  Policy 1905 
Page 2 of 2 
(CSN), Order ID (Rx #) and NDC.  EPIC also has a Charge Detail File, used to compare information from 
DoseEdge.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. The transaction file from Dose Edge for the date in question is queried through Dose Edge.  The 
Dose Edge file has the NDC, Order ID, and CSN.   
2.  A Charge Detail file from Epic is obtained and utilizes the same 3 fields above from DoseEdge to 
match needed information.  The charge detail also contains billable unit and JCode information. 
3. The file is then analyzed and compared for NDC discrepancies between the Charge Detail file to 
Dose Edge File.  The file is then manually researched for each line item with discrepancies. 
4. The correct NDC’s from the DoseEdge file are noted on the Charge Detail spreadsheet, as well as 
any billable unit corrections, if applicable. 
5. The final spreadsheet is then sent to OLOL billing for corrections. 
6. After corrections are completed, Pharmacy visually confirms that the UB04 has been changed. 
7. Routinely, the NDC mismatches will be analyzed for patterns.  If an NDC has been a permanent 
mismatch for the item in question, a ticket will be entered for the Epic Willow team to address.   
 
 