 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Billing/Finance 
Title: Medication Charges and Credits to 
Departments and Patients  
Policy Reference #: PH-19-02 
Supersedes #: PH-05-06-O, 
PH19-03 
Date of Origination: 09/01/2001 Last Date Reviewed: 02/03/2025 
Last Date Revised: 02/06/2020 
 
POLICY: 
 
Pharmacy personnel must ensure that all medications are properly charged  and credited to patients and 
departments of the hospital .  Any medication or item utilized by a department that does not generate 
revenue for pharmacy via direct patient charge is expensed to that department.  Any patient not receiving 
medications should be credited where a charge occurred for medications not given, or where medications 
were obtained at no expense to the dispensing pharmacy such as through patient assistance programs.  
 
CHARGES FOR REQUISITIONS 
 
Requisitions for medications (e.g. floor stock) will be charged to the requesting department’s cost center 
at the acquisition cost of the medication. 
 
CHARGES FOR ITEMS THAT ARE UNACCOUNTABLE 
 
Charges for items that are unaccountable or are determined as lost (e.g. inability to determine appropriate 
patient to charge as result of lack of information provided) by nursing unit will be expensed to the 
particular department’s cost center at the acquisition cost of the medication.  
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
Patient Credits: Should patients be charged for medications and 1) not actually receive the medication or 
2) the medication was obtained by the pharmacy through a patient assistance program where no expense 
to pharmacy occurred, the patient will be credite d for the drug that was charged according to the 
documentation in the electronic medical record.  The credit function will be completed in the electronic 
medical record.   
 
The hospital is currently using an electronic medical record that charges patients upon administration of 
medications.  Medications that are not administered and returned to the pharmacy will be returned 
electronically by trained individuals such that a reconciliation of the medication occurs.   
 
Department Requisitions: As requisitions and lost charge detail are received, the Purchasing Cler k, 
Pharmacy Buyer, or Pharmacy Supervisor will enter the information into the wholesaler database within 
the interdepartmental billing program.  Each department is identified in the database by the corresponding  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
hospital cost center number.   
 
1. At the beginning of every month, the Pharmacy Buyer will run a summary report of each 
department’s prior month requisitions and/or lost charge detail. 
2. Examples of requisitions / lost charge detail include: 
a. Medications missing from PYXIS  
b. Medications ordered by PCNs 
c. Floor Stock utilized for departmental procedures 
3. A summary of all charges is submitted in a report to Accounts Payable including a bill for 
outside entities which the hospital will collect payment.   
4. Accounts payable will expense in-house department’s cost center and submit bills for the outside 
entities (e.g. St. Vincent de Paul, OLOL Foundation, School of Nursing). 
5. Original requisitions will be filed in the purchasing area and copies sent to those departments 
with high cost/volume of medications. 
6. An itemized report should be forwarded to the Supervisor of each department with purchases 
and/or lost charge detail for the prior month.  
 