 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Billing/Finance 
Title: Patient Data Processing Policy Reference #: PH-19-01 
Supersedes #: PH-05-04-O 
Date of Origination: 07/01/2000 Last Date Reviewed: 01/06/25 
Last Date Revised: 2/06/2020 
 
POLICY: 
 
The pharmacy shall use data processing systems in accordance with the procedures in this policy. 
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
For the purposes of this policy, the following words and terms shall have the indicated meanings: 
 
1. Downtime - defined as the period of time during which a data processing system is not operable. 
2. Electronic signature  - defined as a unique security code or other identifier which specifically 
identifies the person entering information into a data processing system. 
3. Hard-copy - defined as a physical document. 
 
RESPONSIBILITY 
 
The Pharmacy Department Leader shall be responsible for maintenance of medication records in a data 
processing system such that the data processing system is in compliance with all regulatory requirements. 
 
MAINTENANCE OF DATA PROCESSING MEDICATION RECORDS 
 
Records, except when specifically required to be maintained in original or hard -copy form, may be 
maintained in an alternative data retention system, such as data processing or direct imaging system (e.g., 
microfilm or microfiche) provided: 
 
• The records in the alternative data retention system contain all of the information required on the 
manual system. 
• The alternative data retention system is capable of producing a hard copy of the record upon request 
of the Louisiana Board of Pharmacy, its representatives or other authorized local, state, or federal law 
enforcement or regulatory agencies. 
 
BACKUP OF DATA PROCESSING RECORDS 
 
The facility shall maintain a back-up copy of information stored in the data processing system and up-date 
this back-up copy on a regular basis (preferably monthly) to assure that data is not lost due to system  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 3 
failure. 
 
MEDICATION DISTRIBUTION AUDIT TRAIL 
 
The data processing system must have the capacity to produce a hard -copy printout of an audit trail of 
medication distribution and return for any strength and dosage form of a medication (by either brand or 
generic name or both) during a specified period of time.  This printout should contain the following 
information: 
 
• Patient's name and room number or patient's facility identification number. 
• Prescribing or attending practitioner's name. 
• Name, strength, and dosage form of the medication product actually distributed. 
• Total quantity distributed from and returned to the pharmacy. 
• If not immediately retrievable electronically, the following should also be included on the printout: 
o Prescribing or attending practitioner's address. 
o Prescribing or attending practitioner's DEA number, if the medication order is for a controlled 
substance. 
 
An audit trail printout for each strength and dosage form of medications distributed during the preceding 
month shall be produced at least monthly and shall be maintained in a separate file at the facility.  The 
information on this printout should be sorted by medication name and list all distribution/returns for that 
medication chronologically. 
 
The pharmacy may elect not to produce the monthly audit trail printout if the data processing system has 
a workable (electronic) data retention system in which can produce an audit trail of medication distribution 
and returns for the preceding two years.  The audit trail will be supplied by the pharmacy within 72 hours, 
if requested by an authorized agent of the Board of Pharmacy, or other authorized local, state, or federal 
law enforcement or regulatory agencies. 
 
CONTROLLED MEDICATION AUDIT TRAIL 
 
Each time a controlled substance is distributed from or returned to the pharmacy, a record of such 
distribution or return shall be entered into the data processing system. 
 
ENTRY OF INFORMATION INTO A DATA PROCESSING SYSTEM 
 
Supportive personnel may enter medication order and medication distribution information into a data 
processing system provided judgmental decisions are not required and a pharmacist checks the accuracy 
of the information entered into the system prior to releasing the order. 
 
DOWNTIME 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 3 
If the pharmacy experiences data processing system downtime, the pharmacy will implement an auxiliary 
procedure to ensure that all data is retained for on-line data entry as soon as the system is available for use 
again. 
 
CHANGE OR DISCONTINUANCE OF A DATA PROCESSING SYSTEM 
 
A pharmacy that changes or discontinues use of a data processing system must: 
 
Transfer the records to a new data processing system; or 
Purge the records to a printout which has the same information as required on the audit trail printout 
including sorting by medication name and listing all distribution/returns for that medication 
chronologically. 
 
Information purged from a data processing system must be maintained by the pharmacy for two years 
from the date of initial entry into the data processing system or for a greater time if required by law. 
 
LOSS OF DATA 
 
The Pharmacy Department leader shall report any significant loss of information from the data processing 
system to the Louisiana Board of Pharmacy. 
 