 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section:  Pharmacy Residency 
Title: Chief Resident 
Policy 
Reference #: PH-22-11 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 04/6/2017 Review Date: 01/06/2025 
Revision Date:  11/06/2021 
 
PURPOSE: 
To set forth the responsibilities of the Chief Resident.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Pharmacy Resident (“resident”):  a pharmacist in a post-graduate education training program. 
 
Preceptor: an expert pharmacist who gives practical experience and training to a pharmacy resident.  
He or she is also responsible for directing, supervising, and evaluating the resident.  
 
Residency Program Director:  the pharmacist responsible for the direction, conduct, and oversight of 
the residency program. 
 
Residency Coordinator: the pharmacist responsible for aiding the residency program director 
throughout the residency year.  
 
POLICY: 
I. Each PGY-1 resident will have the opportunity to serve as chief resident for one quarter during 
the residency year. The PGY-2 critical care resident will serve as co-chief for the year and mentor 
each PGY-1 chief resident in the process. 
II. Responsibilities include, but are not limited to and depend on the quarter in which the resident 
serves as chief resident: 
A. Representing the residents at the monthly clinical meeting and Residency Advisory 
Council (RAC) meeting when deemed necessary. 
i. The chief will solicit issues and feedback from the residency class prior to the 
meetings, and will present to members of RAC any issues at the beginning of 
the meeting when necessary. 
ii. The chief will communicate issues and decisions from RAC to the residency 
class. 
iii. The chief will be responsible for taking the meeting minutes for the monthly 
clinical meeting 
B. Work with the residency coordinator to plan and organize ASHP Midyear and Alcalde 
i. Ensure residents are registered for all relevant events 
ii. Reserve hotel rooms within 2 weeks of open registration 
iii. Coordinate travel times to ensure residents can participate in the conference as 
well as ensure clinical services remain covered when applicable  
C. Residency interviews 
Formatted: Line spacing:  Multiple 1.08 li 
i. Coordinate with the residency program director and/or residency coordinator 
candidate itineraries  
 
 
D. Code blue coverage 
i. Create the code blue resident coverage schedule during the assigned quarter 
ii. Distribute coverage schedule to all clinical pharmacy staff and save onto the 
shared pharmacy drive 
E. TPN assignments 
i. Review TPN patient list daily, evaluate clinical team workloads, and assign 
TPNs out to co-residents and preceptors as seen fit based on unit coverage map 
and resident/preceptor sign-off process. 
ii. Chief resident may reach out to primary nutrition support preceptor if assistance 
is required or questions arise. 
F. Resident schedule 
i. Work directly with the clinical scheduler to ensure all resident switches and PTO 
requests are up-to-date on the current schedule 
G. Pharmacy newsletter 
i. Serve as the Editor-in-Chief for the quarterly InPharmation Newsletter  
H. Any responsibilities assigned during the quarter by the residency program director, 
residency coordinator, or any member of the management team. 