 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Pharmacy 
Residency 
Title: Resident Duty Hours Policy Reference #: PH-22-06 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 05/02/2012 Last Date Reviewed: 02/03/2025 
Last Date Revised: 03/24/2021 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to outline duty requirements that are to be monitored and enforced by the 
OLOL sponsored pharmacy practice residency program.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Pharmacy Resident (“resident”):  a pharmacist in a post-graduate education training program. 
 
Preceptor: an expert pharmacist who gives practical experience and training to a pharmacy resident.  He 
or she is also responsible for directing, supervising, and evaluating the resident.  
 
Residency Program Director (RPD):  the pharmacist responsible for the direction, conduct, and 
oversight of the residency program. 
 
Duty Hours: All clinical and academic activities related to the residency program (i.e. patient care, 
administrative duties related to patient care, and scheduled activities such as conferences).  Duty hours 
do not include reading, studying and preparation time spent away from the duty site. 
 
At-Home Call: Call taken from outside the assigned site. 
 
Moonlighting: Voluntary, compensated work performed outside OLOL or at any of its related 
participating sites. 
 
POLICY: 
A. It is the joint responsibility of the resident, preceptors and RPD to ensure that all residents follow 
the duty hour policy mandated by the ASHP.  If there is danger of a resident being in violation of 
the policy, the RPD will notify the resident and his/her supervising preceptor.   
1. If a resident is found to be in non-compliance, he/she will receive notification from the 
RPD.  The duty hours policy will be reviewed again with the resident and supervising 
preceptor.  The resident rotation and call schedule will be reviewed and revised if 
necessary.  If a resident is in noncompliance on more than one occasion per academic 
year, he/she will be subject to disciplinary action. 
 
 
 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
B. Maximum Hours of Work Per Week 
1. Duty hours are limited to 80 hours per week, averaged over a 4 week period, inclusive of 
call activities and all moonlighting. 
2. Residents will be provided with, at a minimum, 1 day in 7 free from all educational and 
clinical responsibilities, averaged over a 4 week period. 
 
C. Moonlighting 
1. Moonlighting must not interfere with the ability of the resident to achieve the goals and 
objectives of the pharmacy practice residency. 
2. Time spent in internal and external moonlighting must be counted towards the 80  hour 
maximum weekly hour limit 
3. Moonlighting must be approved by the RPD 
4. Moonlighting will not be allowed nor approved during the first 6 months of the residency 
program 
 
D. Duty hours compliance will be attested by residents on each learning experience. Duty hour 
compliance and attestations will be discussed and reviewed with the residency program director 
on a quarterly basis during resident development plans. However, if the resident appears to be 
exceeding the maximum duty hours worked, they must notify the residency program director 
immediately.  Failure by residents to attest duty hour compliance in a timely manner may result 
in remediation in accordance with the due process policy. 
REFERENCES: 
1. American Society of Health System Pharmacist.  Pharmacy Specific Duty Hours Requirements 
for the ASHP Accreditation Standards for Pharmacy Residencies.  
www.ashp.org/DocLibrary/Accreditation/ACGME-Duty-Hours.aspx (Accessed 2012 May 1) 
2. ACGME Task Force on Quality Care and Professionalism.  ACGME Standards: Common 
Program Requirements.  www.acgme-2010standards.org/pdf/Common_Program_ 
Requirements_07012011.pdf (accessed 2012 May 1) 
3. OLOL Policy: GME/RES/04, Resident Duty Hours 
 