 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Pharmacy 
Residency 
Title: Resident Scope of Practice and Licensure 
Policy 
Policy Reference #: PH-22-08 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 05/02/2012 Last Date Reviewed: 02/03/2025 
Last Date Revised: 11/03/2021 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define the pharmacy resident scope of practice and outline policy for licensure. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Pharmacy Resident (“resident”):  a pharmacist in a post-graduate education training program. 
 
Preceptor: an expert pharmacist who gives practical experience and training to a pharmacy resident .  He 
or she is also responsible for directing, supervising, and evaluating the resident.  
 
Residency Program Director:  the pharmacist responsible for the direction, conduct, and oversight of the 
residency program. 
 
Medication Distribution Process:  process of interpreting, processing, and dispensing a medication 
request from a member of the hospital staff authorized to prescribe therapy. 
 
General supervision:  a preceptor may not be physically present within the hospital or other site of 
patient care, but is immediately available by means of telephonic and/or electronic modalities to address 
patient care with the resident. 
 
Direct supervision:  the preceptor is physically within the hospital or other site of patient care, and is 
immediately available to address patient care with the resident. 
 
POLICY: 
 
I. The resident must meet the qualifications for eligibility for pharmacist licensure as 
determined by the Louisiana State Board of Pharmacy (La R.S. 37:1202).  Commencement 
of the Resident’s training is contingent upon securing and maintaining a license without 
restriction in the State of Louisiana.  The resident agrees to obtain a Louisiana Pharmacy 
Intern License and sit for both the NAPLEX and MPJE prior to July 1st, 2021.  Full 
licensure is expected to be obtained prior to October 1st, 2021. Immediate dismissal will 
occur if the resident is not fully licensed by October 31st after the start of residency. 
 
II. Pharmacy residents must be licensed by the Louisiana State Board of Pharmacy in order to 
have direct oversight of the medication distribution process.  Until this occurs, residents are 
not allowed to verify or dispense medication.  
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
 
III. Pharmacy residents must be licensed by the Louisiana State Board of Pharmacy in order to 
directly provide drug information to patients, physicians, nurses, and other healthcare 
professionals.  Until that time, residents may provide drug information under the general 
supervision of a licensed pharmacist. 
 
IV. Pharmacy residents must be licensed and pass a competency to directly provide clinical 
services.  Until both requirements have been fulfilled, residents may perform these duties, but 
under the direct supervision of a preceptor.  Any initial or progress notes generated must be 
reviewed and signed by a preceptor.  
V. Pharmacy residents will provide clinical services throughout the residency under the general 
supervision of a preceptor.  These services include, but are not limited to 
 
a. Medication order entry 
b. Pharmacokinetic consults 
c. Anticoagulation consults 
d. Nutrition support consults 
e. Automatic renal dosing 
f. Automatic IV-to-PO interchange 
g. Patient education 
h. Medication in-services 
i. Interdisciplinary rounds 
j. Drug therapy reviews  
k. Prevent, detect, monitor, and report adverse reactions and medication errors 
l. Formulary management 
m. Regulatory compliance audits 
n. Emergency response 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
ASHP accreditation standard for postgraduate year one (PGY1) pharmacy residency programs; 
American Society of Health-System Pharmacists; 2010.  Accessed April 29, 2012.  
 
 