 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Pharmacy Residency 
Title: Resident Professionalism 
Policy 
Reference #: PH-22-02 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 05/02/2012 Review Date: 02/03/2025 
Revision Date: 02/06/2019 
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish standards of professionalism for the OLOL pharmacy residency programs.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Pharmacy Resident (“resident”):  a pharmacist in a post-graduate education training program. 
 
Preceptor: an expert pharmacist who gives practical experience and training to a pharmacy resident.  
He or she is also responsible for directing, supervising, and evaluating the resident.  
 
Residency Program Director (RPD):  the pharmacist responsible for the direction, conduct, and 
oversight of the residency program. 
 
POLICY: 
I. The following categories of professionalism shall be adhered to: 
A. Attendance and punctuality:  
Residents are expected to attend all functions that are required of them throughout the 
residency year.  Additional attendance requirements may be added throughout the year by 
the RPD or rotation preceptors. Therefore, the resident should schedule accordingly in 
order to attend the required events. The residents are responsible for assuring that 
commitments are met and are covered in the event of an absence. Residents should make 
every effort to be punctual to all meetings and functions. 
 
B. Communication 
The resident is responsible for promoting excellent communication between the 
pharmacists, patients, nurses, physicians, and all other healthcare personnel.  Feedback 
regarding opportunities for improvement is a means of learning and is not meant to 
embarrass or degrade. Any conflicts which may arise between the resident and preceptor 
should first be handled by discussing it with one another. If resolution of the situation is 
not achieved, then discussing the situation with the RPD is the next appropriate step. 
Issues that cannot be resolved with the RPD should be addressed via the steps in the 
Grievance Policy.  (Please see the OLOL Pharmacy Practice Residency Grievance Policy 
PH-22-01) 
 
 
  
C. Confidentiality 
Residents will not discuss their patients with other patients, family members or anyone not 
directly related to each case. Residents will not discuss patients in front of other patients 
or in areas where people may overhear such as the cafeteria or elevators. Residents will 
not leave confidential documents (profiles, charts, prescriptions, etc.) in public places nor 
will they email confidential information to a non-secure email address.  Residents are 
required to complete Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
training and comply with all HIPAA policies as outlined by their respective practice sites. 
Residents should understand that inappropriate conduct is unacceptable and may result in 
disciplinary action including immediate dismissal from the program.  Residents should 
understand that they may be required by the practice site(s) to sign an additional 
confidentiality statement. Please also see the OLOL organizational Confidentiality policy 
(OrgOps/ET/001). 
 
D. Employee Badges 
All residents are required to wear employee identification badges at all times while at 
work or at an off campus practice site. Identification badges will be distributed at the 
beginning of the residency program. If the employee badge is forgotten or misplaced, the 
resident must immediately report to the security office for issuance of a new badge. Please 
also see the OLOL organizational Identification Badge policy (OrgOps/HR/E/018). 
 
E. Professional Conduct 
It is the responsibility of all residents as representatives of Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center and the profession of pharmacy to uphold the highest degree of 
professional conduct at all times. The resident will display an attitude of professionalism 
in all aspects of his/her daily practice.  Please also see the OLOL organizational Principles 
and Standards for Team Member Behavior policy (OrgOps/GN/034) 
 
F. Professional Dress 
All residents are expected to dress in an appropriate manner whenever they are in the 
institution or attending any function as a representative of Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center.  Clean, pressed white lab coats of three-quarter length will be worn at all 
times by residents in patient care areas (unless restricted by practice area). Any specific 
problems with dress will be privately addressed by the residency preceptor and may also 
involve the RPD when necessary.  Please also see the OLOL organizational Employee 
Dress and Appearance policy (OrgOps-HR-E-009) 
 
G. Vendor Gifts and/or Promotions 
Residents shall not accept any vendor gifts.  “Gifts” refer to items of value given without 
explicit expectation of something in return. Gifts may also include one-on-one outside 
meals at restaurants, services such as transportation, promotional items, or business 
courtesies.  Residents may not participate as paid presenters or speakers in industry-
sponsored programs such as lectures and panels without express written permission of the 
RPD. Residents participating in such activity must report, for duty hour purposes, the 
actual time spent in the activity, and must also disclose to the program director the amount 
of any compensation offered, including non-monetary items. 