OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Pharmacy Residency 
Title: Resident Grievance  
Policy 
Reference #: PH-22-01 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 05/02/2012 Review Date: 02/03/2025 
Revision Date: 02/07/2019 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to establish a systematic approach in dealing with grievances by a 
pharmacy practice resident. 
 
DEFINITION: 
Grievance: a wrong or hardship suffered, which is the grounds of a complaint (for example, an 
unfair evaluation). 
 
Pharmacy Resident (“resident”):  a pharmacist in a post-graduate education training program. 
 
Preceptor: an expert pharmacist who gives practical experience and training to a pharmacy 
resident.  He or she is also responsible for directing, supervising, and evaluating the resident.  
 
Residency Program Director:  the pharmacist responsible for the direction, conduct, and 
oversight of the residency program. 
 
 
POLICY: 
I. Grievances are dealt with in a confidential manner to the extent practical and without fear of 
retaliation. A good faith effort must be made by an aggrieved resident and the preceptor, 
and/or any persons involved, to resolve a grievance at an informal level. If a resident is 
unable to resolve his/her grievance directly with the person(s) involved, the grievance 
procedure may be initiated as follows: 
 
A. Program Level: 
 
1. The aggrieved resident must submit a written statement of grievance to the 
Residency Program Director. This notification must occur within fourteen (14) 
calendar days of the event precipitating the grievance and should include the 
following information: (1) factual description of the grievance; (2) the hospital 
and/or program policy that may have been violated; (3) the date on which the 
grievance occurred; and, (4) the remedy sought. The letter should include, as 
attachments, any documentation relevant to the grievance. 
 2. Once a grievance is received, the Residency Program Director will notify all parties 
involved, at which time those involved parties will submit written documentation of 
the situation to the Residency Program Director. 
 
3. Within seven (7) calendar days after notice of the grievance is given to the 
Residency Program Director, the resident and the Residency Program Director will 
set a time to discuss the complaint and attempt to reach a solution. 
 
4. The Program Level grievance process will be deemed complete when the Residency 
Program Director informs the aggrieved resident in writing of the final decision. 
 
5. A copy of the Residency Program Director’s final decision will be kept in the 
resident’s file and all involved parties will be notified of the final decision. 
 
B. Administrative Level Hearing 
 
1. If the resident is not satisfied with the resolution of the grievance reached at the 
program level, the resident may appeal the Residency Program Director’s decision 
and pursue formal resolution of the grievance with the Director of Pharmacy. 
 
a. The appeal of the grievance must be in writing and include copies of the final 
written decision from the Residency Program Director.  The appeal of 
grievance must be submitted to the Director Pharmacy for their administrative 
review within ten (10) calendar days after receiving the program level 
decision.  The grievance will be considered final on the basis of the program 
level decision if such a request is not presented within the ten (10) day period. 
 
b. Upon receiving the grievance appeal, the Director of Pharmacy will conduct a 
preliminary investigation as a background for analysis and discussion and 
meet with the resident within ten (10) days after receiving the grievance 
appeal to hear his/her viewpoint. 
 
c.   The Director of Pharmacy will make a decision on the outcome of the 
grievance, and a copy of the decision will be provided to the resident and the 
Residency Program Director.  A copy will also be placed in the resident’s file, 
and the final decision will be forwarded to all involved parties. 
 
 
C. A resident who believes he/she has been harassed or discriminated against on the basis of 
his/her race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, disability, age, handicap or 
veteran status shall follow those procedures stipulated in the OLOL (Workplace 
Harassment and Fraternization policy #OrgOps/HR/E/026.)  
 