OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: Pharmacy Residency 
Title: Resident Supervision  
Policy 
Reference #: PH-22-04 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 05/02/2012 Review Date: 02/03/2025 
Revision Date: 04/15/2015 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to establish supervision standards, roles, responsibilities and of residents 
in the Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) sponsored pharmacy residency program.  
 
DEFINITIONS: 
 
Pharmacy Resident (“resident”):  a pharmacist in a post-graduate education training program. 
 
Preceptor: an expert pharmacist who gives practical experience and training to a pharmacy resident.  
He or she is also responsible for directing, supervising, and evaluating the resident.  
 
Residency Program Director:  the pharmacist responsible for the direction, conduct, and oversight of 
the residency program. 
 
General Supervision: the preceptor may not be physically present within the hospital or other site of 
patient care, but is immediately available by means of telephonic and or electronic modalities to 
address patient care with the resident. 
 
Direct Supervision: the preceptor is physically within the hospital or other site of patient care, and is 
immediately available to address patient care with the resident. 
 
POLICY: 
A. The residency program director must ensure that preceptors at all participating institutions and 
clinical sites provide appropriate supervision of residents that is consistent with proper patient 
care and the educational needs of the residents.  
 
1. Within the scope of the residency program, all residents will function under the 
supervision of appropriately credentialed, qualified pharmacists and/or medical staff at 
all clinical sites utilized for the education of residents. Each resident must have an 
identifiable, appropriately credentialed and privileged pharmacist who is responsible for 
that patient’s care. This information should be available to other residents, preceptors, 
and pharmacy staff.  
 
2. Call schedules must be structured to provide residents with continuous supervision and 
consultation. 
Formatted: Line spacing:  Multiple 1.08 liB. The supervising preceptor must be available to the resident in person or by telephone at all times 
as outlined in the residency program manual.  
 
C. The privilege of progressive authority and responsibility, conditional independence, and a 
supervisory role in patient care delegated to each resident must be assigned by the preceptor.  
 
1. Preceptors should delegate portions of care to residents, based on the needs of the   patient 
and the skills of the residents.  
 
2. Residents should serve in a supervisory role of pharmacy students/interns in recognition 
of their progress toward independence, based on the needs of the p atient and the skills 
of the individual resident. 
 
3. Residents must be aware of their limitations and may not attempt to provide any clinical 
services for which they are not trained.  
 
 
 
 