 PH-23-11 
Page 1 of 2 
 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Medication Use, 
Storage and 
Handling 
Title: Orders: Turnaround Time Policy Reference #: PH-23-11 
Supersedes #: PH-10-07-O 
Date of Origination: 09/07/2011 Last Date Reviewed: 05/15/2024 
Last Date Revised: 09/28/2021 
  
PURPOSE:  
In an effort to establish expectations on the part of physicians, pharmacists and nurses as to when a medication 
may be reasonably expected to be delivered to the patient care areas from the pharmacy, the Medication Use 
committee has developed and agreed upon turnaround time standards for the processing of medication orders. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
STAT - A medication with an immediate onset of action that is needed in a potentially life threatening, 
emergency situation or when there is severe discomfort. Missing doses should also be considered STAT 
medications. Turnaround Time = 30 minutes. 
Routine  - A medication requested is not of urgent need and will be processed within the time frame established 
for normal performance. Turnaround Time = 2 hours. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
Every attempt will be made to process orders according to this policy. Unless an order specifically states that a 
medication is "STAT", Now, ASAP, or is a missing dose, the order will be processed as routine. The ordering 
provider should assign the priority of an order during the order entry process (CPOE) or it should be designated 
on the written order by the provider.  
 
In instances where the patient would be adversely affected by a delay, the nurse has the authority to upgrade the 
original order from routine to STAT by informing the Pharmacist of the need. The upgrade may be communicated 
by telephone or electronically.  
 
As part of the medication use improvement plan, orders identified as “STAT” will be reviewed for 
appropriateness.  Abuse of the feature will be reported to the Medication Use Committee as well as nursing.  In 
addition, pharmacy will monitor turnaround time (TAT) on these items to ensure they are getting proper attention. 
 
REFERENCES  PH-23-11 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
 
 
MM 04.01.01 EP1.  The hospital has a written policy that identifies the specific types of medication orders that it 
deems acceptable for use.  The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 04.01.01 EP13.  The hospital implements its policies for medication orders.  The Joint Commission 
Medication Management Standards 
MM 05.01.11 EP3.  The hospital dispenses medications within time frames it defines to meet patient needs.  
The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
 
 
 
 