 PH-02-11 
Page 1 of 3 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Medication Use, 
Storage and 
Handling 
Title: Orders: Adverse Drug Reactions Policy Reference #: PH-23-17 
Supersedes #: PH-14-03C 
Date of Origination: 08/01/1997 Last Date Reviewed: 2/28/24 
Last Date Revised: 0505/09/2018 
 
PURPOSE 
To outline the reporting, monitoring and evaluation of Adverse Drug Reactions (ADR). 
POLICY 
All suspected possible Adverse Drug Reactions will be reported by physicians, pharmacists, nurses and 
other healthcare professionals prescribing, dispensing or administering medications within Our Lady of 
the Lake Regional Medical Center. Adverse Drug Reactions will be investigated by the Pharmacy 
Department. Unusual and rare events shall be reported to the Food  and Drug Administrations (FDA), 
Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP), or other appropriate body. 
PROCEDURE 
A.  Definition: as per American Society of Health-Systems Pharmacists (ASHP) 
The definition of an ADR in any unexpected, unintended, undesired, or excessive response to a 
drug that:   
1. Requires discontinuing the drug (therapeutic or diagnostic) 
2. Requires changing the drug therapy 
3. Requires modifying the dose (except for minor dosage adjustments) 
4. Necessitates admission to the hospital 
5. Prolongs stay in the hospital 
6. Necessitates supportive treatment 
7. Significantly complicates diagnosis 
8. Negatively affects prognosis 
9. Results in temporary or permanent harm, disability, or death. 
 
B. Identification of ADRs 
The program may include a concurrent surveillance system: 
• Based on the reporting of suspected ADRs by pharmacists, physicians, and nurses.  PH-02-11 
Page 2 of 3 
• Monitoring the use of “tracer” drugs that are used to treat common ADRs.  
• An ADR can also be identified retrospectively by medical record abstraction. 
C. Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting 
1. The prescriber will be contacted immediately in the event of a potential ADR. 
2. Medical, nursing and pharmacy personnel are responsible for reporting suspected ADRs that 
meet the above definition and reporting criteria. If a medication administration error causes an 
ADR, the event shall be reported using the hospital’s patient safety event reporting tool  
3. When appropriate, actual ADRs shall be documented in the patient’s medical record according 
to policy OO-GN-019 Safety Event (Incident or Variance) Reporting.  
4. Adverse Drug Reaction reports will be compiled and reported to the Pharmacy and 
Therapeutics Committee with trends noted and recommendations for improvement as 
applicable. 
D. Classification of Adverse Drug Reactions 
Category Description 
A Circumstances exist with capacity to cause an event/error or variance in care (A Good Catch) 
B Event/error and/or an omission occurred BUT DID NOT reach the patient/resident. 
C Event/error reached the patient/resident BUT caused NO harm. 
 
D Event/error increased the need for monitoring/intervention BUT caused NO harm. 
*E Event/error increased the need for treatment/intervention AND caused TEMPORARY harm. 
*F Event/error that contributed to or resulted in TEMPORARY harm AND required initial or 
prolonged hospitalization. 
 
*G Event/error that contributed to or resulted in PERMANENT harm AND required initial or 
prolonged hospitalization. 
*H Event/error that required intervention necessary to sustain life. 
 
*I Event/error that contributed to or resulted in DEATH (UNEXPECTED DEATH) 
X Death not related to an event
 
 PH-02-11 
Page 3 of 3 
Not 
Known 
There is not enough information available to assign a Severity Category for this event.  
 
 
REFERENCES: 
Institute for Safe Medication Practices; www.ISMP Adverse Drug Reactions 
American Society of Health-System Pharmacists: Adverse Drug Reaction Monitoring and Reporting. 
MM 07.01.03 EP1.  The hospital has a written process to respond to actual or potential adverse drug 
events, significant adverse drug reactions, and medication errors.  The Joint Commission Medication 
Management Standards 
MM 07.01.03 EP2.  The hospital has a written process addressing prescriber notification in 
the event of an adverse drug event, significant adverse drug reaction, or medication error.  The Joint 
Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 07.01.03 EP3.  The hospital complies with internal and external reporting requirements 
for actual or potential adverse drug events, significant adverse drug reactions, and medication errors.  
The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 07.01.03 EP5.  The hospital implements its process for responding to adverse drug 
events, significant adverse drug reactions, and medication errors.  The Joint Commission Medication 
Management Standards 
MM 07.01.03 EP6.  Medication administration errors, adverse drug reactions, and medication 
incompatibilities as defined by the hospital are reported to the attending physician or clinical 
psychologist, immediately when possible, and as appropriate to the organization-wide performance 
improvement program.  The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
 