 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Medication Use, 
Storage and 
Handling 
Title: Orders:  Protocols and Order Sets Policy Reference #: PH-23-05 
Supersedes #: PH-10-12-O 
Date of Origination: 05/19/2005 Last Date Reviewed: 05/15/2024 
Last Date Revised: 03/12/2018 
  
POLICY: 
Protocol and order sets that include medications shall be handled according to this policy. 
 
DEFINITIONS 
Protocol or Order  set:  a written or electronic document with a group of rules, policies, 
procedures, regulations, and orders for the conduct of patient care in various stipulated clinical 
situations. The orders are usually formulated collectively by the professional members of  a 
department in a hospital or other health care facility. These usually name the condition and 
prescribe the action to be taken in caring for the patient, including the dosage and route of 
administration for a drug or the schedule for the administration of a therapeutic procedure.  
 
PROCEDURE 
Order sets and protocols shall be reviewed using the following criteria: 
• Use of facility approved abbreviations and symbols 
• Medication order clarity 
• Use of formulary medications 
• Appropriate medication dosage and frequency 
• Current Clinical Practice 
Existing Order sets and protocol orders shall be reviewed and revised (if necessary) 
biannually by representatives from nursing, pharmacy and medical staff based on the 
same criteria listed above. 
 
REFERENCES 
MM 04.01.01 EP1.  The hospital has a written policy that identifies the specific types of medication 
orders that it deems acceptable for use.  The Joint Commission Medication Management Standards 
MM 04.01.01 EP7.  The hospital reviews and updates preprinted order sheets, within time frames 
it identifies or sooner if necessary, based on current evidence and practice.  The Joint Commission 
Medication Management Standards 
MM 04.01.01 EP13.  The hospital implements its policies for medication orders.  The Joint 
Commission Medication Management Standards 