 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 3 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Pharmacy Section: 
Medication Use, 
Storage and 
Handling 
Title: Orders: Discharge Medications Policy Reference #: PH-23-18 
Supersedes #: PH-17-02-O 
Date of Origination: 05/19/2005 Last Date Reviewed: 05/08/2024 
 
Last Date Revised: 05/09/2018 
 
POLICY 
In general, the inpatient pharmacy should NOT furnish medications to patients upon release from the 
facility except in limited circumstances. 
The provider responsible for the patient will provide the patient with a prescription that may be filled at 
an outside pharmacy of the patient's choice. 
The pharmacy may dispense medications to patients at discharge to assure continued care upon release 
from the facility for patients who meet criteria and for products that cannot be found commonly in the 
community. 
 
REQUIREMENT FOR AN ORDER FROM AN AUTHORIZED PRESCRIBER 
Discharge medications require a prescription of an authorized prescribing practitioner authorizing the 
continuance of the patient's medication therapy after discharge from the facility.  The prescription shall 
conform to current state and federal regulations found under La RS 2511.   
 
PRESCRIPTION RECORDS (LA RS 1123 RECORDS LA LAW) 
The pharmacy information systems will be capable of providing immediate retrieval (via display and 
hard copy printout or other mutually agreeable transfer media) of patient profile information for all 
prescriptions dispensed within the previous two years. This information should include the following 
minimum data: 
1. The original prescription number; 
2. Date of issuance of the original prescription order by the prescriber; 
3. Date of dispensing by the pharmacist; 
4. Full name and address of the patient; 
5. Full name and address of the prescriber; 
6. Directions for use; 
7. The name, strength, dosage form, and quantity of the drug prescribed; 
8. The quantity dispensed if different from the quantity prescribed; 
9. The pharmacist responsible for prescription information entered into the computer system, the 
pharmacist responsible for prospective drug utilization review as defined below:  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 3 
 
A. A pharmacist will review the patient record and each prescription presented for 
dispensing for purposes of enhancing pharmacy care and therapeutic outcomes by 
recognizing the following potential situations: 
1. drug over-utilization or under-utilization; 
2. therapeutic duplication; 
3. drug-disease contraindications; 
4. drug-drug interactions; 
5. inappropriate drug dosage or treatment duration; 
6. drug-allergy interactions; or 
7. clinical abuse/misuse. 
B. Upon recognizing any of the above situations, the pharmacist, using professional 
judgment, shall take appropriate actions. 
10. The total number of refills authorized by the prescriber; and 
11. The refill history of the prescription as defined in Paragraph D of Section LA RS 1123. 
 
IDENTIFICATION OF PERSONS WHO MAY RECEIVE (ACCEPT) MEDICATIONS 
Prescription medications will be released only to the person for whom the prescription was written or 
his/her bona fide representative. 
 
AMOUNTS TO DISPENSE 
The pharmacy will dispense no more than the quantity authorized by the prescriber.  
 
LABELING OF DISCHARGE MEDICATIONS 
La RS 2527. (Louisiana Law) 
An appropriate label will be affixed to a proper container, and will bear the following minimum 
information: 
• Pharmacy’s name, address, and telephone number; 
• Prescription number; 
• Authorized prescriber’s name; 
• Patient’s name; 
• Date dispensed; 
• Drug name and strength; 
• Directions for use, as indicated; 
• Pharmacist’s name or initials; and 
• Cautionary auxiliary labels, if applicable. 
 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 3 
 
DISPENSING RECORDS FOR DISCHARGED PATIENTS 
Pharmacy dispensing records (e.g., prescriptions) s hould indicate the amount dispensed to discharged 
patients.  The pharmacy dispensing record should also indicate if the medication dispensed was the 
remainder of a medication that was previously dispensed to the patient while the patient was an inpatient. 
 
 