OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 6 
PHLC009 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLC009 
COLLECTION OF BLOOD BANK SPECIMENS 
       Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 10/1/2017 10/1/2017 10/1/2017 
Reviewed By LC 9/16/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 JUL 6, 1986 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide for the proper collection of patient samples used for Blood Bank testing 
 
Addresses: 
Supervisors 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists 
 
POLICY:  
Patient identification is to be established by the Phlebotomist before performing venipuncture.  All non-pediatric 
inpatients that are registered at OLOL shall be identified by at least two identifiers. Patients are to have a hospital 
armband imprinted with their full name and corresponding date of birth attached to a wrist or ankle.  All pediatric 
inpatients (defined as any patient prior to the 15th birthday) are identified by three identifiers. Verification of the 
pediatric patient’s full name, date of birth, on armband and matched armband worn by the designated guardian of the 
patient will be used to compare the laboratory label. Outpatients in areas without armbands are identified by 
verification of full name and birth date.  The identifiers stated are used to label laboratory samples at time of collection 
in the presence of the patient.  Required information must be present and match before the patient can be drawn. 
 
A. The laboratory uses a blood bank armband identification system as a double identification procedure in the 
collection of patient samples used in preparing blood for transfusion 
1. The person drawing the sample is responsible for patient identification 
2. The person drawing the sample writes their Network ID code, date, and time of draw on the laboratory 
label, blood bank armband 
B. Phlebotomists use the blood bank armband system when drawing patient samples for the following tests: 
1. Type and Screen 
i. Patient sample is used to establish patient blood type and antibody status 
ii. Patient sample may later be used to set up a Prepare Order (within 3 days of draw) 
2. Draw and Hold 
i. Patient sample is drawn and held in the laboratory (no testing performed) 
ii. Patient sample may later be used to set up a Prepare Order 
 
MATERIALS: 
1. Phlebotomy Supplies 
2. 9ml Purple Top (EDTA) specimen tube 
3. Blood Bank Card with bar-coded labels and Blood Bank Armband 
4. Rover Device OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 6 
PHLC009 
 
PROCEDURES: 
Inpatient Procedure: 
A. The person collecting the requested sample identifies the patient 
1. Scan the patient’s armband 
2. Visually compare the information on the Rover device to the patient’s armband verifying the two patient 
identifiers: 
i. The full name (first and last) in the Rover matches the name (first and last) on the patient’s hospital 
armband 
ii. The date of birth on the Rover matches the date of birth on the patient’s hospital armband 
3. While performing the visual comparisons, ask the patient (if capable) to state their name  
4. Scan the patient’s armband with the Rover device, and visually verify that the displayed patient data 
matches the patient’s armband. 
5. Patients not having hospital approved armbands not physically attached to their wrist or ankle are not to be 
drawn  
B. Resolve patient identification discrepancies before drawing the patient 
C. Check the patient’s wrist or ankle for a previous blood bank armband 
1. Patient does not have a blood bank armband on their wrist or ankle – proceed to step D 
2. Patient has a blood bank armband – check the draw date noted on the armband 
• If the draw date is 2 days ago or less 
1. Do not draw the patient 
2. The sample currently held in the Laboratory can be used to set up additional requests 
for units 
• If the draw date is 3 days ago  
1. Call the Transfusion Services (x5-8891) 
2. The specimen in the Laboratory may or may not be able to be used 
3. Follow Transfusion Services personnel instructions 
• If the draw date is 4 or more days ago 
1. Cut off the expired armband 
2. Proceed to step D – draw new blood bank sample 
3. A patient’s blood bank armband will expire at midnight on the 3rd day and must have a new sample 
collected using a new blood bank card, and new blood bank armband  
D. Draw the patient using standard venipunture technique 
1. Specimen container is a 9ml Purple Top Tube (EDTA) 
2. Collect as much sample as possible as needed volume will vary with patient 
3. Ensure the sample does not leave the presence of the patient before being labeled with the required 
documentation  
E. Required Specimen Container documentation: (Label must contain patient’s full name and DOB) 
1. Label the specimen tube with the Epic specimen label, patient chart label, or a handwritten label at the 
patient’s bedside 
2. Place a blood bank barcode label with number taken from the blood bank card and place 
VERTICALLY on tube at the patient’s bedside  
3. Write the date, time of draw, and your Network ID on the laboratory label at the patient’s bedside 
F. Required Blood Bank Packet Card documentation: 
1. Record the patient name and patient medical record number in the upper left-hand corner of the Packet 
card by: 
• Writing the information at the patient’s bedside 
• Using a pre-printed patient label (chart label) 
2. Record date, time of draw, and your Network ID at the patient’s bedside 
G. Required Blood Bank Armband documentation: OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 3 of 6 
PHLC009 
 
1. Scan the EPIC patient labels to record the date and time of draw and the phlebotomist Network ID at 
the patient’s bedside 
 
H. After recording the required documentation, tear the blood bank armband label from the blood bank card 
I. Push the blood bank armband label into the red plastic blood bank armband sheath 
J. Ensure the armband “Hold” tab has extended fully outside of the sheath on the opposite end 
K. Hold the “Hold” tab and pull the white strip of paper from the sheath 
L. With fingers, seal the sheath smoothly across the armband 
M. Attach the blood bank armband to the wrist or ankle of the patient exercising care so that the armband: 
1. Displays the blood bank number, Network ID, date and time, ensuring all is readable 
2. Is on tight enough so as not to slide over the patient’s hand 
3. Not tight enough to cause discomfort or restrict circulation 
4. Stays on the patient’s wrist or ankle 
N. If using a Rover device and a laboratory label, scan the barcode on the collected sample and look at the devices 
input screen: 
1. If “does not match the patient” is displayed a mismatch exists between the scanned armband and the 
laboratory label indicating an improperly identified patient – stop sample collection, discard any 
collected material, remove blood bank armband, notify the charge tech of the error and request 
instruction  
2. If the comment is not displayed, the scanned armband information matches information scanned on 
the laboratory label indicating proper patient identification - the collected sample can be accepted by 
selecting the “C” to signal sample collection 
O. If not using a Rover device, proceed with step P.  
P. Remind the patient not to remove the blood bank armband; removing the armband before transfusion will 
require redrawing of the patient. 
Q. Place the specimen tube in a transport biohazard bag and seal 
R. Place the blood bank card in the outside pouch on the biohazard transport bag 
S. Send the specimen and blood bank card to the Central Processing Department for processing 
 
 
Outpatient Procedure: 
Outpatients requiring transfusion service can be drawn and their samples processed for compatibility without being 
preregistered.  The outpatient requesting service is to present the following items: 
• A physician (or Physician representative) order for, type and screen, or draw and hold lab order. 
• A form of picture identification that includes date of birth 
• A completed and signed “Outpatient Laboratory Testing” form which includes patient name, address, phone 
number, insurance billing, and guarantor information 
A. The person collecting the requested sample identifies the patient 
1. Ask the patient to state their first and last name and date of birth 
2. Confirm the patient’s full name (first and last) by comparing the stated name to the name appearing on 
the physician order 
3.  Confirm the date of birth found on either the physician order or the “Outpatient Laboratory Testing” 
form 
B. Resolve patient identification discrepancies before drawing the patient 
C. Draw the patient using standard venipuncture technique 
1. Specimen container is a 9ml Purple Top Tube (EDTA) 
2. Collect as much sample as possible as needed volume will vary with patient OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 4 of 6 
PHLC009 
 
3. Ensure the sample does not leave the presence of the patient before being labeled with the required 
documentation  
D. Required Specimen Container documentation: (Label must contain patient’s full name and DOB) 
1. Label the specimen tube with the following information: 
• Patient’s first and last name 
• Patient’s date of birth 
• Date, time of draw, and Network ID of the collector  
• Blood bank barcode label with number taken from the blood bank card and placed 
VERTICALLY on tube in the presence of the patient 
E. Required Blood Bank Packet Card documentation: 
1. Record the patient name and patient DOB in the upper left-hand corner of the Packet card with the 
following information: 
• Patient’s first and last name 
• Patient’s date of birth 
• Date, time of draw, and Network ID of the collector, writing the information in the presence 
of the patient 
F. Required Blood Bank Armband documentation: 
• Record Date and time of draw in the presence of the patient 
• Record Network ID in the presence of the patient 
1. After recording the required documentation, tear the blood bank armband label from the blood bank 
card 
2. Push the blood bank armband label into the red plastic blood bank armband sheath 
3. Ensure the armband “Hold” tab has extended fully outside of the sheath on the opposite end 
4. Hold the “Hold” tab and pull the white strip of paper from the sheath 
5. With fingers, seal the sheath smoothly across the armband 
2. Attach the blood bank armband to the wrist 
• Ensuring blood bank number, Network ID, date and time, is readable 
• Is on tight enough so as not to slide over the patient’s hand 
• Not tight enough to cause discomfort or restrict circulation 
• Stays on the patient’s wrist 
G. Required lab documentation on the physician’s order: 
• Date, time of draw, and Network ID of the collector  
H. Remind the patient not to remove the blood bank armband until after they receive the transfusion; removing 
the armband before transfusion will require redrawing of the patient. 
I. Place the specimen tube in a transport biohazard bag and seal 
J. Place the physician order, blood bank card, and “Outpatient Laboratory Testing” form in the outside pouch on 
the biohazard transport bag 
K. Deliver to Central Processing 
 
Second Sample for Confirmatory Patient Blood Type Procedure: 
All patients submitted for a Type and Screen with no prior blood type on file at OLOL will require a confirmatory 
blood type on a second sample.  This sample must be drawn as a separate blood collection from the original sample 
being submitted for the Type and Screen. Blood from a separate phlebotomy can also be any sample of blood that may 
already be in the lab collected for a different test (if the sample was collected at a different time than the Type and 
Screen sample).  Any appropriate specimen, that is stored and is properly labeled with two patient identifiers, is 
acceptable for use. 
1. When a sample is received in the Transfusion Services for a Type and Screen, Transfusion Services will 
verify that the patient has a prior blood type history. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 5 of 6 
PHLC009 
 
2. If the patient does not have a blood type history on file, Transfusion Services will check to see if the 
patient has a sample (from a previous draw) located in the laboratory to utilize for confirmation of the 
patient’s blood type. 
3. The sample must have two patient identifiers documented on the tube. The laboratory accession number is 
not considered a patient identifier and will not be accepted as a second patient identifier. 
4. If Transfusion Services does not locate a second sample, Transfusion Services will order an ABO/Rh (no 
charge) for sample collection if unable to locate a second sample. 
5. Patient Identification: 
i. Inpatients: The person collecting the requested specimen identifies the patient 
1. Hold the laboratory label next to the patient’s armband 
2. Scan the patient’s armband with the Rover device and visually compare the information on the 
display to the patient’s armband verifying the two patient identifiers: 
a. The full name (first and last) on the screen of the Rover device matches the name (first 
and last) on the patient’s hospital armband 
b. The date of birth on the screen of the Rover device matches the date of birth on the 
patient’s hospital armband 
3. While performing the visual comparisons, ask the patient (if capable) to state their name  
4. Scan the patient’s armband with the Rover device, add scanned patient data to the collection list 
and visually verify that the displayed patient data matches the information displayed on the 
Rover device. 
5. Inpatients not having hospital approved armbands not physically attached to their wrist or ankle 
are not to be drawn  
ii. Outpatients: The person collecting the requested specimen identifies the patient 
1. Ask the patient to state their first and last name and date of birth 
2. Confirm the patient’s full name (first and last) by comparing the stated name to the name 
appearing on the physician order 
3.  Confirm the date of birth found on either the physician order or the “Outpatient Laboratory 
Testing” form 
6. Resolve patient identification discrepancies before drawing the patient 
7. Draw the patient using standard venipunture technique 
i. Specimen container is a 2ml or 3ml Purple Top Tube (EDTA) 
ii. Ensure the sample does not leave the presence of the patient before being labeled with the required 
documentation  
8. Required Specimen Container documentation:  
i. Inpatients: (Label must contain patient’s full name and DOB) 
1. Label the specimen tube with the EPIC specimen label, patient chart label, or a handwritten 
label at the patient’s bedside 
2. The blood bank barcode label with number is not required. 
3. Write the date, time of draw and your Network ID on the laboratory label at the patient’s 
bedside 
4. Place the specimen tube in a transport biohazard bag, seal, and send to the Central Processing 
Department for processing 
ii. Outpatients: (Label must contain patient’s full name and DOB) 
1. Label the specimen tube with the following information: 
2. Patient’s first and last name 
3. Patient’s date of birth 
4. Date, time of draw, and Network ID of the collector  
5. Place the specimen tube in a transport biohazard bag, seal, and send to the Central Processing 
Department for processing OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 6 of 6 
PHLC009 
 
Limitations of the Procedure: 
A. Trauma patients are identified by Trauma packet numbers as described in the Trauma procedure 
B. Days are counted by beginning with the date noted on the blood bank armband as day 0 
C. Another person may collect a sample via an indwelling access line or other method, but the attending 
Phlebotomist is to: 
1. Be present during the collection of the specimen 
2. Perform the patient identification 
3. Label and sign the specimen container, blood bank card, and blood bank armband 
4. Place the blood bank armband on the patient wrist or ankle 
5. Is responsible for the accuracy of the patient collection 
D. A Phlebotomist may not accept responsibility for unlabeled specimens, incompletely processed nurse 
collections, or specimen draws that were not witnessed by the phlebotomist 
E. Inpatients not having hospital approved armbands attached to their wrists are not to be drawn for: 
1. Type and Screen 
2. Draw and Hold 
F. Label specimen tubes, blood bank card, and blood bank armband at the patient’s bedside or in emergent 
situations, in the presence of the patient (i.e. Trauma, Code) 
G. Blood Bank Specimens for type and screen or draw and hold are never relabeled or corrected. The above 
documentation is required, or the specimen will be rejected, and MUST be redrawn. 
 
REFERENCES: 
Typenex Flexi Blood Armband System 
OLOL Institutional policy  
 
REVISIONS 
7/6/1986 (created); 10/01/2017 
 
 
 