OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 6 
PHLC 004 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLC004 
PHLEBOTOMY TECHNIQUE-FINGER AND HEEL STICK CAPILLARY COLLECTIONS 
       Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 9/19/2019 9/22/2019 9/22/2019 
Reviewed By LC 9/16/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 APR 1993 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide a method of collecting blood specimens by means of skin puncture that yield small but adequate 
amounts of blood for laboratory tests.  The technique is advantageous for obtaining specimens from: 
• Burned patients 
• Bariatric patients 
• Geriatric patients 
• Patients in whom superficial veins are either not accessible or are very fragile 
• Babies 
 
Addresses: 
Supervisors 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists 
 
PRINICIPAL: 
A lancet device is used to puncture the skin above a capillary bed allowing blood to collect on the surface of 
the wound.  The sample of blood is then transferred to collection tubes appropriate for the tests being 
ordered. 
 
POLICY: 
Puncture Sites 
Skin puncture 
• Skin puncture sites should be warm, pink, and free of scars, cuts, bruises, or rashes 
• Do not choose a site that is cold, cyanotic, or edematous (swollen) 
 
Heel puncture—Infants less than one year old 
• The heel is the recommended site for collection of skin puncture specimens on infants less than 1 
years of age and are not walking; the heel is not used as a puncture site if the child is walking 
• Perform the puncture in an area of the heel where there is little risk of puncturing the bone 
• Accidental puncture of the bone can cause painful osteomyelitis, as well as osteochondritis OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 6 
PHLC 004 
 
• Heel punctures should only be performed on the plantar surface of the heel, medial to an imaginary 
line extending from the middle of the big toe to the heel, or lateral to an imaginary line drawn from 
between the fourth and fifth toes to the heel 
• The puncture should not exceed 2.4mm in depth.  Shaded areas as indicated by arrows represent 
recommended areas for infant heel puncture. 
NOTE: 
o Do not puncture deeper than 2.4mm. 
o Do not puncture through previous puncture sites. 
o Do not puncture the area between the imaginary boundaries. 
o Do not puncture the posterior curvature of the heel. 
o Do not puncture in the area of the arch. 
o Do not puncture areas of the foot other than the heel. 
 
Finger puncture—Older Children and Adults 
• Recommended site for skin puncture is the palmer surface of the distal phalanx (end segment of the 
finger) of the middle or ring finger of the non-dominant hand 
• Puncture should be made in the central, fleshy portion of the finger, slightly to the side of center and 
perpendicular to the whorls (grooves) of the fingerprint 
o NOTE: 
o Do not puncture the side, center, or very tip of the finger.  The distance between the skin 
surface and the bone is half as much at the side and tip as it is in the central portion of the 
finger. 
o Do not puncture parallel to the grooves of the fingerprint.  A puncture parallel to or along the 
line of the fingerprint will cause blood to run down the finger and not form a large drop 
making collection difficult. 
o Do not puncture fingers 1, 2, and 5 (thumb, index and small fingers).  Fingers three and four 
should be used to perform finger sticks. 
o Do not puncture fingers of infants and young children.  The amount of tissue between skin 
surface and bone is small making bone injury possible. 
o Do not perform heel sticks on children who are walking as walking quickly thickens the skin 
of the heel making skin puncture problematic. 
 
Supplies 
1. Lancet types—use the correct lancet device appropriate for the type of test/collection being 
performed  
 
Unistik® Tiny Touch Full Term (not to be used for finger capillary collections) 
• Use to perform capillary punctures on infant heels (0-1 year of age, not walking) 
• Cuts an incision 2.5mm wide and 1.0mm deep 
• Not intended to be used on pre-warm newborns 
• Not intended for use on toddlers or older infants (walking, usually greater than 6 months of 
age)  
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 3 of 6 
PHLC 004 
 
 
Unistik 3 Normal Safety Lancet —Yellow Case 
• For use in performing finger capillary collections 
• 23G cuts to a 1.8mm depth 
• Appropriate for use on fingers of smaller children 
 
Unistik 3 Extra Safety Lancet  
• For use in performing finger capillary collections  
• 21G cuts to a 2.0mm depth 
• Appropriate for use on fingers of children and adults 
 
 
2. 70% alcohol swab 
3. Gauze 
4. Appropriate specimen collection container 
5. Warming material (if needed) 
• Towel and warm water 
• Infant Heel Warmer 
o Bend disk in fluid back and forth to begin reaction 
o Knead solution in the bag to soften 
o Hold in place with tape present on the packaging being careful not to attach to tightly 
o Remove in 3-5 minutes, clean puncture site and perform the capillary draw 
 
Tips for improving blood flow 
1. Position the intended puncture site down from the heart 
2. Apply moderate pressure proximal to the puncture site and move toward the puncture site 
3. If the puncture is adequate, 0.5ml of blood can be collected from a single puncture site 
 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Verify pediatric patient orders with the nurse before drawing 
2. Wash your hands before coming into contact with the patient 
3. Check the door to the patient’s room, the wall directly above the head of the patient, or the white 
board in the patient’s room for signage, or special armbands such as “limb alert bands” that define or 
limit phlebotomy 
4. Greet the patient and identify yourself 
5. Identify the patient (refer to the Patient Identification Procedure) 
6. Position the patient 
• Children younger than two years should be placed in a prone position during the procedure 
• The toddler or small child could be held on the lap of an adult 
• Older patients should be seated or laying 
7. Choose an appropriate capillary draw site 
8. Capillary blood flow can be increased by warming the collection site prior to skin puncture OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 4 of 6 
PHLC 004 
 
• Wrapping the draw site for a minimum of 3 minutes with a towel or a diaper that has been 
moistened with comfortably warm water (no warmer than 42°C or 108°F) 
• Activate a heel warmer and place on the intended puncture site for 3-5 minutes 
9. Put on gloves before making the capillary cut 
10. Clean the intended puncture site with an alcohol swab and allow to air dry 
• For Blood Alcohol testing, collect blood specimen using sterile technique, preparing collection 
site with a BETADINE Prep prior to venipuncture 
11. Hold the patient exposing the site of puncture 
 
Fingersticks 
• Infants and Toddler—Encircle the child’s index, middle, and fourth fingers with your index 
finger and thumb 
• Older Patients 
▪ The arm should be firmly supported and extended  
▪ The palmer surface of the hand facing up 
▪ Grasp the finger firmly between your thumb and index finger 
▪ Perform the puncture perpendicular to the whorls (lines) of the fingerprint 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Heelsticks  
• Grasp the heel firmly but gently with the index finger wrapped around the foot supporting the 
arch 
• The thumb wrapped around the ankle and below the puncture 
• Perform the puncture perpendicular to the lines of the footprint 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. Perform the skin puncture—use the correct lancet device appropriate for the type of test to be 
performed 
• Lancets are designed for specific: 
▪ Puncture location 
▪ Depth of cut 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 5 of 6 
PHLC 004 
 
▪ Width of cut 
• General lancet activation instructions 
▪ Open sterile container and remove lancet 
▪ Hold lancet on puncture site with moderate pressure 
▪ Depress activating plunger with index finger to make puncture 
▪ Immediately release the plunger while holding the lancet on the site 
▪ Remove the lancet from the wound 
▪ Discard in a sharps container 
13.  Wipe off the first drop of blood using a dry, clean 2x2 gauze, as this drop may be contaminated with 
tissue fluid or residual alcohol and will interfere with testing 
14. Collect the specimen 
• Choose proper container type 
• Fill the purple top microtainer first, then follow with next required tube type.  Filling more than 
two tubes is very difficult using the dermal puncture technique.  Consider performing a 
phlebotomy procedure to collect more than two tubes. 
• Allow a second large hanging drop of blood to form at the puncture site 
• Touch the “scoop” of the microcollection tube to the drop of blood and let the drop of blood run 
down the wall of the tube 
• Tap the tube gently occasionally to encourage the blood to settle to the bottom of the tube 
• Do not use a “scooping” motion against the surface of the skin 
• Scraping the scoop against the skin activates platelets and may also cause hemolysis 
• Cap microcollection tubes with the caps provided and mix additive tubes eight to ten times. 
15. Apply gauze sponge to the puncture site 
16. Hold pressure for at least 30 seconds and then tape gauze sponge to site 
17. Dispose of puncture device in sharps biohazard box 
18. Label the specimen containers at the patient’s bedside using the Epic specimen label, patient chart 
label or a handwritten label with the Network ID, date and time of draw. 
• Or in emergent situations, labeling needs to take place in the presence of the patient (i.e. Trauma, 
Code)   
19. Make sure the patient is not bleeding before leaving the room 
20. Notify nursing personnel of any problems encountered while drawing the patient 
21. Send the sample to the laboratory 
 
Limitations of the Procedure 
1. Another person may collect a sample and the phlebotomist is to: 
a. Be present during the collection of the specimen 
b. Perform patient identification 
c. Label and sign the specimen container 
d. Is responsible for the accuracy of the patient collection 
2. A Phlebotomist may not accept responsibility for unlabeled specimens, incompletely processed nurse 
collections, or specimen draws that were not witnessed by the phlebotomist 
a. Recollect the patient’s specimen if identification is uncertain 
3. Allow the selected site to dry prior to being punctured as residual alcohol causes rapid hemolysis of 
RBC’s OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 6 of 6 
PHLC 004 
 
  
4. Strong repetitive pressure (milking) should not be applied to the finger or heel as may cause 
hemolysis or contamination of the specimen with tissue fluid 
5. Specimen collection supplies and equipment are only to be utilized within their expiration date and 
stored per manufacturer’s instructions 
 
Sources of Error 
Hemolysis may occur in skin-puncture blood for the following reasons: 
• Residual alcohol at the skin-puncture site 
• Squeezing of the tissue adjacent to the puncture site to obtain a greater volume of blood 
• Mechanical trauma of pressing or scraping a collection device on the skin 
 
 
References: NCCLS Document H4-A3 (National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards, 771 E. Lancaster Ave., 
Villanova, PA 
 
 
REVISIONS 
04/1993 (created); 9/11/2011, 8/9/2017, 8/19/2019 
 