OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 4 
PHLC 002 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLC002 
SPECIMEN LABELING 
       Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 8/19/2019 9/22/2019 9/22/2019 
Reviewed By LC 9/16/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 APR 5, 1984 
 
PURPOSE: 
Provide for the proper labeling of sample tubes used to collect blood during blood collection procedures 
 
Addresses: 
Supervisors 
Charge Techs 
Phlebotomists 
 
POLICY: 
Specimen containers are to be labeled by following proper identification of patients (see PHLC001- 
Patient Identification Policy).  Specimen containers are to be labeled with an EPIC lab label whenever 
possible to allow interment barcode reading.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. EPIC Lab Label 
1. Perform the phlebotomy only if the name, medical record number, appropriate patient response, 
and the Rover device are all in agreement. 
• Rover devices may be subject to failure (unreadable armband, scanner malfunction, 
hardware, software, or system down time). 
• Identifying and drawing patients using visual comparison of first and last name and medical 
record number is permitted during periods of Rover failure 
2. Specimen container labeling is to be completed by the person who identified the patient. 
3. Ensure the specimen does not leave the presence of the patient before being labeled with the 
proper documentation.  
4. Label the specimen containers at the patient’s bedside using the EPIC lab label  
• Or in emergent situations, labeling needs to take place in the presence of the patient (i.e. 
Trauma, Code) using a patient’s chart labels or handwritten patient name (last name, first 
name) and date of birth. 
5. Hold the specimen container in your left hand by the cap. 
6. Tear off the backing on the label. 
7. Hold the label in your right hand to be able to read the writing on the label.  
8. The laboratory label should be placed between the rim of the specimen container cap and the 
bottom of the tube. 
9. The label should be placed flat on the tube so that the writing and bar-coded region on the 
laboratory label parallels the long axis of the tube.  
10. Carefully place the label on the specimen container. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 4 
PHLC 002 
 
11. The collector’s Network ID and time of draw is captured electronically by the Rover device.   
B. Patient Chart Label: 
1. Perform the phlebotomy only if the name, medical record number, appropriate patient response, 
and the rover device are all in agreement 
• Rover devices may be subject to failure (unreadable armband, scanner malfunction, 
hardware, software, or system down time) 
• Identifying and drawing patients using visual comparison of first and last name and medical 
record number is permitted during periods of Rover failure. 
2. Specimen container labeling is to be completed by the person who identified the patient 
3. Ensure the specimen does not leave the presence of the patient before being labeled with the 
proper documentation.  
4. Label the specimen containers at the patient’s bedside using the patient chart label  
• Or in emergent situations, labeling needs to take place in the presence of the patient (i.e. 
Trauma, Code) 
5. Remove patient chart label from the sheet of chart labels located on the patient’s chart 
6. Hold the specimen container in your left hand by the cap 
7. Hold the label in your right hand to be able to read the writing on the label  
8. The patient chart label should be placed between the rim of the specimen container cap and the 
bottom of the tube 
9. The label should be placed flat on the tube so that the writing on the label parallels the long axis 
of the tube  
10. Carefully place the label on the specimen container 
11. Write your Network ID, date and time of draw on the label 
• Writing is to be clear and legible 
 
C. Handwritten Label: 
1. Perform the phlebotomy only if the name, medical record number, appropriate patient response, 
and the rover device are all in agreement 
• Rover devices may be subject to failure (unreadable armband, scanner malfunction, 
hardware, software, or system down time) 
• Identifying and drawing patients using visual comparison of first and last name and medical 
record number is permitted during periods of rover failure 
2. Specimen container labeling is to be completed by the person who identified the patient 
3. Ensure the specimen does not leave the presence of the patient before being labeled with the 
proper documentation  
4. Label the specimen containers at the patient’s bedside with a permanent ink writing utensil 
• Or in emergent situations, labeling needs to take place in the presence of the patient (i.e. 
Trauma, Code) 
5. Outpatient labeling requirements include patient name (first and last), date of birth, date and 
time of draw and Network ID of the person performing the collection 
6. Inpatient labeling requirements include patient name (first and last), patient medical record 
number, date and time of draw and Network ID of the person performing the collection OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 3 of 4 
PHLC 002 
 
7. Writing is to be clear and legible 
D. Non-Blood Containers: 
1. Label placement is not as critical as blood collection tube labeling, but each container must have 
a label 
2. Labeling is to clearly show patient name and medical record number 
3. Write your Network ID, date and time of collection on the label 
4. Blood culture bottle labeling should not cover the barcodes pre-printed on the bottle label. 
E. Limitations of the Procedure: 
1. Trauma and Code labeling is to follow guidelines noted in the Trauma and Code procedures 
2. Specimens placed on ice following collection should be labeled with the EPIC lab label, chart 
label, or handwritten documentation.  Reprint the specimen label and place in the side pocket 
area of the biohazard transport bag 
3. Another person may collect a sample via an indwelling access line or other method, but the attending 
Phlebotomist is to: 
• Be present during the collection of the specimen 
• Perform patient identification 
• Label and sign the specimen container 
• Is responsible for the accuracy of the patient collection 
4. A Phlebotomist may not accept responsibility for unlabeled specimens, incompletely processed 
collections, or specimen draws that were not witnessed by the phlebotomist 
• Redraw the patient’s specimen if identification is uncertain 
F. When an OLOL armband is removed for any reason, the armband will be placed on an alternate limb. 
The individual who removes the armband is responsible for assuring that the patient has an armband 
located somewhere on the patient’s body. 
1. Reprint armband. 
2. Reapply new armband on patient’s limb (arm or leg) whenever possible.   
3. If this is not possible due to wounds, injury, amputation, very fragile skin, multiple IV lines, etc., 
the armband will be placed at an alternate site of the patient’s body, and the location will be 
identified on the front of the patient’s chart.    
4. Put two armbands together to enlarge an armband to use over fragile skin, a swollen limb, or a 
cast. 
5. Armbands should never be placed on the patient’s bed or any other piece of equipment. 
6. Consult with your or Supervisor or Manager 
G. If no armband is present, the patient’s nurse should be contacted immediately to identify the patient 
and place an armband on the patient. 
1. In a life-threatening emergency, the patient’s nurse, who can positively re-identify patient, will 
accompany the patient during transport, re-identify the patient at the department by verifying the 
patient’s name and medical record number with the medical record in the department transported 
to and place an armband on patient. 
2. If a patient is transported to another department without an armband, the patient’s nurse, who 
can positively identify the patient, should be contacted immediately and report to that 
department with a correct armband, re-identify the patient by verifying the patient’s name and 
medical record number with the physician orders, and place an armband on the patient. 
H. Do not proceed with care, treatment or services (except for emergencies) if a patient does not have an 
armband (except in outpatient areas that do not use armbands).  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 4 of 4 
PHLC 002 
 
1. If armband is not available to be placed on the patient at that time, and if time constraints exist 
with workload, please have the nurse contact the Venipuncture Department immediately 
following armband placement 
REVISIONS 
4/5/1984 (created), 9/7/2011; 8/9/2017; 8/19/2019 