OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 2 
PHLC031 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLC031 
OUTPATIENT LABORATORY ORDERS  
       Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 9/10/19 9/22/2019 9/22/2019 
Reviewed By LC 9/17/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 FEB 2006 
 
PURPOSE:` 
To provide the phlebotomy services to outpatients requesting laboratory testing during business hours and after 
business hours.  To obtain the appropriate patient information necessary for outpatient laboratory testing 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Outpatient Orders 
1. Outpatients requesting the laboratory to perform testing must have a written order from a physician or the 
physician’s appointed representative 
2. Outpatients may bring physician orders with them when requesting service 
3. Outpatients requiring repetitive laboratory testing may establish a standing order (filed in the laboratory 
office and acceptable for up to one year from the order date) for laboratory testing 
4. Physicians or their appointed representative may call outpatient orders to the laboratory 
5. Due to the complexities of medical orders and test priorities, Venipuncture personnel receiving phone 
calls from physicians or their representatives are to transfer the call to the Hematology Charge Tech 
6. The Hematology Charge Tech records the physician request on the “Outpatient Verbal / Telephone Order 
Form” by: 
• Completing all requested information fields 
• Determining the physician result reporting method and priority 
• Requesting a follow up fax confirming phone order at the earliest opportunity 
• Reading back the phone order to the requesting person to verify accuracy of the transcription 
7. The order form will either be filed in the laboratory office for patients expected to arrive at the future time 
or given to the Phlebotomy Charge Tech if the patient’s arrival is imminent 
 
B. Outpatient Registration: 
1. Normal Business Hours Outpatient Presentation (07:30 – 17:30 M-F) 
• Outpatients are registered in the hospital computer system on presentation in the laboratory for 
testing by the office secretaries 
• The current registration patient number is written on the outpatient order 
• Notify the Venipuncture Charge Tech of the outpatient draw 
• A phlebotomist is dispatched to the outpatient area to draw the patient 
2. After Hour Outpatient Presentations 
• After hours laboratory testing of patient samples may be performed without a computer-generated 
order. 
• Personnel greeting the outpatient are responsible for obtaining a copy of the outpatient order, any 
copies of insurance cards, and copies of the patient’s/guarantor’s identification. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 2 
PHLC031 
 
 
• Attach all documents together to make a packet and give document to the Venipuncture Tech. 
• The Venipuncture Tech will schedule and register the patient using the One Click Activity in 
EPIC Hyperspace.  Refer to the Lab Admin Policy, “LBA422, Lake Lab Services One-Click 
Procedure” for instructions.  If the Venipuncture Tech is not available, Central Processing staff or 
the Hematology charge tech can assist with the registration and ordering process. 
• A phlebotomist is dispatched to the outpatient area to draw the patient 
• Collect the required specimen tubes and label the specimen as outlined in PHLC002, Specimen 
Labeling Policy.  Place specimens in a specimen biohazard bag. 
• Document the type of specimens drawn, date, time, and Network ID of phlebotomist on the copy 
of the doctor’s order.  Place documents in the side slot of the specimen biohazard bag containing 
the patient specimens. 
• A copy of the doctor’s order and the specimen is taken to the Central Processing department for 
patient registration, test ordering, and specimen processing. 
REVISIONS 
02/1986 (created); 10/11/2011; 9/17/2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 