OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 5 
PHLC14 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLC014 
COLLECTION OF AFB CULTURES 
       Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 9/17/2019 9/22/2019 9/22/2019 
Reviewed By LC 9/17/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 10/1/2017 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide for the drawing of blood use for AFB (Acid Fast Bacteria) culture testing 
 
Addresses: 
Supervisors 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists 
 
PRINCIPLE: 
Bacteria which enter the blood stream (bacteremia) can quickly spread throughout the body and cause severe 
illness. Laboratory diagnosis of bacteremia is determined by culturing blood samples taken from the patient 
suspected of having a bacteria present in their blood stream.  The culturing of a blood sample requires attention to 
technique during all stages of the collection process to avoid misinterpretation of results.  Appropriate volumes of 
blood that are properly collected and combined with culture media enhance the probability of isolation of the 
bacteria responsible for the bacteremia. 
 
Precautions: 
A. Specimen 
1. (2) - 4ml Green Top Vacutainer Tube (lithium or sodium heparin) 
2. Sample for culture is collected using aseptic technique  
3. Optimum sample collection volume is 4mls of whole blood 
4. Minimum sample collection volume is 3mls of whole blood 
5. Consult Microbiology when sample collection volume is less than 3mls of whole blood 
B. Blood cultures are to be drawn from central venous catheters only if requested by the physician. 
1. Vascular catheters are to be cleaned and cleared of contaminating material before inoculating 
blood culture bottles by nursing personnel as follows: 
i. Scrub central venous catheter hub with the first alcohol prep for 15 seconds using a 
second hand or stopwatch and allow to air dry 
ii. Scrub the hub again using a second alcohol pad for 15 seconds and allow to air dry 
iii. Using sterile technique, connect the collection syringe to the catheter port and use the 
two-syringe discard method to collect the sample 
2. Clear vascular catheters of contaminating material by using a two-syringe discard method 
i. Nursing personnel access the catheter and withdraw a minimum of 5ml of blood 
ii. This first syringe sample is not used for inoculation of blood culture bottles 
iii. Nursing personnel access the catheter a second time using a second sterile syringe 
iv. The second sample collected in the second syringe is used to fill two green top vacutainer 
tubes for AFB culture OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 5 
PHLC14 
 
v. The first syringe may be used for Oncology patients or if specifically ordered by the 
physician 
B. Recollection of blood cultures is to be minimized due to the possibility of patients receiving antibiotics in 
the intervening time required for recollection.  Antibiotics present in the collected sample may inhibit 
bacterial growth. 
 
MATERIALS: 
1. (2) - 4ml Green Top Vacutainer Tube (lithium or sodium heparin) 
2. Syringe and Safety Butterfly Needle (21G, 23G, or 25G) 
3. Needle Holder and Vacutainer Needle (21G or 22G) 
4. Blood Culture Transfer Device (if collecting blood culture bottles) 
5. If patient has been placed under precautions appropriate PPE (refer to Isolation Procedure) 
6. Tourniquet 
7. 2x2 gauze 
8. Tape 
9. Sharps Container 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. If Isolation patient, carefully follow guidelines for Isolation patients (refer to Isolation Procedure). If the 
patient has not been placed in isolation proceed as usual. 
B. Two 4ml green top tubes (lithium or sodium heparin) are required for the collection of the sample used in 
culturing for AFB 
C. Perform patient identification (refer to Patient Identification Procedure) 
D. Briefly explain the procedure to the patient using age and condition appropriate language 
E. Select the phlebotomy site 
F. Select the proper skin cleaning applicator 
G. +PDI Povidine-Iodine Cleansing Scrub Swabstick (1’s) (children less than 2 months) 
H. Chloraprep One-Step Frepp Applicator (patient 2 months and older) 
I. Patient with hypersensitivity to Iodine ( +PDI Povidine -Iodine Cleansing Scrub Swabstick (1’s) ) or 
chlorohexidine (Chloraprep): 
1. Gather a +PDI Castille Soap Towelette. 
2. Open the towelette and cleanse the phlebotomy site to remove any visible soil from the skin 
3. Dry the phlebotomy site with 2x2 gauze 
4. Perform two separate 30 second scrubs, allowing the site to air dry between each cleaning 
• Gather two isopropyl alcohol preps  
• Open the first isopropyl alcohol prep and scrub the phlebotomy site with the isopropyl alcohol prep 
•  for 30 seconds 
• Allow phlebotomy site to air dry 
• Repeat the procedure with a second isopropyl alcohol prep 
• Allow the phlebotomy site to air dry 
J. Do not use the iodine tincture prep to clean the draw site 
K. Remove the tourniquet 
L. Prepare the 4 ml green top tubes  
• Wipe the rubber top of green vacutainer tubes with an alcohol prep.  Be careful to completely wipe 
the entire rubber tube top with the alcohol. 
• Allow the alcohol on the rubber top tube to air dry before filling with the blood sample. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 3 of 5 
PHLC14 
 
M. Clean the phlebotomy site using the correct age dependent procedure: 
• Chloraprep One-Step Frepp Applicator: 
1.   Remove the chlorhexidine sponge from the kit 
2.   Hold the sponge in a horizontal position and pinch handle once to break ampule and release  
  the chlorhexidine 
3.   Place the sponge on the selected draw site and depress a few times to saturate the sponge 
4.   Vigorously scrub the chosen draw site for 30 seconds. Use a back and forth motion to clean a  
  square area two inches above, below and to each side of the selected draw site. 
5.   Allow to air dry for 30 seconds 
• + PDI Povidine-Iodine Cleansing Scrub Swabstick(1’s) 
1.   Gather the Isopropyl Alcohol prep Remove the Isopropyl Alcohol prep 
2.   Open the alcohol prep 
3.   Select phlebotomy site 
4.   Hold the sponge in a horizontal position and pinch to break release  
  the alcohol 
5.   Scrub the phlebotomy site vigorously for 30 seconds using a back and forth motion to clean a  
  square area two inches above, below and to each side of the selected draw site. 
6.   Allow to air dry 
7.   Remove the +PDI Povidine-Iodine Cleansing Scrub Swabstick (1’s) for its packaging 
8.   Hold the swabstick in a downward position  
9.   Place the iodine tincture swab on the intended draw site.  Clean an area approximately two   
  inches in diameter by moving the swab outward in concentric circles.  
10.   Allow to air dry  
11.   Allow the phlebotomy site to completely air dry before performing the venipuncture 
N. Ensure the phlebotomy site is completely air dried before preforming the venipuncture. 
O. Re-apply tourniquet, remove and change your gloves and reacquire the vein by touching either above or 
below but not directly on the intended phlebotomy site. 
• Care must be taken to prevent contamination of the patient sample during venipuncture and 
inoculation of the culture bottle 
• Site contamination could lead to a specimen being determined positive when a clinically relevant 
isolate is not actually present. 
P. Perform Phlebotomy :(refer to Phlebotomy Technique –Venipuncture Collections Procedure) 
• Syringe and Butterfly Needle Draw 
1.   Attempt to collect the optimum sample volume of 4mls 
2.   Activate the safety device on removal form the venipuncture site 
3.   Transfer the collected sample to the green top tubes by: 
a. Use sterile technique to remove a blood transfer device form its packaging 
b. Remove the safety butterfly from the syringe and discard in a sharps disposal box 
c. Prepare the green top tubes as instructed above 
d. Allow the alcohol on the rubber tube to air dry 
e. Transfer the blood sample to the green top vacutainer tubes before any other vacutainer 
collection tubes are filled 
f. Gently invert the vacutainer tubes a minimum of 7 times to mix sample with 
anticoagulant 
• Vacutainer Draw:  
1.   Prepare the green top tubes as instructed above 
2.   Allow the alcohol on the rubber tubes to air dry 
3.   Place the cleaned green top tubes in the vacutainer holder 
4.   Perform the draw per procedure OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 4 of 5 
PHLC14 
 
5.   Push the green top tubes onto the vacutainer needle to engage tube vacuum 
6.   Allow the green to tubes to fill completely collecting the optimum sample volume of 4mls 
7.   Remove the tubes from the vacutainer needle and invert the vacutainer tube a minimum of 7  
  times to mix sample with anticoagulant. 
8.   Activate the safety device on removal from the venipuncture site 
Q. Filling additional vacutainer tubes while collecting AFB blood culture samples 
1.   Fill the 4ml green top tubes for AFB testing first 
2.   Fill any other required vacutainer tubes only after the green top culture tubes have been filled 
3.   Follow the order of draw while filling vacutainer tubes 
4.   Following the order of draw will require that the patient be redrawn if specimen collection  
  requires the following tubes: plain red top, blue top and clot activator tubes 
R. If the Blood Culture Kit or Iodine is used, remove iodine tincture from the patient’s skin using soap and 
water or an alcohol pad 
S. Dress the wound being careful to avoid adhesive or tight dressings on skin that has been treated with 
iodine as iodine burns may result 
T. Label and document the vacutainer tubes per the Specimen Labeling Procedure 
U. Dispose of used sharps in biohazard box 
V. Collected blood cultures for AFB should be quickly delivered (preferably within two hours of collection) 
to the Microbiology Department. 
 
Limitations of the Procedure: 
A. Inoculating vacutainer tubes for other lab tests prior to inoculating blood culture bottles may result in 
contamination of the culture 
B. Improper cleaning of the venipuncture site may lead to blood culture contamination 
C. Delay in transport of the inoculated tubes for blood culture to the lab may delay or impede detection of 
bacterial growth 
D. Under filling of the green top tubes may lead to false negative results 
E. Organisms are often few in number and may appear intermittently in the blood stream; therefore, 
consecutive blood samples should be collected from each patient 
F. Cultures obtained for primary diagnosis after initiation of antimicrobial therapy may produce negative 
results 
G. Collecting acceptable samples for blood culture is dependent upon the quality of the preparation of the 
phlebotomy site.  Improper preparation of the phlebotomy site may result in specimen contamination.  
Inadequate specimen volume, inappropriate choice of blood culture bottles, and delays in sample arrival 
in the Microbiology lab may adversely affect culture results.  
H. Use of expired green top tubes will adversely affect test results 
  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 5 of 5 
PHLC14 
 
REFERENCES: 
1.   BacT/Alert MB Process System package insert Rev. June 2004; Biomerieux, 
                                Inc., Box 15969; Durham, North Caroline 27704-0969. 
2.   Blood Culture Prep Kit II. CareFusion Inc., 2009 
3.   PDI+ Povidone Iodine Cleansing Scrub Swabstick (1’s), Professional Disposables  
  International, Inc.  Orangeburg, NY10962-1376  
 
REVISIONS 
 
09/2009 (created), 10/1/2017; 9/17/2019 
 
 
 
 
 