OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 3 
PHLC006 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLC006 
DIFFICULT COLLECTIONS 
       Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 8/9/2017 8/9/2017 8/9/2017 
Reviewed By LC 9/16/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 NOV. 1983 
 
PURPOSE: 
To describe the procedure to follow when unable to successfully perform a phlebotomy or dermal puncture on a 
patient 
Addresses: 
Supervisor 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists 
 
POLICY: 
A. Non pediatric patients (15 years of age and older) 
• Two Venous Draw attempts: No more than two consecutive attempts to obtain a venous phlebotomy 
sample should be made on the same adult patient. 
• A single attempt to collect the sample using dermal puncture may be made following failure of the venous 
phlebotomy attempts if sufficient blood volume can be obtained using this technique 
• Two Dermal Puncture attempts: No more than two consecutive attempts to obtain a dermal puncture 
sample should be made on the same adult patient 
 
B. Pediatric patients (defined as any patient prior to the 15th birthday) or any patient located on the pediatric units 
• One Venous Draw attempt: No more than one attempt to obtain a venous phlebotomy sample should be 
made on the same child 
• A single attempt to collect the sample using dermal puncture may be made following failure of the venous 
phlebotomy attempt if sufficient blood volume can be obtained using this technique 
• Two Dermal Puncture attempts: No more than two consecutive attempts to obtain a dermal puncture 
sample should be made on the same child. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Carefully look for an acceptable phlebotomy site using the following site selection order: 
1. 1st Choice area– Antecubital Fossa (A/C) of arm:  
Examine the A/C area of both arms for a suitable draw site 
i. Choose veins located in this area using the following order: 
1. 1st Choice Vein – Median Cubital Vein 
2. 2nd Choice Vein -  Cephalic Vein 
3. 3rd Choice Vein -  Basillic Vein 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 3 
PHLC006 
 
 
2. 2nd Choice area – Hand: any vein on the back of the hand that offers  
an acceptable degree of being able to support 
A successful phlebotomy 
3. 3rd Choice area –Any Vein on Arm: That offers an acceptable degree  
                            of being able to support a successful phlebotomy  
4. 4th Choice area - Dermal puncture: If phlebotomy attempt fails, consider second attempt at       
performing a phlebotomy or perform a dermal puncture (finger or heel stick) if 
sufficient quantity of sample could be collected using this technique 
5. 5th Choice area – Foot: (physician authorization needed) Drawing from either of the patient’s feet  
can be considered but only if the patient’s physician has given written permission for 
the foot to be used as a draw site. 
 
B. Use appropriate technique to perform phlebotomy (refer to Phlebotomy Technique – Venipuncture Collection 
Procedure) or Finger/Heel dermal punctures (refer to Phlebotomy Technique – Finger and Heel Stick Capillary  
Collection Procedure) 
 
C. If unable to collect a suitable volume of sample or fail to perform a successful dermal puncture 
1. Attempt to locate a second phlebotomy site offering reasonable opportunity for a successful second 
venipuncture 
2. If the second attempt to draw fails to obtain a blood sample  
i. Notify nursing personnel on the patient’s unit of the failure to obtain a blood sample 
ii. Record the name of the person on the nursing unit to whom the failure to draw was reported on 
the phlebotomy workload recording draw sheet and in the Rover device. 
iii. The Rover documentation will populate on the Patient Draw list  that is monitored by the Shift’s 
Charge Tech and must include the following documentation: 
1. The patient’s name or medical record number 
2. The time the attempt to draw was performed 
3. The name of the person to whom the failure to draw was reported 
3. The charge tech is to document information on the Charge Tech Workload Recording worksheet and 
assign another phlebotomist to draw the patient. 
i. Draw priority is still based on the original order’s priority 
ii. Consideration is given to the skill of the phlebotomist to assure that the best qualified tech is 
being sent to perform the repeat draw. 
iii. If workload allows, the original drawing of phlebotomist may be sent with the follow up tech to 
observe the second attempt to draw 
4. Discuss the difficulties encountered in the phlebotomy with the patient’s nurse before sending a third 
phlebotomist to attempt to draw the patient. 
5. Follow the physician/nursing recommendation for proceeding with additional attempts to draw. 
6. Alternative Methods:  Obtaining a sample for laboratory testing could include the following 
i. Respiratory Therapy: asking the patient’s nurse if the physician would approve Respiratory   
Therapy performing an arterial stick to collect the sample. 
ii. Physician Draw: Asking the patient’s nurse if the physician could obtain a sample 
 
Limitations of the Procedure: 
A. The patient may refuse to be drawn a second time 
B. Refusals are reported to the patient’s nurse by phlebotomist performing the draw and then the charge tech 
notified as indicated above 
C. A venipuncture tech should never attempt to draw a patient that they do not feel they have a reasonable 
opportunity for a successful draw 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 3 of 3 
PHLC006 
D. Failure to draw a patient is reported to the charge tech immediately following each instance 
E. The nursing staff is available to assist in drawing the difficult patient. 
 
REFERENCES: 
Clinical Laboratory and Standards Institute (CLSI). Procedures for the Collection of Diagnostic Blood Specimens by 
Venipuncture; Approved Standard-Sixth Edition, CLSI document H3-A6 
 
REVISIONS 
11/1983 (created); 8/9/2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 