OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 1 of 4 
PHLC001 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLC001 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION 
       Date Issue  
Date 
Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 8/9/2019 9/22/2019 9/22/2019 
Reviewed By LC 9/15/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 JAN 2006 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide for the identification of patients prior to being drawn for laboratory specimens 
 
Addresses: 
Supervisors 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists 
 
POLICY: 
Patient identification is to be established by the Phlebotomist before performing venipuncture.  All non-
pediatric inpatients that are registered at OLOL shall be identified by at least two identifiers. Patients are 
to have a hospital armband imprinted with their full name and corresponding medical record number 
(MRN) attached to a wrist or ankle.  All pediatric inpatients (defined as any patient prior to the 15th 
birthday) are identified by three identifiers. Verification of the pediatric patient’s full name, medical 
record number, on an armband and matched armband worn by the designated guardian or nurse of the 
patient will be used to compare the information in the Rover device or patient’s chart label. Outpatients in 
areas without armbands are identified by verification of full name and birth date.  The identifiers stated 
are used to label laboratory specimens at time of collection in the presence of the patient.  Required 
information must be present and match before the patient can be drawn. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
A. Inpatient Procedure: (Non-Pediatric Patient) 
Always identify your patient by verifying patient information from an OLOL issued armband physically 
attached to the patient before beginning phlebotomy. 
1. Scan the OLOL issued armband with the Rover device.  Hold the Rover device next to the 
patient’s armband. 
2. Visually compare the Rover device screen to the patient’s armband verifying the two patient 
identifiers: 
• The full name (first and last) on the laboratory label matches the name (first and last) on 
the patient’s armband 
• The medical record number on the laboratory label matches the medical record number 
on the patient’s armband 
3. While performing the visual comparisons, ask the patient (if capable) to state their name and date 
of birth. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 2 of 4 
PHLC001 
4. Perform the phlebotomy only if the name, medical record number, appropriate patient response, 
and the Rover device are all in agreement. 
• Rover devices may be subject to failure (unreadable armband, scanner malfunction, 
hardware or system down time) 
• Identifying and drawing patients using visual comparison of first and last name and 
medical record number is permitted during periods of Rover failure 
5. Verify the orders on the screen of the Rover device.  Pay special attention to special collection 
instructions and collection times to ensure you do not collect any future orders.  Collect 
specimens as outline in PHLC003 – Phlebotomy Technique – Venipuncture  
collections. 
6. Ensure the specimen does not leave the presence of the patient before being labeled with the 
proper documentation  
7. Scan the OLOL issued armband with the Rover device to generate laboratory labels for the 
specimens. Label the specimen containers at the patient’s bedside using the laboratory label, 
patient chart label or a handwritten label   
• Or in emergent situations, labeling needs to take place in the presence of the patient (i.e. 
Trauma, Code) 
8. Inpatient labeling requirements include patient name (first and last), patient medical record 
number, date and time of draw and the Network ID of the person identifying the patient and 
collecting the specimen 
9. If using a Rover device and a laboratory label, scan the barcode on all collected specimen(s) and 
look at the devices input screen: 
• If “does not match the patient” is displayed a mismatch exists between the scanned 
armband and the laboratory label indicating an improperly identified patient – stop 
specimen collection, discard any collected material, notify the charge tech of the error 
and request instruction  
• If the comment is not displayed, the scanned armband information matches information 
scanned on the laboratory label indicating proper patient identification - the collected 
specimen is accepted when the display on the screen shows “all specimens collected. 
10. If not using a Rover device, place the properly labeled specimen containers in a biohazard bag 
and send the specimens to the laboratory       
B. Inpatient PEDIATRIC Procedure: (defined as any patient prior to the 15th birthday) 
Always identify your patient by verifying patient information from an OLOL issued armband physically 
attached to the patient before beginning phlebotomy 
When drawing on the pediatric units use the three-identification step method 
1. Scan the OLOL issued armband with the Rover device.  Hold the Rover device next to the 
patient’s armband. 
2. Visually compare the Rover device screen to the patient’s armband verifying the patient 
identifiers: 
• The full name (first and last) on the Rover device screen matches the name (first and last) 
on the patient’s armband 
• The medical record number on the Rover device screen matches the medical record 
number on the patient’s armband OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 3 of 4 
PHLC001 
3. While performing the visual comparisons, ask the patient (if capable) to state their name 
4. Visually compare the Rover device screen to the patient’s designated guardian or nurse verifying 
that: 
• The name (first and last) on the Rover device screen matches the name (first and last) on 
the caregiver or parent armband 
• The medical record number on the Rover device screen matches the medical record 
number on the caregiver or parent armband 
5. Perform phlebotomy only if the above identifiers are all in agreement. 
(Rover device screen comparison to patient armband and guardian or nurse armband) 
• Rover devices may be subject to failure (unreadable armband, scanner malfunction, 
hardware or system down time) 
• Identifying and drawing patients using visual comparison of first and last name and 
medical record number is permitted during periods of Rover failure  
6. When the patient caregiver or parent is not present, the patient’s assigned nurse can substitute for 
the caregiver or parent in the identification process  
7. Verify the orders on the screen of the Rover device.  Pay special attention to special collection 
instructions and collection times to ensure you do not collect any future orders.  Collect 
specimens as outline in PHLC003 – Phlebotomy Technique – Venipuncture  
collections. 
8. Ensure the specimen does not leave the presence of the patient before being labeled with the 
proper documentation  
9. Label the specimen containers at the patient’s bedside using the laboratory label, patient chart 
label or a handwritten label   
10. Inpatient labeling requirements include patient name (first and last), patient medical record 
number, date and time of draw and Network ID of the person identifying the patient and 
collecting the specimen 
11. If using a Rover device and a laboratory label, scan the barcode on the collected specimen and 
look at the devices input screen: 
• If “does not match the patient” is displayed a mismatch exists between the scanned 
armband and the laboratory label indicating an improperly identified patient – stop 
specimen collection, discard collected material, notify the charge tech of the error and 
request instruction  
12. If the comment is not displayed, the scanned armband information matches information scanned 
on the laboratory label indicating proper patient identification - the collected specimen is 
accepted when the display on the screen shows “all specimens collected.  Place the properly 
labeled specimen container(s) in a biohazard bag and send the specimen(s) to the laboratory 
13. If not using a Rover device, place the properly labeled specimen containers in a 
biohazard bag and send the specimens to the laboratory       
C. Outpatient Procedure: 
Outpatients in areas without armbands are identified by verification of full name and birth date. Always 
identify your patient by verifying patient information before beginning phlebotomy 
1. An outpatient is identified by verification of full name and birth date.  
2. The outpatient’s full name and date of birth will be noted on the laboratory order form or the 
physician’s written script requesting testing 
3. Bring the patient into the drawing station 
4. Before beginning the phlebotomy, ask the patient to tell you their name and date of birth 
5. Compare the patient’s verbal response to the written data OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
Page 4 of 4 
PHLC001 
6. Draw the patient only if the patient’s response matches the written data 
7. When drawing a child or incapacitated adult use the above procedure but direct the questions to 
the caregiver or parent present with the patient  
8. Ensure the specimen does not leave the presence of the patient before being labeled with the 
proper documentation  
9. Label the specimen containers at the point of patient contact using the laboratory labels, patient 
chart label or handwritten label   
10. Outpatient labeling requirements include patient name (first and last), date of birth, date and time 
of draw and Network ID of the person performing the collection 
11. On the outpatient order, write the types and numbers of tubes collected, time and date of draw 
and Network ID as collector of the specimens 
 
Limitations of the Procedure: 
A. Another person may collect a sample via an indwelling access line or other method, but the attending 
Phlebotomist is to: 
1. Be present during the collection of the specimen 
2. Perform patient identification 
3. Label and sign the specimen container 
4. Is responsible for the accuracy of the patient collection 
B. A Phlebotomist may not accept responsibility for unlabeled specimens, incompletely processed unit 
collections, or specimen draws that were not witnessed by the phlebotomist 
C. When an OLOL armband is removed for any reason, the armband will be placed on an alternate 
limb. The individual who removes the armband is responsible for assuring that the patient has an 
armband located somewhere on the patient’s body. 
1. Reprint armband. 
2. Reapply new armband on patient’s limb (arm or leg) whenever possible.   
3. If this is not possible due to wounds, injury, amputation, very fragile skin, multiple IV 
lines, etc., the armband will be placed at an alternate site of the patient’s body, and the 
location will be identified on the front of the patient’s chart.    
4. Put two armbands together to enlarge an armband to use over fragile skin, a swollen limb, 
or a cast. 
5. Armbands should never be placed on the patient’s bed or any other piece of equipment. 
6. Consult with your or Supervisor or Manager 
 
REVISIONS 
01/2006 (created); 7/26/2011; 8/9/2017; 8/19/2019 