OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
 
Page 1 of 2 
PHLIS001 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLIS001 
RECEIVING COLLECTED SPECIMENS 
       Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 9/3/2019 9/22/2019 9/22/2019 
Reviewed By LC 9/17/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 JAN 2000 
 
PURPOSE: 
Provide for the receiving of specimens collected by phlebotomists utilizing EPIC Hyperspace: Receiving 
Activity/EPIC Rover Device All Labs Assigned to Me  
 
Addresses: 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Central Processing Medical Laboratory Assistants 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists 
 
POLICY: 
To provide for the accurate documentation of the time of specimen draw and the phlebotomist performing the 
draw 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Collection of specimens by phlebotomist on the floor 
1. Select Rover device from storage cabinet. 
2. Ensure Rover Device is fully charge. If the battery level is low, switch it with a fully charge battery form 
the charging station. 
3. Enter the access code 6565 to access the Rover device home screen 
4. Select the Rover icon 
5. At the login screen, enter designated Network ID and password/passcode. 
6. Select the “Patient Icon” at the bottom of the screen 
7. In the list, select “Inpatient Lab Draws”, View Assigned Lab Draws, View Lab Draws Assigned to Me”. 
8. Perform proper Patient Identification (refer Patient Identification procedure) 
9. Draw and label collection tubes 
10. When collection is not performed electronically via Rover or Hyperspace, the time of draw and 
collector’s network ID is required to be documented on the specimen 
11. Required documentation is to be clear and easily read 
12. Rubber band together collected specimen tubes and any unattached laboratory orders 
13. Place the rubber banded patient specimens in a bio-hazard bag 
14. Specimens drawn by individual phlebotomists should be sent to the laboratory in a single 
bio-hazard bag whenever possible 
 
B. Receiving specimens performed by Central Processing Techs 
1. Wear proper PPE while processing collected specimens 
2. Remove patient specimens from bag and/or rubber bands, keep specimens and any additional laboratory 
labels together to simplify receiving OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
 
Page 2 of 2 
PHLIS001 
 
3. Group multiple accession numbers by patient name 
4. To access Epic: 
a. Open Team Link. 
b. Click on the Epic Hyperlink. 
c. Double click on Epic Hyperspace. 
d. Log in using your credentials.  
e. Select LALK Laboratory in the department field.  
5. Opening the Receiving activity:  
a. Click on the Receiving activity from the start-up activities.  
6. Using the Receiving activity:  
a. Before using the activity, verify that LALK Laboratory is displayed on the top left of the screen. 
b. Enter the specimen ID to be received: 
i. Use the scanner to read the specimen ID barcode on the specimen label which 
automatically receives the specimen. Scanning function is the preferred method when 
receiving specimens in Epic.  
1. If the collection date and time are missing the specimen cannot be received. 
Contact the collector and have them complete the collection date and time of 
collection in order to process the specimen.   
ii. If you are unable to contact the collector, using specimen lookup, manually enter the 
specimen ID in the specimen field.  
1. If the collection date and time are missing the specimen cannot be received. Enter 
the current date and time.  
2. Click Receive.  
3. When scanning function is not used, a scan override must be performed.  
4. Enter the appropriate scan override reason and click accept.  
iii. A green checkmark will appear in the received status box.  
c. Sample status changes from ORDERED to ON TEST.  
d. Receive only the containers actually received in the laboratory.  
 
REVISIONS 
01/2000 (created); 10/11/2017; 9/3/2019 
 
 