OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 2 
PHLIS003 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLIS003 
ORDERING REGISTERED PATIENT LAB TESTS 
       Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 10/11/2017 10/11/2017 10/11/2017 
Reviewed By LC 9/17/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 JAN 2001 
 
PURPOSE: 
To describe how to use the computer to order registered patient lab orders utilizing EPIC Hyperspace 
 
Addresses: 
Supervisors 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists 
 
POLICY: 
1. Both Inpatient and Outpatient orders may be requested 
2. Verify that orders do not already exist in EPIC  
3. For patient orders that are not registered please bring to outreach personnel during business hours for patient 
registration and lab ordering. After business hours please bring specimen and order to Central Processing for 
test ordering 
4. A physician order is required for any tests being ordered 
5. If necessary, have a medical technologist from the appropriate laboratory section call the physician for order 
clarification 
  
The vast majorities of samples received in the Laboratory are ordered by the collecting site.  The sample arrives in 
the laboratory with the laboratory order for testing in the form of a laboratory label with an accession number.  
Two exceptions include: 
1. Pre-Surgical and Surgical departments 
• Samples collected in the surgery areas are hand carried to Central Processing  
• The samples may not be ordered in the computer due to test complexity or staffing issues 
• The samples are accompanied with the Surgery–Lab Order form (yellow surgery order form) or 
Lab Test Request Form with tests being requested by the physician noted 
• Blood samples that are received from pre-surgery and surgery without laboratory labels are to be 
ordered by Central Processing and processed in the normal manner 
• Samples received for non-blood testing are not ordered by Central Processing, non-blood samples 
are signed in on the Laboratory Inpatient Log as being received in the laboratory and taken to the 
appropriate testing section 
• The testing location is responsible for the ordering of requested tests   
2. Outreach After Hours Samples 
• Samples are collected at various locations and brought to the laboratory for testing 
• The samples are accompanied by an order requisition that lists the tests requested by a physician 
for laboratory testing 
• The sample is taken to Outreach Registration during normal business hours  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 2 
PHLIS003 
 
 
• Samples received after normal business hours are accepted by Central Processing and prepared 
for testing by the MLA 
 
Limitations of the Procedure 
1. Must have a physician order to perform patient testing 
2. Many patients have similar names, be careful to verify patient name before ordering testing 
3. Verify confusing or illegible orders before requesting patient testing 
4. Wrongly ordered or incomplete orders can have consequences for the patient 
5. Refer lab order questions to the appropriate laboratory section 
 
REVISIONS 
01/2001 (created); 10/11/2017 
 