OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 2 
PHLIS007 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLIS007 
CANCELING PATIENT LAB ORDERS 
       Date Issue  Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 10/3/2017 10/3/2017 10/3/2017 
Reviewed By LC 10/3/2017 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 10/22/2019 JAN 2000 
 
PURPOSE: 
Provide guidance for canceling of uncollected patient laboratory orders utilizing EPIC Hyperspace: Order Inquiry 
 
Addresses: 
Venipuncture Supervisors 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
 
POLICY: 
The Venipuncture Supervisor or Charge Tech may cancel unnecessary laboratory orders 
Categories of tests cancelable include: 
1. Duplicate orders – Laboratory patient orders that have been requested multiple times for the same test and 
draw time 
2. Tests ordered in error – Laboratory orders that have been identified as entry errors by Unit personnel 
3. Unwanted orders – Laboratory orders placed by Unit personnel but changing patient condition no longer 
warrant request processing 
Exercise care in the canceling of patient laboratory orders.  The reason for the canceling of the order and the Unit 
person making the request are to be noted 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. “Lab Collect” order status 
1. “Lab collect” orders being canceled located on the “Patient Draw List” or in the patient’s chart. 
2. Log in to EPIC Hyperspace application 
3. Highlight the patient in the patient draw list or look up the patient using the “Patient Station” icon 
4. Select the “Order Inquiry” icon 
5. Review all orders and highlight only the orders to be cancelled.  
6. Select the “Cancel” icon 
7. A pop-up window will appear; from the drop-down list select a reason for cancellation.  Enter any 
additional notes (person notified on the unit) in the comment box.  
8. Click accept to cancel selected orders. 
B.  “In Laboratory” collection status 
1. Tests having an “On test” status are to be canceled by department personnel 
2. Laboratory labels with appropriate documentation are taken to department personnel for canceling 
 
Limitations of Procedure: 
1. Duplicate laboratory orders can be canceled without notification of Unit personnel 
2. Canceling of other laboratory orders is to be confirmed by the person canceling or by the phlebotomist 
assigned to make the patient draw OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 2 
PHLIS007 
 
 
3. Documentation of canceled orders 
a. Reason for the cancellation of laboratory orders may include: 
• Patient expired 
• Test not wanted 
• Ordered in error 
• Patient refused 
• Sample not received in laboratory 
• Other problems interfering with collection 
b. The cancel reason, phlebotomist Network ID, and time of contact with unit personnel is recorded 
electronically in EPIC by the Charge Tech or Supervisor 
c. The name of the Unit person making the cancel request is entered in the comment box in Epic 
under the “Order Inquiry” icon 
 
REVISIONS 
01/2000 (created); 10/3/2017 
 