OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 4 
PHLR011 
 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLR011 
SAFETY EVENT REPORTING 
       Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 9/7/2011 9/7/2011 9/7/2011 
Reviewed By LC 9/7/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/22/2019 JAN 7, 1984 
 
PURPOSE: 
To communicate the responsibilities for reporting safety events 
 
POLICY: 
• A safety event (incident) is any occurrence, which deviates from policy or procedure of the hospital, 
interrupts orderly routine care, or exposes the hospital to risk 
• Any event observed or discovered by an employee should be reported.  The proper management 
personnel of Our Lady of the Lake are notified of all safety events through the Quantros system. 
• A sincere effort to extend assistance and exhibit professionalism to patients, visitors, physicians and 
employees will be considered a high priority. 
• Safety Event Reports are considered to be hospital documents.  In order to request a copy, please contact 
Risk management. 
• There are three types of safety event reports: 
o PATIENT Safety Event 
o EMPLOYEE Safety Event 
o VISITOR Safety Event (Including Independent Non-Physician Health Care Personnel) 
 
PATIENT Safety Event: 
1. Any safety event involving a patient will be reported via the on-line reporting system, Quantros.  
This application is located on Lake Link.   
2. The person with knowledge of the event should complete the patient information using factual data.  
3. Notify Risk Management immediately if there is a serious injury, a clinically significant medical 
error, unanticipated outcome, or sentinel event. If the event occurs after hours, notify the House 
Manager who will contact the Administrator-On-Call. 
4. It is appropriate to notify the patient's physician of all variances. If the physician was notified, 
indicate this on the Safety Event Report form and include the physician's name. 
5. A brief factual description of what and how the event occurred is to be described. No opinions are to 
be documented. 
6. This includes Medication Safety Event Reports 
 
EMPLOYEE Safety Event: 
1. Safety Events involving Venipuncture employees are to be reported to the Department Supervisor or 
appointed Charge Tech 
2. The Department Supervisor or Charge Tech will complete a safety event report in Quantros 
3. The injured employee reports to: OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 4 
PHLR011 
 
 
 
a. Employee Health during normal M-F business hours 
b. ECU during hours that Employee Health is closed 
c. Employees with serious injuries should report directly to the ECU for treatment 
4. Employees are to be treated as described in the OLOL Organizational Safety Event Policy and 
Procedure 
5. All on-the-job injuries sustained by an employee need to be reported. 
6. Employees of other departments should be assisted when needed 
 
VISITOR Safety Event: 
1. A visitor is defined as a non-employee or non-patient and may include students, volunteers, medical 
staff members, and contract workers. 
2. The visitor may be offered first aid, if appropriate, which he/she has the right to refuse. If the visitor 
wishes to receive treatment, escort the visitor to the ECU and advise the ECU of the event.   
3. Any safety event involving a visitor will be reported through Quantros. Information should include 
identification and address, date, location of event, environmental condition and any witnesses.  A 
brief description of what and how the event occurred is to be described 
 
Independent Non-Physician Health Care Personnel Variance 
1. An independent non-physician health care provider is defined as an employee of a contract 
service or medical staff member's employee. 
2. Any safety event involving these health care providers will be reported in Quantros as a 
visitor safety event.  
3. First aid is available in the ECU, if desired.  
4. Reports will be received in the Risk Management Department through the electronic 
reporting system.  
 
Safety Event Scenarios: (examples) 
1. If Venipuncture administers a glucose tolerance loading dose and the patient has a reaction, please be sure to 
care for the patient, notify the nurse, and your supervisor.  The phlebotomist will then need to complete a 
PATIENT Safety Report with event type: Medication Event.  
2. If a patient falls while getting down from an exam table or after using the rest room, a PATIENT Safety 
Report needs to be completed 
3. If you, the employee, injure yourself while performing your job duties, you will need to complete an 
EMPLOYEE Safety Report. (example: needle stick injury with possible exposure) 
4. If a guest/visitor trips and falls in the hallway, elevator, or escalator, a VISITOR Safety Report will need to 
be completed 
 
PROCEDURE: 
• How to report a safety event: 
o Go to an Our Lady of the Lake computer terminal 
o Double click on the Internet Browser Icon on the desktop screen 
o Once the LakeLink Home page has loaded, locate the “Destinations” 
o Click on “Quantros Safety & Feedback Reporting” 
o The Quantros Home page should appear 
o Select the institution: Our Lady of the Lake 
o Select the type of Safety Event :  Patient, Employee, or Visitor OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 3 of 4 
PHLR011 
 
 
 
o An electronic form will load where you will need to complete all indicated fields with 
information regarding the incident 
o Please make sure to have as much information regarding the patient, employee, or visitor as 
possible: 
▪ PATIENT: Full Name, DOB, MRN, Unit, Room Number, Area incident took place, etc. 
▪ EMPLOYEE: Full Name, Employee Number, Job Title, Department, Area incident took 
place, etc. 
▪ VISITOR: Full Name, Telephone Number, Reason for visiting, Area incident took place, 
etc. 
 
REVISIONS 
1/7/1984 (created); 9/7/2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 4 of 4 
PHLR011 
 
 
 
 
 
References: 
OLOL Organizational Safety Event (Incident or Variance) Reporting – Safety 
 
 