OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 2 
PHLR006 
 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLR006 
TYPES OF PATIENTS 
       Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 9/7/2011 9/7/2011 9/7/2011 
Reviewed By LC 9/7/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/21/2019 JAN 23, 1986 
 
PURPOSE: 
To describe the types of patients treated at OLOLRMC 
 
Addresses: 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists 
 
POLICY: 
Laboratory testing is done on three categories of patients.  Each patient type requires specialized 
registration and billing practice.  Venipuncture personnel are involved with the drawing of all patient 
types.  Difference in departmental handling of patient type is limited to sample processing. 
 
Inpatients: 
An inpatient is a patient that has been admitted to the hospital and assigned at bed location. 
 
Outpatients: 
An outpatient is a patient that has come to the hospital for treatment or specialized procedures 
that usually do not require overnight bed assignment  
 
Outreach patients: 
An Outreach patient is a patient that has presented for drawing from a doctor’s office or other 
medical facility that has contracted with the laboratory for services 
 
A. Inpatients 
1.  Orders are received as computer generated labels 
2.  All non-pediatric inpatients that are registered at OLOL shall be identified by at least two 
identifiers. 
• Patients are to have a hospital armband imprinted with their full name and 
corresponding medical record number (MRN) attached to a wrist or ankle.   
• All pediatric inpatients (defined as any patient prior to the 15th birthday) are 
identified by three identifiers. 
3.  Samples are drawn by Venipuncture or other personnel and returned to the laboratory’s Central   
  Processing department 
4.  Samples are logged as received in the laboratory OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 2 
PHLR006 
 
 
 
5.  Samples are delivered to respective laboratory sections for testing 
 
B. Outpatients: 
1.  Orders are written on physician prescription script 
2.  Outpatients in areas without armbands are identified by verification of full name and birth date  
  (two identifiers) 
3.  Specimens are drawn by Venipuncture or other lab personnel. 
4.  The outpatient order and specimens are given to the Outreach Registration personnel for  
  registration and test ordering 
5.  When the Outreach Registration department is closed, specimens are to be submitted to the   
  Central Processing department for processing and manual lab testing 
 
C. Outreach Patients 
1. Orders are printed from EPIC or presented as a written prescription. 
2. Outpatients in areas without armbands are identified by verification of full name and birth date 
(two identifiers) 
3. Specimens are drawn by Venipuncture or other lab personnel  
4. The outreach order and specimens are given to the Outreach Registration personnel for 
registration and test ordering 
5. When the Outreach Registration department is closed, specimens are to be submitted to the 
Central Processing department for processing and manual lab testing 
 
REVISIONS 
01/23/1986 (created); 9/7/2011 
 