OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 1 of 5 
PHLR001 
 
 
PHLEBOTOMY POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
PHLR001 
WORK SCHEDULE 
       Date Issue Date Effective Date 
 Prepared/Revised By ZJA/LC 9/10/2019 9/21/2019 9/21/2019 
Reviewed By LC 9/11/2019 Origination Date 
Medical Director Review A Harton 9/21/2019 DEC 18, 1984 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define workplace scheduling  
 
Addresses: 
Supervisors 
Venipuncture Charge Techs 
Venipuncture Phlebotomists 
 
POLICY: 
A. Work Schedules 
1. Each employee is assigned a work schedule listing specific work dates with reporting and 
departure times. 
2. Employee scheduling is determined by the Department Supervisor, Manager, and/or the 
Phlebotomy Operations Coordinator according to staffing requirements of the department. 
3. Employee scheduling is designed to meet the needs of the department in providing 
phlebotomy support to the hospital. 
4. Working hours are set by the job or position and not for the convenience of the employee.  
Team members are expected to report to work as scheduled, on time, prepared to start work, 
and remain at work for their entire shift. 
 
B. Schedule Changes 
1. In general, the posted schedule is to be followed as written. 
2. Schedule changes are granted by the Department Supervisor, Manager, and/or the 
Phlebotomy Operations Coordinator after consideration of workplace personnel needs. 
3. Requests for schedule changes are to be submitted in writing or by email to the Department 
Supervisor at least 72 hours prior to the requested change. 
4. The employee submitting the earliest request receives priority consideration.  
5. Department Supervisor, Manager, or Phlebotomy Operations Coordinator will notify the 
requester of either the approval or denial of the schedule change. 
 
C.   Posted Work Schedule 
1. Only the Department Supervisor, Manager, or Phlebotomy Operations Coordinator may add, 
delete or change the reporting date or time of personnel on the posted work schedule. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 2 of 5 
PHLR001 
 
 
2.  Only the Charge Tech, Phlebotomy Operations Coordinator, Supervisor, or Manager may 
make notations indicating employee absence on the posted work schedule 
 
D. Overtime 
1. A work week begins at 00:01 hours Sunday morning and runs through 24:00 hours Saturday 
night. 
2. There are two work weeks in a pay period. 
3. The overtime hourly rate is one and a half times the employee’s base rate. 
4. Paid Time Off (PTO) and Grandfathered Extended Illness Time (EIT) are benefit hours.   
5. Benefit hours are not counted as worked hours. 
6. Employees must accumulate 40 worked hours before they can be paid at the overtime rate for 
worked hours in excess of 40 hours.  
 
E. Breaks 
1. Work Breaks 
a. Work breaks are scheduled according to the work requirements of the phlebotomy 
department whenever feasible.  
b. Breaks should be staggered so that as few persons as possible are away from the 
same section at the same time. 
c. One 15-minute break may be allowed for employees that work at least 8 hours per 
shift. 
d. Frequent or excessively long breaks will not be tolerated. 
e. Patient needs and workload of the department must be considered a priority to any 
employee taking a break. 
f. Employees are not permitted to leave OLOLRMC during working hours, unless 
on hospital business or with supervisor approval. 
g. Employees leaving campus for non-work-related purposes should clock out when 
leaving and clock in when returning. 
h. All Breaks will be scheduled by the Venipuncture Supervisor, Phlebotomy 
Operations Coordinator, or Venipuncture Charge Techs. 
2. Meal Breaks 
a.  
b. Employees working 5.5 hours in a given work day are granted one unpaid 30-
minute meal period. 
c. Employees are encouraged to take a meal break during every shift. Working 
through a meal should be an occasional exception and not a regular occurrence.  
d. All Breaks will be scheduled by the Venipuncture Supervisor, Phlebotomy 
Operations Coordinator, or Venipuncture Charge Tech.  The employee must clock 
in and clock out for all meal breaks. 
e. Employees are to report to the Venipuncture department before going to break 
and at the end of break 
3. Smoke Breaks 
a. Smoking is not permitted on the medical center campus. 
 
 OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 3 of 5 
PHLR001 
 
 
F. Attendance/Punctuality 
1. Employees are to report illness or expected absence at least two hours before the scheduled 
start time of the shift to which they have been assigned to the Department Supervisor, 
Manager, and/or the Phlebotomy Coordinator.   
2. Employees must call in sick for every day that they are ill.  It is not acceptable for the 
employee to have another person call the sick message to the department.   
3. Text messages or emails are not an acceptable method for call-ins. In the event, you are 
unable to reach the Phlebotomy Operations Coordinator, Supervisor, or Manager, leave a 
voicemail and contact the scheduled Charge Tech.  The Charge Tech will then be responsible 
for communicating the information back to the Phlebotomy Operations Coordinator, 
Supervisor, or Manager. 
4. Employees failing to provide an acceptable and sufficient notice of their absence will be 
reported as “Absent Unexcused” and will be subject to disciplinary action. 
5. Unexcused Absence: 
a. Any illness or absence must be reported at least two hours before the scheduled reporting 
time. 
b. You are in violation of this policy if you call in with less than a two-hour notice. 
c. An unreported, unexcused absence will be considered grounds for disciplinary action up 
to and including dismissal. 
6. Excessive Absence: 
a. A pattern of continued attendance problems creates a need for an assessment as to 
whether the requirements of the position are being fulfilled and a determination of the 
negative impact of an absence has on Venipuncture operations. 
b. Six days of absence in a three-month period, ten days in a year, or repeated instances of 
absence in conjunction with holidays, or days off may be construed as a pattern of 
absence.  In such cases, progressive counseling and disciplinary procedures will be 
initiated. 
7. Illness: 
a.   The Venipuncture Supervisor or Manager may at any time require written 
documentation from the employee’s physician for absence due to illness.  
b. Absence in excess of three working days automatically requires physician 
documentation of illness.  
c.   In cases of prolonged and/or serious illness, an employee may be placed on medical 
leave of absence until the date certified by the physician for return to work. 
8. Tardiness: 
a.   Employees are required to report and be prepared for work at the scheduled time of the 
shift to which they have been assigned.  
b. Employees are to clock in the designated time window.  The designated clock-in time is 
 ± 7 minutes of scheduled shift. 
c.   Clocking in after your scheduled time is considered tardy. 
d. Repeated incidents of tardiness will result in progressive counseling and disciplinary 
action. 
e.   Tardiness is tracked using an FMOLHS Occurrence System and includes tardiness due 
to extenuating circumstances (such as transportation issues) in its accounting.  Refer to OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 4 of 5 
PHLR001 
 
 
Human Resources policy HR.5.003 Hours of Work for the guidelines of the occurrence 
system. 
9. Absenteeism: 
a.   Examples of absenteeism include but are not limited to “No call no show”, job abandonment, 
failure to report to work, leaving work without permission, excessive absence, 
inappropriate absence, tardiness, failure to follow call-in procedure, failure to respond 
to call, or unexcused absence.  Refer to Human Resources policy HR.5.003 Hours of 
Work for the guidelines governing corrective/disciplinary actions involving 
absenteeism.   
 
G.  Paid Time Off (PTO) 
*Holiday Benefit Time 
1. OLOLRMC offers its employees six paid holidays 
 
New Year’s Day Good Friday  Independence Day 
Labor Day  Thanksgiving   Christmas 
 
2. Requests for holiday benefit time are to be submitted in writing to the Department Supervisor 
at least 72 hours prior to the requested date. 
3. Department workplace needs will determine the number of employees allowed holiday 
benefit time on any given holiday. 
4. Holiday benefit time is generally granted on a first come, first served basis. 
5. Previously granted holidays are considered in the granting of holiday benefit time. 
6. If a holiday falls on a regularly scheduled work day or a normal day off, the employee is 
given paid time off (PTO) at another time.  
7. Holiday benefits are granted to regular full-time and part-time employees whose status is .50 
or more FTE. 
8. PRN employees are not eligible for paid holiday benefit hours. 
 
*Vacation Benefit Time 
1. Requests for vacation benefit time are to be submitted in writing or email to the Department 
Supervisor. 
2. Department workplace needs will determine the granting of the benefit time. 
3. Vacation benefit time is generally granted on a first come, first served basis. 
4. Vacation/PTO request forms are available and should be used to submit benefit requests. 
Email requests are acceptable as well. 
 
G. Extended Illness Time (EIT) 
1. Grandfathered EIT may be used after three consecutive scheduled work days (24 scheduled 
work hours) missed because of illness (same occurrence of illness).  PTO or unpaid excused 
absence (if PTO is not available) is used for the first three work days (24 worked hours) of an 
illness.  This benefit is available to employees hired after December 31, 2014. 
2. The 3-day PTO use requirement is waived if the employee is admitted to any inpatient 
healthcare facility for treatment. 
3. Grandfathered EIT may be used for employee illness only – not a family member’s illness. OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
LABORATORY 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
 
Page 5 of 5 
PHLR001 
 
 
 
 
References: 
 Organizational Hours of Work Policy – Human Resources 
 Organizational Benefit Time Policy – Human Resources 
 Organizational Holiday Benefit Time Policy - Human Resources 
 
REVISIONS 
12/18/1984 (created); 9/7/2011; 9/10/2019 
 
 