ECLS-012 102-10314-4682 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Plant Services  Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for Plant Services 102-
10314-4682 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012 102-10314-
4682 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 5/7/2018 Review Date:  
Revision Date: 2/15/2020; 3/1/2019; 
1/23/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide 
the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Exit Locations: 
o Back Door toward Generator Building 
o Door near Control Room 
o Door near Admin. Assist. Desk  
o Door exiting to loading dock  
 ECLS-012 102-10314-4682 
Page 2 of 2 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
• All available staff will assist patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety” 
• All available staff will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Director or Designee ensures all employees are accounted for 
• Mechanic or Designee will clear means of egress of all Items.  
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
• Wall near Bio-meds door next to Locker area 
• Director/ Designee has the authority to shut them off  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Pull station Location  
o Back door going towards Generator Building  
o On the wall near Door leading to loading dock  
 
•  Fire Extinguisher 
o Control on wall near door 
o Door entering Offices 
o Wall near Lockers 
o Boiler room near ramp door 
o Wall near Women’s restroom 
o Spares in Garage 4  
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Dependent upon where fire is located certain pieces of equipment needs to be shut down by 
Designee  
o Boiler Room 
▪ Chillers, Boilers, Pumps, Natural Gas Valve 
o Generator Building 
▪ Natural Gas Valves and Diesel Gas Valves  
• Used/stored combustible products 
o Paint – spray cans in Garage 4 
• Plant Services Doors are badge access  
o Key can be used to unlock these doors 
▪ Plant Services has these keys on their Key Rings. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
•  Primary horizontal evacuation  
o Garage 4- 1st level- side closest to Canal  
• Secondary horizontal evacuation 
o Garage 3- 1st Level- side closest to Canal 