 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 1 of 15 
 
       
                                          
POINT OF CARE TESTING PROCEDURE MANUAL 
POCT01 
WHOLE BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING –  
NOVA STATSTRIP® HOSPITAL METER SYSTEM  
Prepared/Revised By: Origination Date:    Revision Date: Effective Date: 
 K. Vetter 8/5/2021 2/7/2025 2/10/2025 
 
PURPOSE: 
To set forth uniform testing and quality control procedures for waived whole blood glucose testing 
wherever Point of Care testing is performed.  
 
PRINCIPLE: 
The StatStrip® Glucose Hospital Meter System is intended for Point of Care multiple patient use for 
quantitative determination of glucose in capillary finger stick, venous whole blood, arterial whole 
blood, neonate arterial whole blood, and neonate heel stick specimens throughout all hospital and all 
professional healthcare settings, including patients receiving intensive medical intervention/therapy 
otherwise considered as critically ill.  
 
This system should only be used with single-use, auto-disabling lancing devices when performing a 
capillary finger stick or neonate heel stick.  
 
This method is not intended for use with neonate cord blood specimens or for the screening or 
diagnosis of diabetes mellitus but is indicated for use in determining dysglycemia.  
 
The Test Strip is designed with an electrode that measures glucose levels. Glucose (sugar) in the 
blood sample mixes with reagent on the test strip that produces an electric current. The amount of 
current that is produced depends on how much glucose is in the blood. The glucose result is displayed 
on the screen of the meter. The test strips are calibrated against plasma. 
 
SPECIMEN: 
 One drop of fresh, whole blood 
a. Capillary fingerstick, neonate heel stick, neonate arterial whole blood, venous whole blood 
and arterial whole blood. 
b. Sample size is 1.2 µL 
c. To minimize the effect of glycolysis, venous or arterial blood samples need to be performed 
within 30 minutes of sample collection to prevent inaccurate results. 
d. Alternate site testing (earlobe, forearm, etc.) is NOT allowed. 
e. The following anticoagulant is acceptable (do not use any other anticoagulants for meter 
testing): 
a. Lithium Heparin 
f. Refer to Limitations Section below for other specimen/testing limitations.   
 
     Capillary Precautions: 
a. Caution should be exercised when testing capillary whole blood due to potential pre -
analytical variability in capillary specimen collection.  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 2 of 15 
 
b. A capillary specimen relies upon an adequate, non -compromised blood flow. The 
healthcare provider must be aware that a capillary specimen glucose result may not always 
be the same as an arterial or venous specimen, especially when the patient’s condition i s 
rapidly changing. 
c. If the capillary specimen glucose result is not consistent with a patient’s clinical signs and 
symptoms, glucose testing should be repeated with either an arterial or venous specimen 
on the StatStrip meter. 
d. When performing a capillary heel stick glucose test on a neonate, caution should be 
exercised to ensure adequate blood flow to the heel. Consider unswaddling the neonate, 
massaging and/or warming the heel prior to specimen collection. 
 
EQUIPMENT / REAGENTS / SUPPLIES: 
 
EQUIPMENT: 
Nova StatStrip® System 
A. Nova StatStrip Meter 
a. The meter has wireless connectivity to the HIS. 
b. The meter uses a touch screen for menu navigation and data entry. 
c. The meter provides audible feedback of user inputs and has a built -in barcode for 
scanning. (do not stare into laser light or point towards anyone’s eyes when scanning) 
d. The meter stores patient test data, quality control test data, linearity test data, etc. 
e. Store meter at 15º C to 40º C 
f. Use meter between 10% to 90% relative humidity 
B.  Battery  
a. Battery powered: 3.7 V Li Polymer battery (rechargeable/replaceable) 
b. When the Battery LOW symbol displays on the screen, place the meter into the Docking 
Charging Station 
C. Docking/Charging Station 
a. An LED indicator light on the right shows the status of battery: amber indicates charging 
and green indicates fully charged. 
REAGENTS: 
A. StatStrip® Glucose Hospital Meter Test Strips 
a. Store at 1-30°C.  Do not freeze. 
b. Use test strips between 10-90% relative humidity  
c. Store strips in the same tightly capped vial in which they were packaged. Never transfer test 
strips to plastic bag, pocket, or any other secondary container. Replace cap immediately after 
removal of test strip to protect test strips from humidity. 
d. Unopened test strips are stable until the expiration date on the test strip container. 
e. Once opened, test strips are stable when stored properly for up to 6 months or until the 
manufacturer’s expiration date printed on the vial, whichever comes first. 
f. The 6mth Expiration Date MUST be written on the vial when first opened or the manufacturer’s 
expiration date printed on the vial is acceptable if it comes first.  
B. StatStrip® Glucose Control Solutions, Level 1 and Level 3 
a. Store at room temperature below 30°C.  Do not refrigerate or freeze.  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 3 of 15 
 
b. Once opened, glucose controls are stable for 3 months or until the manufacturer’s expiration 
date printed on the bottle, whichever comes first. 
c. The 3mth Expiration D ate MUST be written on both bottles when first opened  or the 
manufacturer’s expiration date on the bottle is acceptable if it comes first. 
C.  StatStrip® Glucose Linearity Test Kit, 5 linearity solutions with varying glucose levels.    
a. Store at room temperature below 86°F (30°C).  Do not refrigerate or freeze. 
b. Linearity solutions are stable for 3 months after bottles are opened or until the expiration date 
printed on the bottles, whichever comes first.4 
c. The 3mth Expiration Date MUST be written on the box when first opened  or the 
manufacturer’s expiration date on the box is acceptable, if it comes first. 
d. The linearity test kit is stored in the Lab for use by the POC Coordinator. 
 
SUPPLIES: 
Cotton balls or Gauze pads  
B.  Alcohol Wipes 
C.  Personal Protective Equipment, gloves 
D.  Hospital approved disinfectant wipes 
E.  Hospital approved disposable single use lancet device 
 
 
CALIBRATION:  N/A 
 
LINEARITY TESTING: 
Linearity tests are performed by the Point of Care Coordinators or other designee before a blood 
glucose meter is put into use  for the first time .  The linearity results of each StatStrip® meter are 
charted and reviewed by POCC.  Linearity testing is a means of testing the StatStrip® system’s ability 
to give correct readings through a broad range of glucose levels.  
 
 
QUALITY CONTROL:  
A. The StatStrip® glucose meters require two levels of quality control testing. 
B. QC results will display as “Pass” or “Fail”. 
C. Control tests are performed at the following times: 
1. Every 24 hours, when in use 
2. Training of new operators 
3. Before using the StatStrip® Meter for the first time. 
4. If a patient test has been repeated and the blood glucose results are still lower or higher 
than expected 
5. If there are indications that the system is not working properly 
6. Whenever problems (storage, operator, instrument) are identified or anytime there i s 
concern the accuracy of the meter may have been affected by rough handling (such as 
dropping the meter). 
 
 
 
 
 
  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 4 of 15 
 
 
QUALITY CONTROL TESTING PROCEDURE: 
A. Use proper PPE including gloves. 
B. Assemble equipment and reagents. 
C. Confirm that strips and controls are not expired, and discard date is written on both controls.  
D. Follow the appropriate steps below for quality control testing for both StatStrip® Glucose Control 
Solutions, Level 1 and Level 3: 
STEP ACTION 
1 Wake Up meter: 
-Touch screen or insert test strip 
2 From Home screen, press the Login soft key at the bottom middle of screen 
3 The Enter Operator ID screen displays. 
-Press the Scan soft key to scan name badge barcode or enter OID manually on keypad 
4 From the Patient Test screen, press the QC soft key. 
5 The Enter Strip Lot screen displays. Scan the Test Strip vial barcode.  
To scan the barcode, press the Scan soft key. 
 
Note: If the Strip Lot Number is invalid, the screen displays the invalid number with “is not 
a valid Strip Lot # Try again.” 
6 The Enter QC Lot screen displays. Enter the QC lot number. To scan the barcode, press the 
Scan soft key. 
 
Note: If the QC Lot Number is invalid, the screen displays the invalid number with “is not a 
valid QC Lot Try again.” 
7 The Insert Strip screen displays. Insert a Test Strip as shown on the screen.  
8 With the test strip correctly inserted, the Apply Sample screen displays. 
9 Gently mix the StatStrip® Glucose Control Solution before each use. 
10 Discard the first drop of control solution from the bottle to avoid contamination.  
11 Place a drop of control solution from the bottle at the end of the test strip until the solution is 
drawn into the well of the test strip. When enough sample has been drawn into the strip, an 
audible beep is sounded by the meter. 
12 Recap the control solution. The Testing Sample screen displays. The screen shows a clock 
with seconds remaining below the clock. 
13 When the meter completes the test, the QC Result screen displays result as either PASS or 
FAIL 
14 Remove the strip manually or use the ejector button on the back of the meter to eject the strip 
directly into a biohazard container. 
15 To add a comment to the result, press the Comment soft key. 
16 To accept the result, press the Accept soft key 
 
Note: Acceptable control assay ranges are printed on the Glucose Control Solutions vial 
label. If a QC test does not fall within the specified range, verify that the StatStrip® Glucose 
Hospital Meter Test Strips and Control Solutions are not past their expiration dates. Repeat 
the test with a new strip. If the second test fails, inspect and clean the meter. If the third test 
fails, contact the Laboratory Point of Care Department.  
     
  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 5 of 15 
 
 
E. QC Expected Results: 
The Nova StatStrip® Glucose Control Solution should produce results that fall within the range of 
results printed on the label. If the control solution test result is outside the range (is either higher or 
lower), the meter and/or test strip may not be working as a system. If quality control testing falls 
outside of acceptable limits with “FAIL” displaying, immediate corrective action must be taken. 
 
.Possible Reason for “QC Fail” Corrective Action 
Test done incorrectly Make sure that instructions have been carefully 
followed 
Strips have been damaged  Get new strips 
Strips are expired Get a new vial of test strips 
Controls are expired Get new controls 
Controls are contaminated- cloudy not clear Get new controls 
Unknown Failure – Glucose Meter may not 
be working properly 
Follow these steps: 
1. Repeat testing using new controls – If 
failed 
2. Repeat testing using new reagent strips – 
If failed 
3. Bring the meter to the lab in exchange 
 
The StatStrip® glucose meter will NOT allow patient testing until both levels of control are within 
acceptable limits. 
 
     .     
PATIENT TESTING PROCEDURE:  
A. Only testing personnel trained in the use of the NOVA StatStrip ® Glucose Meter are 
allowed to perform patient testing. They must successfully complete all required training 
and annual competency to remain certified  in the NOVA system. Testing Personnel must 
under no circumstances provide their ID to enable another team member to perform 
testing. 
B. Ensure meter is clean before patient testing. 
C. Use proper PPE – Use gloves. Wear a new pair of clean gloves for testing each patient. Wash 
hands thoroughly with soap and water before putting on a new pair of gloves and performing the 
next patient test. Hand hygiene must be performed before and after each procedure. 
D. Assemble equipment and reagents 
E.   Confirm patient identity, using the 2ID or 3ID (pediatrics) process. (See Patient Identification 
Policy- OrgClin/018) 
F.   Explain the test procedure to the patient. 
G.   Follow the appropriate steps below for patient testing: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 6 of 15 
 
 
 
STEP ACTION 
1 Wake Up meter: 
-Touch screen or insert test strip 
2 From Home screen, press the Login soft key at the bottom middle of screen 
3 The Enter Operator ID screen displays. 
-Press the Scan soft key to scan name badge barcode or enter OID manually on keypad 
 
4 From the Patient Test screen, press the Accept soft key. 
5 The Enter Strip Lot screen displays. Enter or scan the strip lot number. 
7 The Enter Patient ID screen will display. 
8 From the Enter Patient ID screen, enter the Patient ID by scanning the patient’s armband. 
 
Note: To scan the patient ID, press the Scan soft key on the screen. Then scan the patient’s 
barcode with the bottom of the meter. The patient’s ID can also be entered manually by 
using the numeric keypad. Enter CSN on patient’s armband for Patient ID, NOT MRN. 
9 Once the Patient’s ID has been entered, verify Patient Information (Name and DOB) on 
screen. Press Accept soft key. 
• If msg “Is Not a Valid Patient ID” displays on meter, but the CSN is correct on the 
screen and Patient identity is confirmed. Press Downtime Override soft key to 
continue with patient testing 
10 The Insert Strip screen displays. Insert a test strip as shown on the meter screen. 
 
Note: Do Not dose test strip with blood prior to sticking it in meter. 
11 Follow Single Use Lancet/Fingerstick Procedure: 
• Rotate fingers and puncture sites for patients having multiple blood glucose tests. 
• Clean puncture site area with alcohol pads and let dry thoroughly after cleaning.  
• Holding hand downward, massage finger with thumb toward tip to stimulate blood 
flow.   
• Use a new single use lancet to puncture the finger.  When using lancet on infant only 
heel may be punctured. 
• Never use a lancet if the protective cap has been removed or the Trigger button is 
depressed. 
• Squeeze the finger to form a drop of blood. Wipe away the first drop of blood with 
gauze or cotton ball, then squeeze the finger again to form a second drop of blood. 
• Discard lancet in appropriate biohazard sharps container  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 7 of 15 
 
12 The Apply Sample screen should be displaying. When the blood drop appears, touch the 
end of the test strip to the blood drop until the well of the test strip is full and the meter 
beeps.  
 
Note: At the time of dosing the strip it is very important to hold the meter horizontal to 
keep any liquid from getting into the strip port.  
 
Warning: The test strip must fill completely upon touching the blood droplet. If the test 
strip does not fill completely, do not touch the test strip to the blood droplet a second 
time. Discard the test strip and repeat the test with a new strip.  
13 The test results will appear in 6 seconds. 
 
Note: Do not remove the test strip while the countdown is in progress. 
14 Remove the strip manually or use the ejector button on the back of the meter to eject the strip 
directly into a biohazard container. 
15 To accept the result, press the Accept soft key. 
To reject the result, press the Reject soft key. 
• Reject result if Error has been made during patient testing 
• Add a Comment to document reject reason 
• Then repeat test procedure using new test strip. 
To add a comment, press the Comment soft key. 
 
Abnormal results Display as: 
Note:  ↑ displays for abnormal high result              ↓ displays for abnormal low 
        ↑↑ displays for critical high value                 ↓↓ displays for critical low value 
 
16 When patient testing is completed, the StatStrip® Glucose Hospital Meter System should be 
cleaned and disinfected after use prior to testing with a new patient. 
17 Remove gloves and wash hands thoroughly with soap and water and/or hand sanitizer. 
18 Place meter in docking station when finished. This ensures proper charging, downloading of 
results and ability to locate meters.  
 
 
Questionable Patient Results: 
       If a patient result is unexpected or not consistent with the patient’s history and clinical 
presentation see table below for corrective action: 
 
STEP ACTION 
1 Perform Quality Control using the same meter and test strips 
2 If quality control test results are within range, repeat the patient test using the same 
test strips and meter, selecting a different collection site 
3 If quality control test results are not within range, contact POC department with 
issue. 
4 Repeat patient testing using another meter and test strip vial that have passed 
routine quality control testing  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 8 of 15 
 
5  If patient results are to be compared between the Nova StatStrip® meter and lab 
glucose, samples should be collected within 10 minutes of each other 
• Collect sample in a properly labeled green top tube  
• Order a stat blood/serum glucose 
• Send to the laboratory for testing 
 
Result Review Procedure: 
All results can be recalled and reviewed: Patient Results, QC Results, and Linearity Results. The 
Review Results screen can be sorted by ID, Time/Date, or Type. Follow the appropriate steps 
below for result review: 
 
STEP ACTION 
1 From the Patient Test screen, press the Review soft key. 
2 The Review Result screen displays. 
3 Select how to sort the results by pressing ID, Time/Date, or Type. 
4 Select the result that you want to review. 
 
Note: The scroll bar shows the position in the results field: beginning, middle, end.  
5 Press the Page Down or Page Up soft key to scroll through the stored results. 
Press the View soft key to view the selected result. 
Press the Previous soft key to view the previous result. 
Press the Next soft key to view the next result. 
 
 
RESULTS: 
 
Reportable (linear) range for NOVA StatStrip® meter: 10 - 600 mg/dL     
 
See table below for age specific reference and critical ranges: 
 
 
 
                          
 
 
    
 
 
 
Result Interpretation: 
o All Critical Results must be confirmed by repeat testing.  A repeat test is a test performed 
within 15 minutes of the initial test.  
o Results greater than 600 mg/dL are displayed as “HI”. Report as >600 mg/dL 
o Results less than 10 mg/dL are displayed as “LO”. Report as <10 mg/dL.  
o All Out of Reportable Range Results must be confirmed by repeat testing.  
o If result is still out of reportable range order a STAT laboratory glucose test to 
verify POC glucose result. 
 
Age Range Normal Reference Range 
(mg/dL) 
Critical Range  
(mg/dL) 
0 – 1day 45 – 60 <40 or > 180 
>1day – 28days 60 – 100 <60 or > 180 
>28days – 3mo 60 – 100 <60 or > 300 
>3mo – 18years 60 – 100 <60 or > 400 
18years and up 70 – 100 <70 or > 400  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 9 of 15 
 
 
o Caution is advised in the interpretation of critical neonate blood glucose value .   
Laboratory glucose testing should be performed to confirm critical neonate NOVA 
StatStrip® whole blood test result. 
o Physician Notification:  Critical r esults and Out of  Reportable Range results require 
physician notification be documented in the patient’s medical record. 
o Comment Required for all Critical results and Out of Reportable Range results. 
o Results within normal range are displayed in Blue. 
o Results outside the normal range are displayed in Red. 
o A Single up arrow (↑) is displayed for a result if the value is higher than the upper end of 
the normal range but within the critical range. 
o A Double up arrow (↑↑) is displayed for a result if the value is higher than the upper end 
of the critical range.  
o A Single down arrow (↓) is displayed for a result if the value is lower than the lower end 
of the normal range but within the critical range. 
o A Double down arrow (↓↓) is displayed for a result if the value is lower than the lower 
end of the critical range.  
 
REPORTING RESULTS: 
Whole blood glucose test results along with the reference ranges, date, time, Name and ID of the 
testing personnel, and the meter number will be transferred from the Nova StatStrip meter to the 
Automated Data Management System via specialized software and hardware. The Laboratory Point 
of Care Coordinators or other designee manage the data. It is then transferred to the HIS into the 
patient’s electronic medical record. 
  
A.  Wireless Data Transfer 
 1.  Results will be automatically transferred wirelessly if a wireless connection is  
      available upon completion of the test.   
 2.  Wireless connectivity can be confirmed by the presence of wifi four bar icon at the top of 
the screen which indicates connection and strength.       
 3.  If a wireless connection is not available the meter will send the results automatically as  
      soon as the connection is available. 
 4.  The meter connects to the ADT (Admit, Discharge, Transfer) feed every 10 minutes  
      and sends and receives data even if it is turned off. 
 
B.  Wired Data Transfer 
 1.  If the Wireless Transfer is not available results can still be transferred into the  
      Patient’s EMR (electronic medical record) by docking the meter in the designated  
      Hardwired Charging/Docking Station. 
2. While the meter is docked in the designated Hardwired Charging/Docking Station it will    
connect to the ADT feed every 10 minutes to send and receive data. 
3. Wireless Downtime Protocol:   
If WIFI is DOWN , please find Yellow Labeled “Downloader” - Hard Wired 
Charging/Docking Stations  located throughout the facilities  by reviewing the Nova 
StatStrip Wireless Downtime Protocol: 
• Go to Teamlink -> Policies -> Lake -> Laboratory -> Point of Care  
Testing -> POCT01-JA-1 Nova StatStrip Wireless Downtime Protocol
   
 
  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 10 of 15 
 
 
CLEANING /DISINFECTION OF METER: 
A.  Clean and disinfect after each patient use following this protocol to ensure effective cleaning and 
disinfection. The meter must also be cleaned  and disinfected  whenever it becomes visibly  
contaminated with blood or other materials.  
B.  Gloves are to be worn while cleaning.  
C.  Make sure the test strip is removed from the meter.  Lay the meter on a flat surface prior to 
cleaning and disinfecting. 
Acceptable Cleaning and Disinfecting Materials: 
 Nova Biomedical recommends the use of Clorox Healthcare Bleach Germicidal Wipes, EPA 
Registration #6769-12, or any disinfectant product with EPA Registration #67619-12.  However, 
hospital approved disinfection materials are acceptable for use according to NOVA CIB NO: 01-
21ss (which states any disinfectant product included in both EPA List D or List N may be used  
provided the institution perform validation testing to ensure the alternate selection does not have 
a detrimental effect on the meter’s surface or performance) 
• PDI Sani-Cloth Bleach Wipes EPA Registration #9480-8 
D.  Warning: To ensure proper disinfection it is important to clean the meter (Step 1) prior 
disinfecting the meter (Step2) 
 1. Clean the Meter 
• Remove a fresh germicidal wipe from canister 
• Wipe the external surface of the meter thoroughly with the wipe. Discard wipe in 
appropriate biohazard container. 
2.  Disinfect the Meter 
• Using a new fresh germicidal wipe, thoroughly wipe the surface of the meter (top, 
bottom, left and right sides) a minimum of 3 times horizontally followed by 3 times 
vertically avoiding the bar code scanner and electrical connector.  
• Gently wipe the surface area of the test strip port making sure that no fluid enters the 
port.  
3. Observe surface contact time.  
• Ensure the meter surface stays wet for the contact time specified on the hospital 
approved germicidal wipe, which is longer than the manufacturer’s requirement of 1 
minute.  Allow to air dry for 1 minute. 
       4. Dispose of wipe and gloves in a standard biohazard container. 
 5. Wash and sanitize hands following hospital approved guidelines and put on a fresh set of 
gloves before proceeding to perform testing on the next patient. 
 
WARNING: Do not allow liquid to enter the strip port connector or allow pooling of liquid on 
the touch screen. If liquid does get into the strip port or connector, immediately dry the 
components with a dry cloth or gauze.  
WARNING: Do not spray the meter directly with solutions as this could cause the solution to 
enter the case and damage the electronic components.  
 
 
 
  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 11 of 15 
 
 
WARNING: Do not immerse the meter or hold the meter under running water.  
WARNING: Cleaning and disinfection may in rare cases damage the meter. Damage may include 
plastic housing cracks, cloudiness or frosting of the display, response issues with the 
display, battery compartment fluid leakage, or test port damage. Signs of meter 
performance deterioration may include failure to recover proper control solution results 
or the inability to perform a blood glucose test. If you observe damage due to cleaning 
and disinfection, stop using the meter and contact POCT Department to investigate. 
 
PROCEDURE NOTES: 
• Do not stare into the Laser light or point it towards anyone’s eyes while scanning a barcode. 
• Touchscreen: 
• It is recommended to use only your fingers to touch the screen. Using sharp -edged 
objects can damage or disable the meter. 
• A PDA-style pen may be used as a replacement for finger input.  
• Battery Hazards: 
• All rechargeable Lithium batteries have a finite useful life that will vary depending 
upon use and handling conditions. A Lithium battery exhibiting any of the following 
conditions should be immediately removed from use and properly disposed of in 
accordance with local regulations.  
o Has exceeded its expiration date 
o Swelling, cracking, or damage to the battery case 
o Leakage 
o Failure to hold a proper charge 
• The Lithium battery may present a fire or chemical burn hazard, if mistreated. Do not 
disassemble, heat above 100ºC (212ºF), or incinerate. 
• The battery provided should not be treated as household waste. To ensure the used 
battery is treated properly, remove the used battery from the meter and hand over to 
the used battery to the applicable collection point for the recycling of electrical and 
electronic equipment.   
 
• Troubleshooting: 
Meter Screen Alerts Possible solution 
Battery Low Change the battery or place the meter onto the 
Charging/Docking Station. 
Analysis Canceled  The test has been canceled, repeat the test with a 
new strip in place until the result is displayed on 
the screen.  
Temperature Meter will only work within the temperature 
range of 59ºF to 104ºF (15ºC to 40ºC). Return the 
meter to an environment within the specified 
temperature range of 59ºF to 104ºF (15ºC to 
40ºC). 
Bad Sample Insert a new strip and rerun the test. If the error 
code persists, perform the test using an alternate 
test strip vial or alternate method. 
Replace Strip Occurs after insertion of strip or occurs during 
analysis. Insert another strip and retest. If the  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 12 of 15 
 
error code persists, perform the test using an 
alternate method. 
Flow Error The specimen was incorrectly drawn into the test 
strip due to either insufficient or incorrect sample 
application. Repeat the test with a new strip. If 
the error code persists, perform test using an 
alternate method. 
Transfer Failed: 
Connection Not Allowed or 
Connection Broken 
Server refuses to allow dialog with meter or 
connection to server was broken. Please check 
the network settings, status of your network, or 
contact your administrator for assistance.  
Transfer Failed: 
Transfer Incomplete 
The meter was removed before data transfer was 
complete. Please re-dock the meter. 
 
•    If meter is still malfunctioning: 
▪ Remove the meter from service and use a different meter. 
▪ Bring down the broken meter to Laboratory in exchang e for a Lab Loaner 
meter to use. Complete the Lab Loaner form (POCT01-A). 
▪ Send a sample to the Laboratory for testing.  
•    Contact information for POCT Department is in every Nova StatStrip Case. Contact 
POCT Department during normal business hours with any POCT issues. 
• Dropped Meter: 
▪ Run both levels of Quality Control before returning meter to service. 
▪ If Quality Control fails, remove meter from service and bring to Laboratory. 
 
LIMITATIONS: 
a. The system has not been evaluated for use with neonate venous blood. 
b. Blood source – Use only whole blood. Do not use serum or plasma. 
c. Specimens – Only fresh whole blood or whole blood collected in lithium heparin collection 
devices should be used for arterial and venous specimens. 
d. Fluoride, EDTA, Sodium, and Ammonium blood collection devices should not be used for 
arterial and venous specimens. 
e. Temperature and humidity extremes – Test results may be inaccurate when test strips are 
stored outside of the storage and handling conditions. 
f. Altitudes above 15,000 feet (4500 meters) above sea level have not been evaluated. 
g. Do not immerse meter under water when cleaning/disinfecting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 13 of 15 
 
 
INTERFERENCES: 
The StatStrip Glucose Hospital Meter System exhibits NO interference from the following list of 
drugs or physiological conditions commonly found in patients in intensive care settings with complex 
medical conditions and drug regiments up to the following concentration levels: 
 
Tested  
Interfering Substances  
Tested  
Concentration Level  
 
Acetaminophen  
 
20.0 mg/dL  
 
1.323 mmol/L  
Acetoacetate  51.0 mg/dL  5 mmol/L  
Acetone  69.7 mg/dL  12 mmol/L  
Acyclovir  0.6 mg/dL  0.027 mmol/L  
Albuterol  0.06 mg/dL  0.0025 mmol/L  
Amitriptyline  0.06 mg/dL  0.0022 mmol/L  
Amoxicillin  5 mg/dL  0.137 mmol/L  
Ampicillin  0.8 mg/dL  0.0229 mmol/L  
Ascorbic Acid  22.5 mg/dL  1.278 mmol/L  
Atropine  0.01 mg/dL  0.000346 mmol/L  
Beta-hydroxybutyrate  166.6 mg/dL  16 mmol/L  
Bilirubin  29.3 mg/dL  0.5 mmol/L  
Captopril  0.6 mg/dL  0.0276 mmol/L  
Carbamazepine  1 mg/dL  0.0423 mmol/L  
Cefaclor  35 mg/dL  0.952 mmol/L  
Cholesterol  1000 mg/dL  25.86 mmol/L  
Cimetidine  5 mg/dL  0.198 mmol/L  
Citric Acid  384.3 mg/dL  20 mmol/L  
Creatinine  6 mg/dL  0.53 mmol/L  
Digoxin  0.3 mg/dL  0.0038 mmol/L  
Diltiazem  0.1 mg/dL  0.0024 mmol/L  
Dopamine  20 mg/dL  1.306 mmol/L  
Enalapril  0.5 mg/dL  0.0133 mmol/L  
Ephedrine  1 mg/dL  0.0605 mmol/L  
Ethanol  399.9 mg/dL  86.8 mmol/L  
Famotidine  0.042 mg/dL  0.0012 mmol/L  
Fluconazole  2 mg/dL  0.0653 mmol/L  
Fluoxetine Hydrochloride  2 mg/dL  0.0647 mmol/L  
Fructose  500 mg/dL  27.75 mmol/L  
Furosemide  3 mg/dL  0.0907 mmol/L  
Galactose D(+)  500 mg/dL  27.75 mmol/L  
Galactose-1-Phosphate  500 mg/dL  19.22 mmol/L  
 
Glycerol  500 mg/dL  54.30 mmol/L  
Heparin  1.2 mg/dL  N/A  
Hydrochlorothiazide   2 mg/dL  0.0672 mmol/L  
Hydrocortisone  20 mg/dL  0.552 mmol/L  
Ibuprofen  48.0 mg/dL  2.33 mmol/L  
Ketoprofen  6 mg/dL  0.236 mmol/L  
Lactose  500 mg/dL  14.61 mmol/L  
Lansoprazole  20 mg/dL  0.542 mmol/L  
L-dopa  5 mg/dL  0.25 mmol/L  
Levofloxacin  1.8 mg/dL  0.0498 mmol/L  
Lidocaine  0.7 mg/dL  0.0299 mmol/L  
Lisinopril  0.5 mg/dL  0.0123 mmol/L  
Maltose D(+)  500 mg/dL  14.61 mmol/L  
Mannitol  6000 mg/dL  329.4 mmol/L   
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 14 of 15 
 
MaltotetrioseD(+) 
Maltotetraose D(+)  
240 mg/dL 
240 mg/dL  
4.76 mmol/L 
3.6 mmol/L  
Mannose  500 mg/dL  27.75 mmol/L  
Methy-dopa  1.0 mg/dL  0.042 mmol/L  
Metoprolol Tartrate Salt  1.8 mg/dL  0.0673 mmol/L  
N-acetylcysteine  81.6 mg/dL  5 mmol/L  
Naproxen  40 mg/dL  1.74 mmol/L  
Nifedipine  0.02 mg/dL  0.00058 mmol/L  
Norepinephrine  10 mg/dL  0.591 mmol/L  
Nortriptyline Hydrochloride  0.02 mg/dL  0.00076 mmol/L  
Olanzapine  0.02 mg/dL  0.00064 mmol/L  
Pancuronium bromide  0.4 mg/dL  0.0070 mmol/L  
Penicillin  72 mg/dL  2.02 mmol/L  
Phenytoin  2.5 mg/dL  0.099 mmol/L  
Prednisone  1 mg/dL  0.0279 mmol/L  
Propofol  3.2 mg/dL  0.18 mmol/L  
Propranolol Hydrochloride  0.3 mg/dL  0.012 mmol/L  
Ranitidine hydrochloride  1 mg/dL  0.032 mmol/L  
Salicylate  120.0 mg/dL  7.50 mmol/L  
Sodium Chloride  
Deviation from a normal sodium or 
chloride level  
 
234 mg/dL  
 
40 mmol/L  
Sodium Nitroprusside dihydrate  0.05 mg/dL  0.0019 mmol/L  
Sorbitol  500 mg/dL  27.45 mmol/L  
Sucrose  500 mg/dL  14.61 mmol/L  
Sulfamethoxazole  1.5 mg/dL  0.059 mmol/L  
Tetracycline  30 mg/dL  0.675 mmol/L  
Theophylline  2 mg/dL  0.111 mmol/L  
Tolazamide  45 mg/dL  1.45 mmol/L  
Tolbutamide  50 mg/dL  1.85 mmol/L  
Triglyceride  1500 mg/dL  16.9 mmol/L  
Uric Acid  23.5 mg/dL  1.4 mmol/L  
Vancomycin hydrochloride hydrate  3 mg/dL  0.021 mmol/L  
Verapamil Hydrochloride  0.1 mg/dL  0.0022 mmol/L  
Warfarin  1.2 mg/dL  0.039 mmol/L  
Xylose  500 mg/dL  33.3 mmol/L  
   
Hematocrit  20% and 70%   
Oxygen  All concentrations   
pH  6.6 and 8.0   
   
   
 
 
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC 
POINT OF CARE TESTING 
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808 
POCT01 – WBG Nova StatStrip    Page 15 of 15 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
StatStrip® Glucose Hospital Meter System IFU, current. 
StatStrip® Glucose Hospital Meter Test Strips package insert, LPN 55873H 2020-01 
Nova StatStrip® Glucose Control Solution Level 1 package insert, LPN 41749P 2018-02 
Nova StatStrip® Glucose Control Solution Level 3 package insert, LPN 43281L 2018-02 
Nova StatStrip® Glucose Linearity Kit package insert, LPN 41750J 2018-02 
 
 
VERSIONS: 
8/5/2021 (created), 2/7/2025 
 
 
 