POINT OF CARE TESTING PROCEDURE MANUAL

POCTO09 _‘

URINE PREGNANCY TEST — hCG Combo Rapid Test

s/i9 | stag
7%

Prepared/Revised By K. Vetter

Reviewed By

***Department Medical Director Review

Medical Director Review

L:{_fﬁha/ed Medical Director Review

PRINCIPLE:

The hCG Combo Serum/Urine test is a rapid chromatographic immunoassay (CIA) for the
qualitative determination of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in serum or urine to aid in the
early detection of pregnancy. The test utilizes a combination of mouse monoclonal anti-hCG
antibodies and goat polyclonal anti-hCG antibodies to selectively detect elevated levels of hCG in
serum or urine. This test has the sensitivity of 10 mIU/ml in serum and 20 mIU/ml in urine. Once
the specimen is added to the specimen well of the test cassette, the specimen migrates via capillary
action along the membrane to react with the colored conjugate. Positive specimens react with the
specific colored antibody conjugates and form a colored line at the test line region of the
membrane. Absence of the colored line suggests a negative result. To serve as a procedural
control, a colored line will always appear at the control line region if the test has been performed
properly.

**% CLIA Complexity: Urine - Waived Test (only method allowed in OLOLRMC ED)

Serum- Moderately Complex

Shared procedure applicable for multiple hospital institutions listed below:
1. Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (Emergency Dept.)
2. Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (Emergency Dept.)

SPECIMEN COLLECTION:

A urine specimen must be collected in a clean and dry container which is labeled with 2 PID. A
first morning urine specimen is preferred since it generally contains the highest concentration of
hCG; however, urine specimens collected at any time of the day may be used. Urine specimens
exhibiting visible precipitates (turbidity) should be centrifuged. filtered, or allowed to settle to
obtain a clear specimen for testing. These turbid specimens can be sent to the Core Laboratory
for testing, if necessary.

Page 1 of 4
POCT09 UPT

Handling Conditions:
1. Wear gloves while handling urine specimens.

2. Urine specimens may be stored at 2° - 8°C (36° - 46°F) for up to 48 hours prior to
testing.

3. For prolonged storage, specimens may be frozen and stored below -20°C (-4°F).
Frozen specimens should be thawed and mixed before testing.

EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS:

1. hCG Combo Rapid Test Kit: Thirty (30) individually packaged test cassettes each
containing one disposable specimen dropper. Stored Room Temperature 15° - 30°C.
Stable until manufacturer expiration date printed on outside of test kit.

2. Urine Dropper Quality Controls (Level 1 & 2)- Stored Refrigerated 2°- 8°C. Stable
until manufacturer expiration date on bottles.

3. Urine specimen collection container

4. Timer

QUALITY CONTROL:

External Quality Control testing should be performed:
1 Each Lot Number of test kits per shipment
2% Monthly, on Each Lot Number of test kits for Storage Conditions

3 When training new testing personnel.
External Quality Control performance:
1, Bring Urine Dropper QC to room temperature before use.
2. Mix vial contents, remove cap and invert. Squeeze the bottle to express required
volume (3 drops) of control reagent.
3. Test as described in the procedure below.
4. Document QC results on appropriate QC Log: New Shipment (POCT-4) vs
Monthly (POCT-B).
Acceptable QC Results:
I Positive control — Two distinct RED lines appear. A RED colored control band
(C). and a RED colored band in the patient test region (T).
2; Negative control — One Red line appears in control region (C). NO apparent

band on the patient test region (T).

Internal Control must be present for QC results to be acceptable.
Internal procedural controls are included in the test. A red line appearing in the control
region (C) is the internal procedural control. It confirms sufficient specimen volume and
correct procedural technique. A clear background is an internal negative background
control. If the test is working properly, the background in the result area should be white
to light pink and not interfere with the ability to read the test result.

Page 2 of 4
POCTO09 UPT

PROCEDURE:

1. Follow OLOL 2 Step ID for patient identification prior to specimen collection.

2. See specimen collection section for acceptable specimens.

3. Use only test cassettes from UPT Kits with Green Stickers “This Lot Ready for Use.”

4. Remove the test cassette from the sealed pouch, label with Patient ID and use it as soon
as possible.

5. Place the test cassette on a clean and level surface. Hold the dropper vertically and
transfer 3 full drops of urine to the specimen well (S) of the test cassette, and then start
the timer. (Avoid trapping the air bubbles in the specimen well (S).

6. Wait for the red line(s) to appear. Read the result at 3 minutes when testing urine. It
is important that the background is clear before the result is read. Do not interpret results
after 4 minutes.

7. Dispose used pipette, test cassette and urine specimen in biohazard waste container once
testing is completed.

REPORTING RESULTS:

Manually document patient test results in hospital information system. The patient test result
should include: UPT result, internal control, Lot # of test cassette, testing personnel, date and
time.

POSITIVE:

Two distinct RED lines appear. One line should be in the control region (C) and another line
should be in the test region (T).

NEGATIVE:

One RED line appears in the control region (C). NO apparent red or pink line appears in the
test region (T).

INVALID:
Control line fails to appear. Insufficient specimen volume or incorrect procedural techniques

are the most likely reasons for control line failure. Review the procedure and repeat the test with
anew cassette.

LIMITATIONS OF THE PROCEDURE:

1. Very dilute urine specimens, as indicated by a low specific gravity, may not contain
representative levels of hCG. If pregnancy is still suspected, a first morning urine
specimen should be collected 48 hours later and tested.

2. False negative results may occur when the levels of hCG are below the sensitivity level of
test. When pregnancy is still suspected, a first morning urine specimen should
be collected 48 hours later and tested.

3. Very low levels of hCG (less than 50 mIU/ml) are present in urine specimens
shortly after implantation. However, because a significant number of first trimester
pregnancies terminate for natural reasons, a test result that is weakly positive should be
confirmed by retesting with a first morning urine specimen collected 48 hours later.

Page 3 of 4
POCT09 UPT

The test reliably detects intact hCG up to 500,000 mIU/mL. It doee not reliably detect hCG
degradation products, including free-beta hCG and Beta core fragments. Quantitative

assays used to detect hCG may detect hCG degradation products and therefore may disagree
with the results of this rapid test.

A number of conditions other than pregnancy, including trophoblastic disease and certain
non-trophoblastic neoplasms including testicular tumors, prostate cancer, breast cancer,
and lung cancer, cause elevated levels of hCG. Therefore, the presence of hCG in a urine
specimen should not be used to diagnose pregnancy unless these conditions have been ruled
out.

As with any assay employing mouse antibodies, the possibility exists for interference by
human anti-mouse antibodies (HAMA) in the specimen. Specimens from patients who
have received preparations of monoclonal antibodies for diagnosis or therapy may contain
HAMA. Such specimens may cause false positive or false negative results.

Ths test provides a presumptive diagnosis for pregnancy. A confirmed pregnancy diagnosis
should only be made by a physician after all clinical and laboratory findings have been
evaluated.

REFERENCES:
hCG Combo Rapid Test Package Insert; Cardinal Health, Current.

Page 4 of 4
POCT09 UPT

