OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
POINT OF CARE TESTING
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

S ——————
POINT OF CARE TESTING QUALITY PLAN MANUAL
— o COUALITYPLANMANUAL |

POCT11
Hydrion pH Paper

sue D
Prepared/Revised By L/ b

Reviewed By

***Department Medical Director Review

Medical Director Review

Affiliate Medical Director Review Clivince h_\\ £

Affiliate Medical Director Review (Q\D

*** Signed above

PURPOSE:

pH is a numerical scale used to express a solution’s acidity or alkalinity. The use of Hydrion pH
paper provides a simple, fast, and economical method of PpH measurement.

This testing method will be used for the screening of the presence of amniotic fluid following
premature rupture of the membranes and for the determination of the need and success of eye
irrigation after caustic exposure. It is performed only by Physicians, Advanced Practice Providers
and Residents in the Emergency Departments.

Shared procedure applicable for multiple hospital institutions list below:
1. Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (Emergency Dept.)
2. Our Lady of the Lake Livingston (Emergency Dept.)
3. Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital (Emergency Dept.)

PRINCIPLE:

A body fluid’s pH measurement may be of use as an evaluation aid to assist with assessment,
diagnosis, and treatment of a patient. Testing pH level in vaginal secretions can detect presence
of amniotic fluid following Premature Rupture of the Membrane (PROM). It can also be
measured in eye secretions to monitor effects of chemical splashes to the eye. Hydrion paper
color changes coincide with a numeric pH interpretation. Red/orange to yellow/green (pH 1 — 6)
indicates an acidic sample. Green (pH 7) indicates a neutral sample.

Dark green/blue (pH 8 — 11) indicates an alkaline sample.

SPECIMEN:
Vaginal secretions or amniotic fluid
Eye secretions or eye washings

Page 1 0of 3
POCT11 Hydrion pH Paper

OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
POINT OF CARE TESTING
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

MATERIALS:

Hydrion pH Paper

Gloves

Sterile Container or Cotton Swab for Specimen Collection

QUALITY CONTROL:

Hydrion pH paper are to be stored in a dry location at room temperature (15-30°C)
protected from sunlight. Hydrion pH paper is stable until the manufacturer’s expiration
date printed on the container.
Quality control will be performed by POCC or Lab designee monthly and upon receiving a new
lot/shipment of Hydrion pH paper. To ensure accuracy of pH paper, QC Hyrdion paper with
buffer standards of various pH values. Buffer standards may be used until manufactures
expiration and stored at Room Temperature.
Any unacceptable QC should be repeated. If QC is still unacceptable after repeating, then paper
will be removed.

QC Procedure:

1. Use a 3-inch strip of pH paper for each solution and use the:
Type A pH paper with the buffer standard 4.0
Type B pH paper with the buffer standard 7.0
2. Compare each paper to color chart to verify appropriate color change for the
corresponding pH value.
3. Record QC results on QC log. (POCTI1 1-A)

PROCEDURE:
Only physicians, mid-level practitioners and laboratory personnel are to perform procedure.

Verify that the Hydrion pH paper has not expired.

Put on gloves.

Tear off a 3-inch strip of pH paper

Sample Application

A. Use at least 2 unique patient identifiers to verify a patient’s identity before collecting
sample

B. If using a cotton swab for sample collection, smear fluid from the swab onto pH paper

C. If using fluid container for sample collection, dip the strip into the sample fluid and
shake off any excess fluid

5. Compare the strip to the color chart on the Hydrion dispenser immediately

6. Dispose of strip into biohazard container after results have been recorded

L BRI

REFERENCE RANGES:
Normal Vaginal pH: 3.8 —4.5
Amniotic Fluid pH: 7.0 - 7.5
Normal Eye pH: 7.0 - 7.3

RESULT RECORDING: '
Test results are documented in patient EMR under ER Provider Notes (POCT11-JA-1)

Page 2 of 3
POCT11 Hydrion pH Paper

OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
POINT OF CARE TESTING
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

LIMITATIONS:

1. Hydrion paper is to be used in vitro only and is not to be used internally.

2. Hydrion pH paper can read up to pH 11. Samples higher than pH 11 will show the color
indicated on the chart for pH 11.

3. Color change should be read immediately after strip inoculation.

4. Contamination with blood or lubricating gel may interfere with the test.

5. Falsely elevated pH results may occur with blood, semen, bacterial vaginosis, or
Trichomonas vaginalis infections.

6. Falsely decreased pH results may occur if insufficient specimen is placed on the strip.

7. Hydrion pH paper cannot distinguish amniotic fluid from urine.

REFERENCES:

Duke Raleigh Hospital pH Testing Using pHydrion Paper Laboratory Procedure Statement.
hitp://poct.duhs.duke.edu/wysiwyg/downloads/DRaH §-

2011_ph_testing using_pHydrion_paper.pdf

MCLNO-pH testing in Amniotic Fluid Laboratory Procedure Statement
http://www.mc]no.org/webresources/Waived/pH%20Testing.pdf

Page 3 of 3
POCT11 Hydrion pH Paper

