OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
POINT OF CARE TESTING
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

g
| seprmen et oo evew | 77 3 0 yiplparg| | msam ]

cscavirroiee | Quiotdis Uiy [3120123

¢

PURPOSE:

The TEG 6s Hemostasis Analyzer is intended for in vitro diagnostic use to monitor and analyze
the coagulation state of a blood sample. The TEG 6s analyzer records the kinetic changes in a
sample of anticoagulated whole blood as the sample clots, retracts and/or lyses in real time. The
system output consists of a table of numerical values derived from a graphical representation of
the hemostasis curve, which depicts clot firmness over time. These values determine clot
formation, kinetics, strength and stability. The indication for TEG 6s Hemostasis

System use is with adult patients (18 years and older) where an evaluation of their blood
hemostasis properties is desired. Hemostasis evaluation with the TEG 6s Hemostasis System
using the Global Hemostasis with Lysis - Citrated: K, RT, FF Assay Cartridge is used to assess
clinical conditions in a trauma setting to assess hemorrhage or thrombosis conditions.

PRINCIPLE:

The TEG 6s System and the Citrated: K, RT, FF cartridge are used to test the

hemostasis properties of citrated blood samples using three different assays/reagents
simultaneously, one in each of the three cartridge channels. For the CK assay, Kaolinactivated
test methods are used to reduce variability and to reduce the running time of a

native whole blood sample. The CRT assay maximally accelerates the clotting process

by simultaneously activating the intrinsic and extrinsic coagulation pathways, allowing for
the maximum clot strength to be reached more quickly. The CFF assay inhibits platelet
aggregation, excluding its contribution to clot strength, and thereby measures fibrinogen
contribution to clot strength.

MATERIALS/EQUIPMENT:
e TEG 6s Analyzer- the instrument should be located on a flat surface with adequate

airflow through a cooling fan at the rear of the device. Ensure that the fan is not
obstructed by proximity to a wall or other equipment. The analyzer must be operated at
room temperature (10-32°C), 20%-80% RH (non-condensing) humidity, and 0-2000m
above sea level. Voltage rating is 100V-240V AC.

Page 1 of 10
POCTI12 TEG 6s

OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
POINT OF CARE TESTING
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

o Citrated: K, RT. FF cartridge (10 provided in each cartridge box). Stored refrigerated

between 2-8°C in sealed foil packages when not in use. When stored between 2-8°C, the
product has a shelf life up to the date labeled on the box. Use before expiration date listed
on the box. Cartridges must be used within 2 hours after removal from the pouch and
exposure to ambient room temperature. Cartridges are for single use only and must be
discarded after use.

e Transfer Pipettes (12 provided in each cartridge box)

e (Cartridge Reagent QC- Level 1 (12 QC vials and diluent water vials in each box).
TEG 6s System QC materials are for single use only and should be stored refrigerated at
2°C to 8°C prior to use. When stored between 2-8 °C, vials are stable until expiration
date on box. Reconstituted vials are stable for 2hrs.

e Cartridge Reagent QC- Level 2 (12 QC vials and diluent water vials in each box).
TEG 6s System QC materials are for single use only and should be stored refrigerated at
2°C to 8°C prior to use. When stored between 2-8 °C, vials are stable until expiration
date on box. Reconstituted vials are stable for 2 hrs.

SPECIMEN COLLECTION, HANDLING AND PRECAUTIONS:

Specimen:
3.2% sodium citrate Vacutainer tube, properly labeled with patient chart label

Specimen Collection & Handling:

Phlebotomy: Follow standard phlebotomy practices. Inspect both arms to ensure the best
possible vein is selected. Use a 21-gauge needle. Under no circumstances should a smaller gauge
needle be used. The use of a butterfly needle with tubing is specifically recommended if
available, as it puts less pressure on the vein. Drawing a discard tube (with no additive) or
discard syringe of 3-5 mL prior to collecting blood for TEG® analysis is required to ensure
accurate results. This clears the needle and tubing of any tissue thromboplastin that is released
during the process of accessing the vein and ensures that a free-flowing sample is collected. If a
no additive tube is not available, a second blue top marked “discard” may be used.

Line Draw: When drawing from a line be sure to use plastic syringes that are NOT heparinized.
Using 2 syringes discard 3x’s the dead space, typically 10 ml. If the line is extremely long, or
extremely wide, you may wish to draw a larger discard. Switch to a new syringe and draw the
needed amount of blood. Pull back GENTLY on the syringe. Pulling hard on the syringe causes
shear forces that can affect the TEG results. Be sure to clear the line when you are done. Using a
safe transfer device (or a standard needle no smaller than 21 g) allow the blood collection tube to
fill completely by vacuum. Invert 5-7x’s to mix, write the draw time on the tube, then place
horizontally at room temperature for at least 10 minutes. /n an urgent or emergent situation
citrated samples may be run immediately.

Page 2 of 10
POCT12 TEG 6s

OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
POINT OF CARE TESTING
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

Specimen Precautions:

Use only 3.2% sodium citrate Vacutainer® tubes that have been filled completely (until
vacuum is exhausted). All tubes must be completely filled by vacuum.

A short draw is not an acceptable sample. No additives or preservatives are necessary to
maintain the integrity of the sample.

Never check for clots in a TEG tube using wooden sticks. Check for clots visually; if
they are present, you will get an alert from the TEG 6s software.

Samples must be used within 2 hours of draw.

Do not collect blood samples into heparin tubes or any other tubes not specifically
recommended.

QUALITY CONTROLS:
Internal /Electronic Quality Control
The TEG 6s analyzer is designed with the following internal, built-in Quality Control (QC)
features that verify that all electromechanical and pneumatic functions of the analyzer-cartridge
combination are operating satisfactorily:

Power On Self-Test (POST) is required at least monthly.

When the power switch is moved to the “ON” position, the analyzer initiates the POST
sequence. This performs QC tests on all analyzer functions prior to cartridge insertion. 4
failure of any component will report an error on the display screen and prevent further
operation.

Pre-Test QC and In-Use QC are performed each time a test cartridge is used.

Pre-Test: When a cartridge is inserted into the slot, the analyzer performs a Pre-Test QC
to verify the bar code reader’s ability to identify the cartridge and the integrity of the
cartridge-analyzer interface. 4 failure of any component will report an error on the
display screen and prevent further operation.

In-Use: When the user adds the sample and starts the test, the analyzer’s internal QC
functions monitor critical operational parameters throughout the duration of the test. A¢
every step, if any critical operational parameter is found to be out of range it will be
reported, and the test will be invalidated.

External Quality Control

Cartridge Reagent QC Level 1 and Level 2 is required with each new shipment/new lot
number of test cartridges received, and monthly to verify stability and performance of test
cartridges.

The quality control procedures are to be performed by, and rotated among, all testing
personnel who perform patient testing.

Quality Control results (internal and external), the manufacturer lot numbers, and
expiration dates of reagents are automatically stored in the instrument database and
transmitted to TEG Manager.

Quality control results should fall within the manufacturers® QC reference ranges as listed
in the package inserts.

The TEG 6s analyzers are configured to require QC monthly. If QC is overdue the
instrument will prevent patient testing until successful completion of QC has been
performed.

Page 3 of 10
POCT12 TEG 6s

OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
POINT OF CARE TESTING
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

All Citrated: K, RT, FF cartridge boxes must be labeled with green sticker “This Lot
Ready for Use” indicating QC has been performed and cartridges are acceptable prior to
being used for patient testing.

Do Not Use cartridges for patient testing if green sticker is not present on box.

EXTERNAL QC PROCEDURE: (POCT12-J4-1)
First, run Cartridge Reagent QC — Level I:

Remove the Citrated: K, RT, FF Cartridge pouch from refrigerated storage.
Prepare the Level 1 sample:

1. Allow one control vial and one diluent water vial to sit for ~10 min. to equilibrate
to room temp.

2. Make sure the lyophilized material is on the bottom of the control vial. You may
need to tap the vial a few times.

3. Remove the seal and stopper of the control vial, taking care to avoid sharp metal
edges

4. Using a transfer pipette from the Cartridge Box, transfer entire contents of diluent
water vial into the control vial. Failure to do so may result in inaccurate results.

Note: Keep transfer pipette to use again when dosing the control to the cartridge.

. Re-insert the stopper into the control vial.

. Vigorously shake control vial for 15 sec., until fully reconstituted.

. Let control stand for 5 min at room temp.

. Shake the control vial vigorously again for 15 sec. and let stand 5 more minutes.

. Ensure that there is no undissolved material remaining in the vial. Repeat the step
if needed.

Note: Reconstituted QC must be used within 2 hours.

Login to TEG 6s:

1. Enter Username — Scan Employee Name Badge (123...Lawson#)

2. Enter Password — Scan Password barcode on TEG analyzer or enter password
manually

3. Touch Login

Running QC:

1. Touch New QC

2. When LED light flashes on Cartridge Slot, insert cartridge into the slot with the
bar code on the left side.

3. Confirmation Alert Msg: Patient Cartridge QC will appear on display-
“Attempting to run a QC test using a patient test cartridge” — Touch
Acknowledge

4. On the QC Level screen, touch L1- Normal and then touch Next.

5. On the Test Information screen, scan QC Level 1 Barcode on TEG analyzer

6. Using same transfer pipette from earlier, pipette the prepared QC sample into the
cartridge sample port. Fill port up to or above the line marked on the cartridge.

7. Touch Start Test

NelN- NN B NV,

Page 4 of 10
POCTI12 TEG 6s

OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
POINT OF CARE TESTING
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

8.

1
1

When test is complete, QC result buttons display at the bottom of the results
screen. Do the following:
a. Compare the results against the Reference Range Card on the analyzer
b. If all results fall within the ranges, touch Pass. If any result falls outside
the ranges, touch Fail.
c. In the confirmation message, touch Acknowledge.
When the analyzer displays the “Remove Cartridge” prompt, remove the used
cartridge, and dispose of in biohazard waste.
0. Touch Done to return to Home screen.
1. QC Results are stored in TEG Manager.

Next, run Cartridge Reagent QC - Level 2:
e Remove the Citrated: K, RT, FF Cartridge pouch from refrigerated storage.

e Prepare the Level 2 sample:

1.

Note

5
6
T
8
9

Note:

Allow one control vial and one diluent water vial to sit for ~10 min. to equilibrate
to room temp.

Make sure the lyophilized material is on the bottom of the control vial. You may
need to tap the vial a few times.

Remove the seal and stopper of the control vial, taking care to avoid sharp metal
edges

Using a transfer pipette from the Cartridge Box, transfer entire contents of diluent
water vial into the control vial. Failure to do so may result in inaccurate results.

: Keep transfer pipette to use again when dosing the control to the cartridge.

. Re-insert the stopper into the control vial.

. Vigorously shake control vial for 15 sec., until fully reconstituted.

Let control stand for 5 min at room temp.

Shake the control vial vigorously again and let stand 5 more minutes.

. Ensure that there is no undissolved material remaining in the vial. Repeat the step
if needed.

Reconstituted QC must be used within 2 hours.

e Login to TEG 6s:

1.

Enter Username — Scan Employee Name Badge (123...Lawson#)

2. Enter Password — Scan Password barcode on TEG analyzer or enter password
manually
3. Touch Login
e Running QC:
1. Touch New QC
2. When LED light flashes on Cartridge Slot, insert cartridge into the slot with the

bar code on the left side.

Confirmation Alert Msg: Patient Cartridge QC will appear on display-
“Attempting to run a QC test using a patient test cartridge” — Touch
Acknowledge

On the QC Level screen, touch L2- Abnormal and then touch Next.

Page 5 of 10
POCT12 TEG 6s

OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
POINT OF CARE TESTING
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

5. On the Test Information screen, scan QC Level 2 Barcode on TEG analyzer
6. Using same transfer pipette from earlier, pipette the prepared QC sample into the
cartridge sample port. Fill port up to or above the line marked on the cartridge.
7. Touch Start Test
8. When test is complete, QC result buttons display at the bottom of the results
screen. Do the following:
a. Compare the results against the Reference Range Card on the analyzer
b. Ifall results fall within the ranges, touch Pass. If any result falls outside
the ranges, touch Fail.
c. In the confirmation message, touch Acknowledge.
9. When the analyzer displays the “Remove Cartridge” prompt, remove the used
cartridge and dispose of in an appropriate biohazard waste.
10. Touch Done to return to Home screen.
11. QC Results are stored in TEG Manager.

Quality Control Acceptability:
All parameters for Cartridge Reagent QC Level 1 and Level 2 must fall within their
reported reference ranges indicated in their package inserts, indicating that QC has
Passed.
e [fany of the parameters fall outside their reported reference ranges,
repeat the test with a second cartridge from the same lot/shipment.
e Reagent performance is verified if all parameters in the repeated test
fall within the reference ranges.
e Results outside of the reference ranges listed in the package insert may be caused
by improperly prepared control material or product deterioration. It
is recommended that any failed QC control test should be repeated.
e Repeated failures should be reported to the POCT Department in the lab and
discontinue use of the instrument.
e Do not report any patient results until the control parameters are within
their reference ranges.

PATIENT TEST PROCEDURE:

Only trained testing personnel are authorized to perform patient testing. Verify patient identity
by using two patient identifiers. Gloves are to be worn when performing patient testing.

After patient

Test Procedure:

1. Remove one cartridge pouch from refrigerated storage.

2. Login to TEG 6s:
e Enter Username — Scan Employee Name Badge (123...Lawson#)
o Enter Password — Scan Password barcode on TEG analyzer or enter password manually
e Touch Login

3. From the Home screen on the TEG analyzer, touch New Test.

4. On the Select Patient screen touch the Add Patient button +

Page 6 of 10
POCTI12 TEG 6s

OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
POINT OF CARE TESTING
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

5. Scan the CSN from the patient chart labeled tube, and then touch Confirm.
5. Touch Next.
6. On the Confirm Patient Data screen, do one of the following:
* Touch Confirm if the patient information is correct.
* Touch Reject if the patient information is incorrect.
In the confirmation message that appears, touch Yes if you wish to continue the test
with rejected patient data, or touch No to return to the Select Patient screen.
8. Tear open the pouch, remove the cartridge, and discard the pouch and desiccant pack
9. Insert the cartridge into the slot, as indicated on the screen, with the barcode on the left side.
9. After the cartridge pretest has completed, touch Next.
10. On the Test Information screen, enter information for the test, if desired, and then touch
Next.
11. Using a transfer pipette, pipette blood into the cartridge sample port, filling up to or above
the line marked on the cartridge.
12. Touch Start Test. The TEG analyzer starts the test, and the results are displayed as they
become available.
13. When the analyzer displays the “Remove Cartridge” prompt, remove the used
cartridge from the slot and dispose of in an appropriate biohazard waste.
14. Touch Done to return to the Home screen.

RESULTS:

Expected values for a normal patient would be test results that fall within the Reference Range
Tables below:

CK Reference Ranges

Citrated Blood Parameter

CRT Reference Ranges

Citrated Blood Parameter

MA (mm)

CFF Reference Ranges
Citrated Blood Parameter

Page 7 of 10

POCT12 TEG 6s

OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
POINT OF CARE TESTING
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

RESULT INTERPRETATION:

Results to be interpreted by Clinician.

TEG 6s analyzer results should always be considered within the clinical context of the
individual patient’s case. In the event of inconsistencies with the patient’s clinical status,
samples should be repeated or supplemented with additional clinical information.

The measurement interpretation guidance table below is not intended to be comprehensive
of all variables that could influence test results, but addresses key variables based

on literature review and clinical experience. As with any hemostasis test, TEG 6s test
results should not be the sole basis for a patient diagnosis, but should be evaluated
together with the patient’s medical history, the clinical picture and, if necessary, further
hemostasis tests.

TEG 6s Measurement Interpretation Guidance (from manufacturer package insert)

Ref  |Parameter Hemostatic Interpretation of
Range |Readout i Parameter Readout
{RR) ivi for Consideration

R(min) [46-9.1 |CK-R>RR Hypocoagulable || Coagulation
factor activity and/or
presence of heparin
at sufficiently high

CK-R<RR Hypercoagulable

LY30 (%) CK-LY30>RR [Hypocoaguiable [Hyperfibrinolysis

CRT [MA({mm) [52-70 ,F:bnnogen or
| platelet
contribution™
contribution™
G WK (15
[CFF WA= RR_[ipecoaguiabe

Note: These findings were supported by in vitro studies.

* Detection thresholds were 0.1 IU/mL for unfractionated heparin and 0.3 IU/mL for low molecular weight
heparin, respectively, in in vitro experiments. Actual threshold values in patients may differ. Heparinization can be
exogenous or endogenous

** Other factors, such as the coagulation cascade and FXIIl. may contribute to clot stiffness.

REPORTING RESULTS:

TEG 6s results should be reported immediately to the clinician for interpretation. TEG 6s
analyzers connect to a data port for transmission of patient test results to a data management
system, which is interfaced with the hospital information system. Patient test results which
include date, time, instrument serial#, reference ranges, and name/ID of instrument operator, are
then recorded in the patient’s electronic medical record. These results can be found under
Laboratory Testing.

Page 8 of 10
POCTI12 TEG 6s

OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
POINT OF CARE TESTING
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

CLEANING/DISINFECTION
Clean the analyzer
o The surfaces of the TEG analyzer must be cleaned and disinfected weekly.
between each individual patient, and when visibly soiled.
e The TEG analyzer must also be cleaned and disinfected prior to return
shipment if servicing is necessary.
e Use hospital approved disinfection material or products containing 70-95% isopropyl
alcohol solution to wipe the instrument.
To clean and disinfect the surfaces of the analyzer:
1. Turn off the analyzer and unplug it from the wall.
2. Put on disposable gloves.
3. Using hospital approved wipes or gauze pads soaked in isopropyl alcohol, thoroughly
clean all external surfaces of the TEG analyzer, including the touch screen.
Attention: Avoid getting liquid into the cartridge slot at the front of the
analyzer or into connectors on the rear panel.
4. Record on TEG 6s Maintenance Log (POCT12-4)
Clean the filter
e The TEG analyzer has a filter assembly mounted at the rear of the unit to filter
air as it is drawn into the unit by the fan.
o This filter should be cleaned or replaced during each scheduled preventive maintenance
(PM) procedure.
e [Ifatemperature error occurs before a scheduled PM, clean the filter using the
following instructions.
To clean the filter:
1. Grasp the edges of the filter cover and pull to remove it.
2. Remove the filter from the cover.
3. Rinse the filter under warm running water until it is clean. Do not use soap or any
cleaning solution.
. Squeeze out any excess water, place on a clean cloth, and allow to dry completely.
. Ensure the filter is 100% dry, and then reinsert the filter into the filter cover.
. Press the filter cover back onto the analyzer.
. Record on TEG 6s Maintenance Log (POCT12-4)

NOo

TROUBLESHOOTING:

For all error messages, the analyzer emits an audible tone at the same time as

the message is displayed on the touchscreen. Follow the instructions on the error message to
prevent further errors.

If any problem persists after performing the recommended correction, contact TEG System
Technical Support 1-800-GETATEG (438-2834). Provide the Error Code# that accompanied the
error message and description of the problem. If unable to resolve, contact POCT Department in
the Lab 765-8811, option 9 and TriMedx for further assistance.

Records of major instrument repair, part replacement, preventative maintenance or other
manufacturer provided service are to be recorded on the TEG 6s Repair Log.
(POCTI12-B)

Page 9 of 10
POCTI12 TEG 6s

OUR LADY OF THE LAKE RMC
POINT OF CARE TESTING
BATON ROUGE, LA 70808

CALIBRATION:
The TEG 6s analyzer does not require routine calibration.

INTERFERING SUBSTANCES:
Hemolysis and Hemodilution above 30% will interfere with the CRT Assay.
Hemodilution above 40% will interfere with the CFF Assay.

REFERENCES:

TEG 6s Hemostasis User Manual, current.

TEG 6s Hemostasis System Citrated: K, RT, FF package insert, current.

TEG 6s Hemostasis System Cartridge Reagent QC — Level 1 package insert, current.
TEG 6s Hemostasis System Cartridge Reagent QC — Level 2 package insert, current.

Page 10 of 10
POCTI12 TEG 6s

