ECLS-012 (102103142318) 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Surgical Services Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for PreAdmission and 
Registration Center 102103142318 
Policy 
Reference #: 
ECLS-012   2318 
Preadmissions 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 1/25/2019 Review Date:  
Revision Date: 1/13/2025 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions that 
indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present by 
addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s written 
Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed practitioners, and vendors are to follow the instruction of unit manager or 
designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001) and the OLOL Code RED Safety and Response Plan (ECEP007) to guide the 
preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartment 
•  One Exit door in Plaza I Suite 109-Exit sign visible 
•  No smoke compartment in Suite. 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drill or Code RED response 
• RN will clear hallway 
• RN will make sure door is closed, no windows in department 
• RN will confirms automatic fire doors closed (doors held open by magnetic locks are to release and 
close upon activation of the alarm) 
• No patients are in this area ECLS-012 (102103142318) 
Page 2 of 2 
• RN will prevents people from using elevator 
• RN will assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with sensory or mobility 
disabilities 
• RN ensures all employees are accounted for 
• No patients in department 
• RN ensures each room is empty 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off. 
• None in this department 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments. 
• No patients in this department 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire extinguisher and manual pull in hallway outside of department 
 
Specific departmental responsibilities in preparation for emergency evacuation. 
• My department just makes sure it’s employees are safe 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• None in this area. 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Exit directly across from department leading to Garage 3 
• Exit department to the right and exit employee drop off area by back garage 3 
• Exit department to left and exit to Parking Garage 3 in Plaza 2 exit. 
 