OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy 
Manual: 
  
Surgical Services 
  
Section/Chapter: Anesthesia 
Title
: 
PRN Anesthesia Technologist staffing 
and scheduling  
Policy Reference 
#: SAA002 
Supersedes #:   
Date of Origination: 08/10/2023 Review Date:  8/10/2024 
Revision Date:   
      
 
  
PURPOSE: 
To establish policy for the staffing and scheduling of PRN Anesthesia Technologist 
  
POLICY: 
The PRN Program of the Anesthesiology Services Department of Our Lady of the Lake Regional 
Medical Center (OLOLRMC) allows for supplemental staffing during increased census periods, 
high activity and during vacation and sick periods of the department. 
PRN ANESTHESIA TECHNOLOGIST SHOULD ADHERE TO THE FOLLOWING 
CRITERIA AT OLOLRMC. 
A. Pre-Requisites for Employment: 
1. Completion of all Human Resources pre-employment pre-requisites 
2. Satisfactory work reference 
3. Formal interview by Manager and/or Director of the Anesthesiology Department  
  
B. General Availability Requirements: 
1. PRN anesthesia technologist must have a valid and effective means of communication (cell 
phone, text messages, email, etc.) on file with the department. 2. Lack of communication with the department leadership for a period of longer than 2 weeks 
may result in dismissal from the Program and termination from their position 
3. Persistent failure to return calls or messages from the supervisory and management personnel 
of the department may result in dismissal from the Program and termination from their position 
  
C. Orientation 
1. PRN participants will receive an orientation that is materially consistent with that of all other 
employees. The scheduling of the orientation may be individualized to meet the needs of the 
PRN team member. 
2. PRN anesthesia technologist are required to complete the training program within the normal 
time frame of 12 weeks. PRN team members are expected to schedule enough hours to achieve 
this. Failure to complete the orientation checklist will result in termination from their position.  
  
D. Education  
1. PRN anesthesia technologist are required to maintain their ongoing education. Failure to 
complete any assignment by the due date will result in termination from their position. 
E. Scheduling 
1. Schedules are in eight-week blocks. PRN anesthesia technologist schedule must be submitted 
in writing or email (not text) no less than 2 weeks prior to the schedule’s release date.  
2. Scheduling is done by the anesthesia technologist supervisor (or assigned individual) and 
approved by the Manager.  
3. The Anesthesiology department may change an employee work schedule, PTO schedule, or 
holiday schedule at any time based on the department and hospital needs. 
4. PRN anesthesia technologist are required to work a minimum of 64hrs (as required by the 
department) every schedule (8 weeks). Additionally, PRN anesthesia technologist are required to 
sign up for one holiday per year. A weekend shift is consistent with the hospital definition of 
weekends.  
5. The team member is responsible for compliance with the scheduling requirements as indicated 
above.  Failure to perform within the program requirements and to maintain the schedule 
commitment may result in termination from the program. 
 