 
Plant Services 
 
 PS018 
Page 1 of 1 
Title: Medical Gas / Vacuum Systems  
Revision Date: 02/05/20 
Review Date: 07/15/18 
Reference # PS018 Origin Date: May 1988 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide a safe physical environment for patients, staff and visitors at all Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center (OLOL) network locations. 
 
POLICY: 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOL) is equipped with medical gas and vacuum 
systems which are monitored continuously with warning audible and visual alarms.  The medical gas 
and vacuum systems have been installed and tested in accordance with current standards.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
Operations: 
1. Inspections on medical gas panels, alarms, outlets, are conducted annually. 
2. Hospital users of medical gases have panels installed to alert staff of low line pressure. If the alarm 
sounds, notify Plant Services immediately. 
3. Plant Services is designated to exchange medical gas cylinders, when needed. 
4. Bulk stores of medical gases are stored in open spaces and secured by badge access or lock. 
5. Tanks and valves are labeled, and fittings standardized to prevent cross connection. 
 
Identification: 
OLOL will identify all valves within the Medical gas/vacuum system, through use of unique signage, 
according to applicable codes, standards,  and established safe practice.   Zone valves shall be located to 
ensure visibility and ease of access and shall remain unobstructed. 
1. Zone valves shall not branch from other zone valves, but rather should feed from main distribution 
lines. 
2. Signage on the zone valve box must identify the gas and area controlled. 
3. Signage must be in accordance with current applicable standards. 
 
Construction 
Alterations or modifications to any primary medical gas system must be approved by Plant Services 
leadership or designee.  Certification and cross checks must be performed by a certified outside 
contractor before the modified section is put into services.  All lines are to be purged before use.  This 
procedure is necessary to assure patient and pipeline safety. 
 
REFERENCES: 
National Fire Protection Association 99-2012 Chapter 5 