 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  Monitoring of Charges Section: Monitoring of Charges 
Date of Origination: 01 March 2011   
Date of Last Revision: January 26, 2022 Serial Code: RC1-04 
Date of Last Review:  January 26, 2022  
          
PURPOSE: 
To establish guidelines and practices to ensure that patient charges are applied correctly.  
This process is intended to detect both missed charges and duplicate charges and  
facilitate the correction of those errors in a timely manner. 
 
GENERAL POLICY: 
It is the responsibility of all staff members to ensure charges are applied appropriately.  
All daily billable procedures will be charged by the therapist responsible for that area 
until midnight. Patient education and MDI instructions ordered after 10 P.M. should be 
held until the following day. MDI instructions may be done at the time of the first 
administration, but the task should be left to be completed by the following day shift 
therapist. It is our goal to not depend on education of patients during sleeping hours. 
Below outlines those responsibilities and the actions to be taken. 
 
RESPONSIBILITIES: 
 
STAFF THERAPIST:   
 When performing a procedure, it is the responsibility of the therapist to drop the 
appropriate charge for that procedure in the electronic medical record. . If a 
charge error is detected in the patient medical record, the therapist should notify 
the supervisor.   
 
CLINICAL SUPERVISOR: 
 The supervisor will review charges routinely and resolve issues detected by staff 
therapist within their area of responsibility.  This data will be utilized to steer 
training and corrective actions to prevent future issues.   
 
CHARGE CORRECTION SUPERVISOR: 
 This supervisor is responsible for reviewing charges in EPIC  for needed charge 
corrections and correcting those deficiencies.    The supervisor will follow up with 
all issues brought forward by the staff therapist  and maintain cumulative files on 
all areas and report this data to the manager on an as needed basis and to the 
director monthly. 
 
 
MANAGER/DIRECTOR: 
 The manager and/or director will report any charging errors that cannot be 
corrected at the department level to accounting.  
 