 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Patient Care 
Subject:  Pulmonary Function Testing  
Date of Origination: September 1984 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: February 1, 2024 Serial Code: RC10-3 
Date of Last Review:  February 1, 2024 
          
FORMATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY:  
Respiratory Care 
 
POLICIES: 
A. Pulmonary Function Studies will be available in labs located on the OLOL main 
campus and Ascension Campus. Testing is available Mon - Fri from 7a to 3p 
excluding holidays at OLOL, and Monday-Thursday7a to 3p at Ascension 
Campus. Patients will be scheduled during hours that the lab is open.  
B. Pulmonary Function Tests may be ordered by faxing an order to the pulmonary 
function lab or placing the order electronically in the EMR.  Respiratory Therapy 
or central scheduling will call the patient and schedule the testing time with the 
patient in an appropriate time slot. At that time, the respiratory therapists or 
scheduler will give the patient pre-testing instructions specific to the tests that will 
be performed. If a patient arrives at the lab more than 30 minutes after the 
scheduled time, the patients test may not be able to be performed due to the 
constraints of the schedule.  In this event, the patient will be rescheduled at a later 
date.  
C. Tests may be cancelled if the patient does not follow the pre-testing instructions. 
D. The respiratory therapist in the PFT lab will charge the patient according to 
procedures in EPIC.  
E. The following testing and/or treatment may be performed in the PFT lab when 
ordered by a physician: 
1. Complete PFT with Body Box  
2. Complete PFT with Nitrogen Washout  
3. Simple PFT without Bronchodilator  
4. Complete Spirometry  
5. Bronchial Provocation  
6. 6 Minute Walk  
7. IOS  
8. ABG  
9. Sputum inductions  
10. Nebulized medication treatments  
11. Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing (OLOL Main Only) 
12. Maximal Inspiratory Pressure (MIP)  
13. Maximal Expiratory Pressure (MEP)  
14. HAST Testing (Ascension Campus Only) 15. Fraction of Exhaled Nitric Oxide (FeNO) 
F. For inpatients, when a Complete PFT is ordered, the following procedures will be 
performed 
a. FVC  
b. MVV 
c. DLCO 
d. Lung Volumes 
e. SVC 
f. FRC 
G. For outpatients, when a Complete PFT is ordered, the following procedures will 
be performed 
a. FVC 
b. SVC 
c. MVV (OLOL Main and Ascension Campus) 
d. DLCO 
e. MIP/MEP (at physician request – OLOL Main and Ascension) 
f. Lung Volumes (OLOL Main and Ascension Campus) 
g. Plethysmography 
 
 
H. When a Complete PFT is performed, if any value within the FVC maneuver is 
less than 100% of the predicted value, then the respiratory therapist will 
administer a bronchodilator, and then repeat the FVC maneuver 15 minutes after 
medication is administered.  This will be the process followed unless otherwise 
ordered by the physician. 
I. For all MDI medications, a holding chamber will be issued to each patient for 
single patient use, and a common canister MDI will be used. The MDI will be 
cleaned with alcohol prep pads before and after medication administration.  
Proper hand washing will be performed before and after patient treatment. For 
replacement of MDI, the PFT lab personnel will send a request to pharmacy.  
Once the PFT lab receives the replacement MDI, a label is placed on the canister 
stating the date it is opened.  The MDI will expire one year after opening the MDI 
or the expiration date on the canister, whichever occurs first. The MDI will be 
stored at room temperature and in a secured location.  
J. For Complete PFT, a bronchodilator will be administer after the first FVC.  
1. At the Regional Medical Center, the bronchodilator to be used will be 
albuterol via MDI, 2 puffs with a holding chamber.  
2. At Lake Ascension Campus, the  bronchodilator to be used for pre/post 
testing will be Terbutaline 2mg per nebulizer administered by PFT lab 
personnel. At the regional campus,  
K. A physician from Pulmonology will be available for questions or direction during 
testing hours. CCMS can be reached at 765-5864. 
L. All adult studies will be sent to a pulmonologist from CCMS, Baton Rouge 
Clinic, Ascension MOB or LSU to interpret. If a study is completed on a pediatric 
patient, it will be sent to the Pediatric Pulmonary LPG clinic for interpretation. 
The PFT will be recorded and interpreted in the patient’s EMR.  
Commented [ASA1]: Different process at Ascension, we use 
terbutaline M. The respiratory therapist will notify the ordering physician for any 
contraindication. The physician may then decide if the test should be conducted or 
not. Absolute contraindication includes a patient with an artificial airway or 
diagnosis of any airborne infectious disease.  Including, but not limited to 
tuberculosis, chicken pox and shingles. Contraindications to Pulmonary Function 
Testing include the following: 
1. Recent Myocardial Infarction or Stroke 
2. Increased ICP 
3. Chest Pain 
4. Suspected Tuberculosis  
5. Recent Eye Surgery 
6. Dementia or confusion 
 