 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Department Organization 
Subject:  Determination of Adequate Staffing  
Date of Origination:  January 2003 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: June 1, 2020 Serial Code: RC2-31 
Date of Last Review:  June 1, 2020  
          
Purpose 
 
The purpose of this policy is to outline the procedure for determining adequate respiratory therapy 
staffing for any given shift. 
 
Policy 
 
The Workload Projection Report will be used to determine the adequate amount of staffing for any 
given shift. This report is generated via Epic and can be accessed by any respiratory therapist in 
the department. 
 
Procedure 
 
 
I. Summary of the Workload Projection Report 
A. The Workload Projection Report will count all outstanding tasks for the desired 
period. In addition, it will also calculate workload by multiplying the count by a 
predetermined workload unit based on the AARC workload units and institution -
based adjustments. 
B. The Workload Projection Report totals the hours of work projected for the shift. By 
dividing total hours of work by the number of therapists scheduled, the supervisor 
determines if there is adequate staffing for the upcoming shift.  This calculation 
excludes the therapist assigned to the ER and supervisory staff. For night shift, 
assessments and re -assessments will be subtracted from the total hours prior to 
assessing appropriateness of staffing.  
 
II. Determination of Adequate Staffing 
A. Minimum staffing levels – In the event minimum staffing levels are not met, critical 
staffing procedures may occur. 
1. Lake Main Campus: 14 on day shift and 12 on night shift.   
2. Children’s Hospital Campus: 4 on day shift and 4 on night shift.  One of the 
4 RTs may float to Main campus when workload is lower than 10 hours/RT 
at CH and higher than 12 hours/RT at Main Campus.  The RT that floats to 
CH will be required to return to the Children’s Hospital campus if the 
transport RT leaves for transport.  
3. Lake Ascension Campus:  2 on day shift and 2 on night shift. 
B. Need to call in additional RTs:  At Main Campus and Children’s Hospital, the 
staffing at a level of more than 1 3 hours per therapist should be avoided when possible, and additional team members should be called it to work.  For hours 
between 12 and 13 per RT, the manager/supervisor may choose to call in additional 
RTs based on the specific circumstances including patient acuity, RT skill sets, etc.  
At Ascension campus, Additional RTs may be called in if there are 2 or more 
ventilator patients in the ICU and more than 6 treatments on the med -surg floors. 
Additional resources should be sought out in the following order: any staff member 
that would not incur overtime, PRN staff, then staff that would incur overtime. 
C. Incentive Pay (IP) may be offered to team members during significant staffing 
shortages to maintain a staffing level as stated above (B) or during extraordinary 
circumstances.  Approvals for IP will require the approvals as stated below:  
1. Supervisor may approve $5/hour of IP  
2. Manager must approve $10/hour of IP or more 
3. Director must approve $20/hour of IP or more  
D. Need to Flex staff off: At Main Campus and Children’s Hospital, if the workload 
per therapist falls below 10 hours of work per therapist, the supervisor will cancel  
or flex a therapist to bring the workload to 11 hours per therapist. If the therapist 
flexes to another campus, competencies must be maintained at each campus in 
which the RT may work. The supervisor may elect not to adjust staffing if there are 
extenuating circumstances that require additional staffing  or if minimum staffing 
level has been reached.   At the Ascension Campus, if the vent count falls below 2 
in the ICU and there are less than 6 treatments on the floor, a team member may be 
flexed off down to minimum staffing. Cancellation shall be done in the following 
order. 
1. Staff that volunteer to be called off (those in OT offered 1st) 
2. PRN staff 
3. Part time staff exceeding minimum hours 
4. Full time staff 
E. Staff may use PTO or time off without pay to cover this time.  
 