 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  Statement of Services Section: Organization 
Date of Origination: May 1991 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: March 19, 2024 Serial Code: RC2-23 
Date of Last Review:  March 19, 2024  
         
Purpose: To provide a list of services provided by the Respiratory Care Department 
which is in support of the medical staff and in accordance with a valid physician 
order.   
 
Respiratory Services: 
1. Mechanical Ventilation – All ventilation is utilized in accordance with physicians’ 
orders and manufacturers’ recommendations.   
2. Non-invasive ventilation - All ventilation is utilized in accordance with 
physicians’ orders and manufacturers’ recommendations.   
3. Oxygen Adm inistration- heated high flow, non -heated high flow, low flow and 
aerosol devices are utilized at Our Lady of the Lake campuses. 
4. Nebulized Medication-Via handheld nebulizer with either a mouthpiece or aerosol 
mask. The  aerogen nebulizer is utilized for invasive and non -invasive ventilated 
patient. 
5. Metered Dose inhaled medications with spacer/chamber 
6. Dry Powder inhaled medications  
7. Blood gas sampling and measurement – arterial, venous, capillary. 
a. Arterial blood sampling, to include Radial, brachial and femoral with a 
physician order to obtain the sample from a femoral site. 
8. Arterial line insertion with physician order 
9. Intubation and extubation of airways  
10. Suctioning and airway management  
11. Simple Spirometry and PFT testing (RMC, CH and ASC campuses) 
12. Sputum Induction 
13. Heliox Therapy 
14. Nitric Oxide Therapy (RMC and CH campus only) 
15. VELETRI Therapy (RMC campus only) 
16. Airway Clearance and volume expansion therapy 
17. Bronchoalveolar lavage 
18. Holter monitoring 
19. Stress testing (ASC campus only Treadmill/Lexiscan/Stress Echo) 
20. HAST testing (ASC campus only) 
21. EKGs 
22. Bronchoscopy Assist 
23. Pulmonary Rehab 
24. Six-minute walks 
25. Desaturation studies 26. Apnea testing (CH only) 
27. Patient monitoring: capnography and continuous pulse oximetry 
28. Cardiopulmonary Exercise Test (RMC PFT lab only) 
29. Patient Education for pulmonary diseases and therapeutic devices 
 
This list may not be all inclusive.  All task s performed will only be done after 
competency has been demonstrated and with a valid physician’s order. 
 