 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  Supplemental Staffing and PRN Program Section: Organization 
Date of Origination: September 1999 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision:  December 8, 2023 Serial Code: RC2-25 
Date of Last Review:  December 8, 2023  
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this policy is to provide pertinent information for the utilization of 
supplemental staffing. 
 
POLICY 
The PRN Program of the Respiratory Services Department of Our Lady of the Lake 
Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC) allows for supplemental staffing during increased 
census periods, high activity and during vacation and sick periods of the department. 
 
PRN THERAPISTS SHOULD ADHERE TO THE FOLLOWING CRITERIA AT 
OLOLRMC. 
A. Pre-Requisites for Employment: 
1. Current Louisiana license 
2. Completion of all Human Resources pre-employment pre-requisites 
Satisfactory work reference 
3. Formal interview by Manager and/or Director of the Respiratory Care 
Department 
 
B. General Availability Requirements: 
1. PRN therapists must have a valid and effective means of communication (cell 
phone, text messages, email, etc.) on file with the department. 
2. Lack of communication with the department leadership for a period of longer 
than 4 weeks may result in dismissal from the Program  and termination from 
their position 
3. Persistent failure to return calls or messages from the supervisory and 
management personnel of the department may result in dismissal from the 
Program and termination from their position 
4. PRN therapists are required to work a minimum of one twelve hour shift 
a pay period (or 2 shifts per month). Also, a minimum of 1 weekend shifts 
every 4 pay periods (2 months). A weekend shift is consistent with the 
hospital definition for weekends. At the discretion of the respiratory 
leadership, a holiday may be substituted for a weekend shift. Failure to 
comply with this may result in disciplinary action followed by removal 
from the program and termination from their position. 
5. When a PRN therapist works mor than  3 shifts per payperiod, the 4 th 
shift must be a weekend shift within the payperiod. The approval of the  
4th shift for the payperiod, will be dependent on the overall staffing levels, 
and the scheduling supervisor or manager will have the discretion to 
approve the requested shifts.  
 D. Salaries/Benefits: 
The PRN salary will be determined by the Human Resources Department.  There 
are also shift, weekend, and holiday differentials to be applied as HR determines 
appropriate. 
1. Annual performance evaluation will be performed by their primary 
supervisor or manager.  
2. PRN therapists are eligible for incentive pay when offered as long as they 
have met the minimum requirements of the program for the preceding 6 
weeks. 
 
E. Demonstrated Competence: 
1. PRN therapists must successfully complete all Competencies required by 
the department’s leadership team for orientation and each year thereafter 
at the same time as the rest of the department staff. 
2. Failure to successfully complete competencies and other mandatory 
requirements in a timely manner may result in a moratorium on scheduling 
the PRN participant until all requir ements have been met. It may also 
result in progressive disciplinary actions. 
3. Persistent and prolonged failure to successfully complete requirements 
may result in dismissal from the Program. 
 
F. Orientation 
 PRN participants will receive an orientation that is materially consistent with that 
of all other employees.  The scheduling of the orientation may be individualized 
to meet the needs of the PRN team member. 
 
G. Scheduling 
 Scheduling is done by a Respiratory Care leader and approved by the Manager or 
Director. 
 
 
 
 