 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center   
Subject: Quality Management Program Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Origination: December 2003 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: October 12, 2021               Serial Code: RC2-32 
Date of Last Review:  October 3, 2023 Signature: 
         
PURPOSE: 
 
The purpose of this policy is to outline the Quality Management  Program for the 
Respiratory Care Department  and Blood Gas laboratory and how it interrelates with the 
organization-wide quality management plan. 
 
POLICY: 
 
1. The Medical Director of Respiratory Care is responsible for assuring the quality 
and appropriateness of care provided by the Respiratory Care Department. In 
addition, the Laboratory Director of each facility is responsible for assuring that 
the quality management program is followed. 
2. This program is managed by the Blood Gas Lab  Supervisor in collaboration 
with the Medical/Laboratory Director, Department Director and Manager. The 
following will be components of the quality management program: 
• Design and implementation of the Quality Management Program 
• The day-to-day operation of the plan 
• Identification of indicators and threshold levels 
• Addresses the current CAP Laboratory Patient safety Goals 
• Collection and evaluation of data 
• Recommendations for corrective action 
• Preparation of reports 
• Reporting of status to departmental staff and the organizational 
performance improvement team/committees 
• Annual evaluation of the Quality Management Program 
• Non-conforming events that represent severe or significant risk to 
patients, donors, employees or the general public will be investigated 
and a safety event will be reported. If a non -conforming event occurs 
and results in death, permanent harm or severe temporary harm, the root 
cause analysis would be performed in accordance with the organizations 
quality department.  
3. The blood gas laboratory  indicators are designed to ensure quality throughout 
pre-analytical, analytical and post analytical phases of testing. 
4. All data collected on department -specific indicators will be reported  at 
respiratory leadership meetings, quality and safety committee meetings, and to 
the Laboratory Director. All records will be retain ed in the Respiratory Care 
Department for a minimum of two years. 5. A blood gas laboratory annual report will be written each year for each facility 
specific laboratory , and it will be reviewed and signed by the appropriate 
Laboratory Director. In addition, the Laboratory Director will perform an on -
site assessment of physical and environmental conditions and the adequacy of 
staffing periodically.  
 
 
 