 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Policy & Procedure 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject: Nitric Oxide Section: Organization 
Date of Origination: 15 January 2012 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: March 19,2024 Serial Code: RC2-33 
Date of Last Review:  March 19, 2024 
          
PURPOSE: 
 
The purpose of this policy is to outline the utilization of Nitric Oxide for Our Lady of the 
Lake and Our Lady of the Lake Children’s Hospital. Patients at Our Lady of the Lake 
main hospital campus will not be placed on nitric oxide unless they have a documented 
failed VELETRI trial as described in policy RC 2-34. 
 
POLICY: 
 
1. Nitric Oxide use is limited to Intensive Care  Units, Emergency Care Unit, 
Operating rooms, and the Cath Lab.  
2. Use of nitric oxide in the cardiac cath  lab is unrestricted for all use not 
exceeding 3 hours.   
3. Nitric Oxide may only be ordered by an OLOL physician. 
4. For patients > 18 years old, VELETRI must be trialed first before the 
initiation of Nitric Oxide.  If the patient has a failed VELETRI trial where 
VELETRI is not effective or the patient is on a device providing mechanical 
ventilation that is incompatible with VELETRI delivery, then Nitric oxide 
may be ordered.   
5. For patients > 18 years old, nitric oxide must be ordered per protocol except 
for the cath lab and Operating Room. 
6. If Nitric oxide is ordered on an adult patient while in the operating r oom, the 
physician can choose one of the following: 
a. Follow the nitric protocol for weaning procedure 
b. Transition patient to VELETRI per policy RC2-34 
c. Discontinue Nitric Oxide when returning to the ICU.    
7. If the patient remains on nitric oxide, weaning off NO should be done within 
7-8 hours.  If the patient has a negative response to weaning and/or MD 
wishes to continue vasodilation beyond 8 hours, the patient should be ordered 
to receive VELETRI (RC 2-34). 8. For pediatric patients, less than 18 years of age, if the  physician desires to 
deviate from the hospital protocol they must: 
a. Obtain written authorization from one of the fo llowing: Medical Director 
of ICU  , Chief Medical Officer  of the Children’s Hospital, or Medical 
Director of Respiratory Care.  
b. If a request to deviate from the protocol is approved, then a meeting must 
be requested by the ordering physician to discuss the patient's case and 
determine a plan of action within 24 hours of the waiver being signed .  
The meeting request should include the ordering physician, an intensivist, 
medical director, consultant physicians, and respiratory leadership. At this 
meeting, it will be decided to either continue Nitric Oxide for 48 hours or 
discontinue.  If the team decides to continue Nitric Oxide, it will not be 
weaned for 48 hours, unless ordered by the physician. At the 48-hour time 
frame, if the patient did not demonstrate a positive response as defined by 
#6 in the  protocol which can be found in EPIC, then the Nitric Oxide will 
be weaned and discontinued according to the protocol.   
c. If the request to deviate from the protocol is denied , then the nitric oxide 
protocol must be followed.  
 
 