 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  Nebulizer-Hand Held (Wall Neb) Section: Therapy 
Date of Origination: October 1980 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision:  March 19, 2024 Serial Code: RC7-14 
Date of Last Review: March 19, 2024 
          
PURPOSE: 
Provides a mechanism for delivery of aerosol drugs into the lungs and secondarily 
improves bronchial hygiene in-patients who can take an adequate spontaneous breath. 
      
EQUIPMENT REQUIRED 
A. Gas source 
1. Oxygen or air supply (50 psi) 
2. Portable compressor 
B. Flowmeter 
C. Small volume nebulizer as indicated 
D. Medication(s) and/or Diluent 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Essential elements 
1. Before delivering the therapy, the following will be completed: 
a. Verify the order in EMR - questions concerning the order should be 
immediately forwarded to the physician. 
b. For combination medications such as Duoneb, if the medications are 
ordered separately, the order will be modified “per protocol” to 
substitute as one vial.  For scanning and documentation purposes, an 
order for 2.5 mg/0.5ml of Albuterol and 0.5mg/2.5ml Ipratropium will 
be discontinued and reordered as “Albuterol-ipratropium neb” this will 
be delivered as a combination medication in one vial with 2.5mg 
Albuterol and 0.5mg Ipratropium/3ml. Also, for any 2.5mg/0.5ml 
Albuterol order will be substituted for 2.5mg/3ml Albuterol. The 
respiratory therapist will enter this order as a “per protocol”. 
c. Gather all equipment and medications 
d. Proper hand washing before and after patient contact 
e. Proper patient identification in accordance with hospital policy 
f. Introduce self and state reason for being there 
g. Complete patient assessment 
h. Scan patient armband then scan medication prior to administration. 
2. During the delivery of therapy, the following will be completed: 
a. Follow the procedure according to AARC clinical practice guidelines 
b. Provide the patient with instruction on good technique, medications 
and treatment related questions.  
3. After the delivery of therapy, the following will be completed: 
a. Answer questions as needed b. Complete patient assessment 
c. Wash hands properly  
d. Document treatment and assessment in the electronic medical record 
e. Discuss any adverse reactions and/or complications with the physician 
 
B. Unmonitored concurrent treatment by the same respiratory therapist is prohibited. 
It is the standard for the respiratory therapist to provide one-on-one care to all 
patients receiving respiratory services. It is unacceptable to leave a patient during 
a treatment. In the event of an emergency if the therapist must leave the patient 
prior to him/her completing the treatment, the therapist must notify the patient’s 
nurse. 
 