 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject: High Flow Oxygen Therapy  Section: Therapy 
Date of Origination: February 15, 2014 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision:  March 19, 2024 Serial Code: RC7-28 
Date of Last Review:   March 19, 2024  
          
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to describe the use of and  management of heated 
and non-heated high flow oxygen therapy. 
 
POLICY: 
A. Orders:  
a. Non-heated high flow Oxygen therapy should be ordered with a 
specified flow rate and SpO2 level.  Once the initial order is 
received, the respiratory therapist will assess the patient and p lace 
patient on the non-heated high flow nasal cannula as per physician 
orders.  Pulse oximetry will be used to determine SpO2 
measurement. 
b. Heated h igh Flow Oxygen Therapy may be or dered with defined 
settings or as per protocol.  Once the initial order is received, the 
respiratory therapist will assess the patient, and place the heated 
high flow device on the ordered settings  or on initial protocol 
settings followed by patient assessment .  Pulse Oximetry will be 
used to determine the SpO2 measurement.  
B. Patient Assessment: Patients on Heated and non-heated high flow Oxygen 
Therapy will be assessed at least once every six hours, and it will be 
documented in the electronic medical record.  
a. If the patient is ordered on a heated high -flow nasal cannula and 
has a flow requirement greater than 20 LPM for more than 4 hours, 
the respiratory therapist will contact the physician. 
b. If the patient is ordered on a non -heated high-flow nasal cannula 
and cannot maintain SpO2 at 15 pm , the respiratory therapist will 
contact the physician   
C. Reprocessing: 
a. Non-heated high flow nasal cannulas are single patient use and 
must be discarded after patient use. 
b. The cleaning of the heated high flow device will be as per 
manufacturer recommendations.   
 
If the order is placed as per protocol  for heated high flow nasal cannula , the 
Respiratory therapist will follow the protocol which can be found in Epic.   
 
 
 
 
  
 