 
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  Respiratory Personnel to Perform                Section: 
Advanced procedures  
Date of Origination: August 1986 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: March 19, 2024 Serial Code: RC8-10 
Date of Last Review:  March 19, 2024 
  
I. PURPOSE: The purpose of this policy is to outline the competency assessment 
and process for respiratory personnel to  perform advanced procedures 
including endotracheal intubation and arterial line insertion. 
 
II. POLICY:  To be deemed as “skilled”  in performing an advanced 
procedure, the  Respiratory therapist  is required to  complete a 
competency assessment. Only advanced procedures that are within 
the scope of practice for a respiratory therapist in the state of 
Louisiana will be performed once competency assessment has been 
completed and documented. 
 
III.  PROCEDURE: Respiratory personnel may complete the competency 
assessment and be c hecked-off by a pulmonologist, intensivist, ED 
physician, Respiratory Care Supervisor, RRT 2, or other authorized 
Respiratory therapists as approved by the Respiratory Manager  or 
Sr. Director 
 
IV.  COMPETENCY ASSESSMENT - INTUBATION: 
   
a. Respiratory care personnel shall first demonstrate intubation 
skill on a mannequin , demonstrate proper steps to ensure 
endotracheal tube placement is verified and demonstrate 
endotracheal tube is secure.  This technique for intubation of the 
mannequin must be observed and verified as correct by a 
Respiratory leader, Supervisor and/or Manager.  Documentation 
of this skill will be completed and placed in employee file. 
b. Once the mannequin competency is complete, R espiratory 
therapists shall demonstrate correct intubation of a patient in the 
presence of a Respiratory Supervisor, or physician as identified 
above.  If the respiratory therapist demonstrates correct skill , 
completes each step in the competency  and successfully 
intubates the patient, the therapist can then be deemed as 
“skilled” with a completed competency as proof of this skill. 
Multiple attempts on different patients may be necessary before 
demonstrating complete competency.   
  
V. COMPETENCY ASSESSMENT – ARTERIAL LINE INSERTION: 
a. Insertion of arterial lines is within the scope of practice for Respiratory 
therapist. 
b. Respiratory therapist will receive training on the approved step -by-step 
process for arterial line insertion during the orientation period. 
c. After observing the procedure, the Respiratory therapist can attempt the 
procedure to be checked off by a Respiratory Supervisor or authorized 
Respiratory therapists. If the Respiratory therapist is successful in completion 
of the entire process of obtaining supplies , utilizing sterile technique, 
successfully inserting the catheter , safely securing the arterial line, and 
validating proper waveform on the patient monitor, then the Respiratory 
therapist can be checked off on this procedure and will be deemed as 
“skilled” with a completed competency as proof of this skill. 
 
VI.   ORDER FOR INTUBATION OR ARTERIAL LINE INSERTION  
a. Intubation may be performed by a “skilled” Respiratory therapist for the following 
reasons: 
i. There is an order by a physician or midlevel provider 
ii. Patient is in respiratory arrest and/or agonal breathing during a code blue or 
Rapid Response call 
b. Arterial line insertion may be performed by a “skilled” Respiratory therapist when a 
direct order is placed in the EMR or verbally given by a MD, or mid-level. 
 
VII. ONGOING COMPETENCY ASSESSMENT  
a. Once therapist deemed “skilled” the therapist will be required to complete this 
competency at least every two years.   