 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  BIPAP Section: Ventilator 
Date of Origination: June 1995 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: October 21, 2021 Serial Code: RC8-03 
Date of Last Review:  October 21, 2021 
 
         
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to outline the proper use of Bipap across the facility and 
outline proper assessment.  
 
PROCESS: 
THERAPIST RESPONSIBILITIES AFTER INSTITUTION OF NON-INVASIVE 
VENTILATION: 
A. A physician order must be received to initiate Non -Invasive Ventilation on any 
patient.  
B. All proper handwashing and infection control precautions will be maintained 
while engaged in patient care.  
C. The respiratory therapist will place patient on ordered Non -invasive ventilation 
settings.  The Respiratory therapist will conduct a complete patient assessment.  
The assessment will include but is not limited to the following: auscultation of 
breath sounds to verify equal breath sounds and proper chest expansion,  heart 
rate, respiratory rate, work of breathing and SpO2.  All assessment parameters 
will be documented in the patient’s EMR. .   
D. If not already ordered, the therapist may request an arterial blood gas after 
instituting continuous non-invasive ventilation. 
E. The respiratory therapist will explain all procedures to the patient. 
F. The respiratory therapist will document set values as well as all measured 
parameters in the patient EMR.  
G. The respiratory therapist will set appropriate alarms.  These alarms will be 
assessed with each patient assessment to ensure the appropriateness of the 
settings.    
H. The non -invasive ventilator settings should be checked and documented in 
accordance with the patient’s order and acuity: 
a. Non-invasive ventilation Continuous: should be assessed no less frequent 
than every four hours with the recommended frequency of every 2 hours.   
b. Non-invasive ventilation QHS:  assessment and documentation should be 
no less frequent than every 6 hours.   
I. The following parameters should be checked: 
1. Appropriateness of the mask fitting and the skin integrity beneath it.  
2. Inspiratory Pressure and Expiratory Pressure 
3. Exhaled tidal volume and minute ventilation 
4. Total respiratory rate 5. FiO2 
J. Indications and contraindications will be considered for any patient receiving non-
invasive mechanical ventilat ion. The physician should be contacted for all 
concerns regarding indications and contraindications. 
1. Indications for BiPAP 
a. Unacceptable hypoventilation and CO2 retention. 
b. Clinical signs of ventilatory muscle fatigue. 
c. Unacceptable hypoxemia. 
d. Post-extubation difficulties/upper airway obstruction. 
2. Contraindications for BiPAP 
a. Lack of spontaneous respirations 
b. Pre-existing pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum. 
c. Hypotension due to or associated with intravascular volume depletion. 
d. Pre-existing bullous lung disease 
e. Nosebleeds 
f. Decreased level of consciousness  
g. Inability to clear secretions or excessive secretions 
h. Patient with increased risk of vomiting 
 
K. The disposable ventilator circuit will be changed only when visibly soiled, as 
recommended by the Centers for Disease Control Guidelines. 
L. Psychological considerations - The therapist will make every effort to 
communicate with the patient regarding all procedures. 
 
 
VENTILATOR OPERATION: 
 
For specific instructions on the operation of the non -invasive ventilators, please refer to 
the respective operator manuals for the device.  