 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject: Mechanical Ventilation Section: Ventilator 
Date of Origination: October 1980 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision:  April 15, 2024 Serial Code: RC8-01 
Date of Last Review:  April 15, 2024 
 
 PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to outline the procedure for the care of patients receiving 
Mechanical ventilation. 
 
THERAPIST RESPONSIBILITIES AFTER INSTITUTION OF CONTINUOUS 
VENTILATION: 
A. The respiratory therapist will auscultate the patient's chest to verify equal breath 
sounds and proper chest expansion and complete an entire respiratory assessment. 
B. If not already ordered, the therapist may request a blood gas within half an hour of 
instituting continuous ventilation. 
C. The respiratory therapist will explain all procedures to the patient. 
D. The respiratory therapist will document settings and patient assessment in the 
electronic medical record.    
E. The respiratory therapist will set appropriate ventilator alarms as directed by the 
department’s guidelines. These alarms will be assessed every 2 - 4 hours to ensure 
appropriateness of settings.  
F. Ventilator settings will be checked, and patient assessment will be performed and 
documented every 2 to 4 hours in the ICU.  This will be based on patient acuity , 
priority, and workload.  For non -ICU patients, t his will be performed every 4 
hours. 
G. The following parameters should be checked at least once per shift: 
1. Endotracheal tube or tracheostomy tube cuff pressure. 
2. The endotracheal tube placement  will be noted at the centimeter mark at 
the gums or teeth . In the NICU only, the tube placement will be assessed 
at the lip. 
H. The Endotracheal Tube will be rotated to the other side of the mouth or center at a 
frequency of every two to four hours.  
I. The disposable ventilator circuit will be changed only when visibly soiled, as 
recommended by the Centers for Disease Control Guidelines. 
J. The respiratory therapist will ensure that the patient is suctioned when indicated 
per the patient assessment. Suctioning ventilator patients is a shared responsibility 
between nursing and Respiratory Care. 
K. The respiratory therapist will provide adequate humidification of the inspired gas. 
L. Psychological considerations - The respiratory therapist will make every effort to 
communicate with the patient regarding all procedures.  This is especially 
important due to the patient’s inability to speak while mechanically ventilated. 
M.  To discontinue the ventilator, the patient must be extubated or placed on T -
piece/Trach Collar before the ventilator is  turned off . If the patient is to be 
extubated, the patient must have an order for extubation. 
 
 HOME VENTILATOR CONSIDERATIONS: 
 
A. Processes will be followed for continuous ventilation as listed above.  
B. Home ventilator will  be checked by plant services to ensure equipment meets 
electrical compliance. 
C. The nurse will get the patient’s family to sign the “hold harmless and indemnity 
form”. 
D. Subsequent charges will be charted daily by RT  
E. Ventilator settings can be manipulated by RT with MD order.  
 
 
 
VENTILATOR OPERATION: 
For specific instructions on the operation of the ventilators, please refer to the respective 
manuals located in the respiratory therapy department. Only licensed respiratory 
therapist, student respiratory therapist, physicians, nurse practitioners, or physician 
assistants may make changes to the ventilator. The RN caring for the patient may make 
changes to FIO2. 
 
 