 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  High Frequency Oscillatory Ventilation 
 Section: Ventilator 
Date of Origination: September 1994 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision:  November 27, 2023 Serial Code: RC8-08 
Date of Last Review:   November 27, 2023  
          
POLICY: 
The purpose of high-frequency oscillatory ventilation is to effectively ventilate and 
oxygenate the neonate, pediatric or adult patient who is not responding to conventional 
ventilation. The decision to initiate high-frequency oscillatory ventilation will be made by 
the attending physician. 
 
EQUIPMENT: 
A. Sensor Medics 3100A and Sensor Medics 3100B Oscillatory Ventilator with 
appropriate humidification system and blender attached. 
B. Complete ventilator circuit based on type (i.e. 3100A or 3100B). 
 
ASSEMBLY OF THE SENSOR MEDICS 3100A & 3100B: 
A. Connect the patient circuit body to the bellows/water trap assembly. 
B. Snap the three identical cap -diaphragm assemblies onto the three-valve bodies 
located on the patient circuit body. 
C. Attach the assembled patient circuit to the face of the oscillator compartment 
using the four t-handle fasteners. 
D. Attach the three color-coded tubes to their corresponding valve caps. 
1. –Blue-limit valve. 
2. Green - mean airway pressure control valve. 
3. Red - dump valve. 
E. Attach the 1/8 inch pressure tubing to the fitting marked "Airway Pressure." 
F. Insert the humidifier temperature probe into the opening near the patient wye. 
 
INITIAL SET-UP OF THE VENTILATOR: 
A. Obtain authorization either verbally or per written order to initiate high frequency 
oscillatory ventilation. The initial order should include FIO2, frequency, mean 
airway pressure, and delta P settings. 
B. Obstruct the ET tube connection port on the patient circuit using the rubber 
stopper accessory provided. 
C. Calibrate the patient circuit according to manufacturer guidelines. (These 
following steps are located on the side of the ventilator.) 
D. Perform the ventilator performance check labeled OFF PATIENT ONLY 
according to manufacture guidelines. (The steps for this procedure are located on 
top of the ventilator itself.) 
F. Place the patient on the oscillator by removing the stopper from the patient circuit 
and connecting the circuit to the endotracheal tube. G.       Start oscillator by pressing and holding Reset/power button and pressing Start/Stop 
button.  
H. Document all initial settings in the electronic medical record.  
 
OPERATION OF THE HIGH-FREQUENCY OSCILLATOR: 
A. Setting Bias Flow - 
Upon initiation of the oscillator, the Bias Flow will be set at 20 liters per minute. 
This value may be adjusted at the discretion of the respiratory care practitioner. 
B. Piston Centering 
The oscillating piston should remain centered throughout operation. The position 
of the piston can be determined by observing the oscillating light in the piston -
centering display window on the front of the ventilator.  
C. Frequency 
Frequency will be ordered by the physician. 
D. % Inspiratory Time 
Unless requested otherwise by the physician, the % Inspiratory Time will be set at 
33%. This can be accomplished by turning the % I Time kn ob located on the 
control panel. 
E. Mean Airway Pressure 
 Mean Airway Pressure will be ordered by the physician  
F. Oscillatory Pressure Amplitude (Delta P) 
The Delta P will be ordered by the physician. This value represents the pressure 
amplitude of the oscillations. It can be adjusted by turning the Power control on 
the front panel. 
H. For further questions regarding the operation of the oscillator, please refer to the 
manual located in the respiratory therapy department. 
 
ALARM SETTINGS 
The following Alarm Settings will be set at an appropriate: 
A. Max. Mean Airway Pressure should be set no higher than 5 above the set MAP 
B. Min. Mean Airway Pressure should be set no lower than 5 below the set MAP 
 
THERAPIST RESPONSIBILITIES AFTER INSTITUTION OF HIGH-
FREQUENCY OSCILLATORY VENTILATION: 
A. Ventilator checks should be performed every two hours while the oscillator is in 
use. All values should be recorded in the electronic medical record. 
B. During high-frequency oscillation, it is imperative that chest movement be 
monitored closely.   Any sudden change in chest wall movement should be 
evaluated and the patient assessed.   
C. Suctioning should be done only when necessary.  This is generally indicated by a 
sudden decrease in chest wall movement 
 
 
 
CLEANING OF THE OSCILLATOR: 
A. The patient circuit is for one-time use only. B. The body of the ventilator should be  cleaned in accordance with   Manufacture  
recommendations for cleaning. 
 