 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Blood Gas Lab 
Subject:  Detection and correction of reporting 
errors for blood gases  
Date of Origination: May 1983 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision: October 10, 2022 Serial Code: RC9-17 
       Reviewed: October 1, 2024 
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is t o detect clerical errors, significant analytical errors, pre -analytical 
errors, or unusual blood gas results, and provide for a timely correction of such errors. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Avoidance/detection of errors or unusual results 
1. The Testing Therapist is the first line of defense against pre -analytical, analytical, 
or clerical errors. 
  a. Sample Quality 
    In the case of each sample acquired, the therapist is to consider the nature of 
the sample draw, for example: 
   For arterial puncture - 
   - did the syringe fill quickly, indicating probable puncture of an artery  
    versus a vein? 
   - was the sample an "acceptable" sample as per policy. 
   - was the patient on the correct oxygen device? 
   For capillary samples - 
   - did the tube fill without "milking' the site? 
   - was undue exposure to air, bubbles avoided? 
   Questionable samples or samples handled improperly should be excluded  
   for patient evaluation and an acceptable sample acquired. Erroneous samples 
will be rejected at the instrument. 
  b. Correlation with Clinical Situation 
    When analysis has been performed, the results of the analysis should 
be reviewed by th e testing therapist prior to reporting in the EMR.  
Any values that do not appear reasonable considering the patient's 
clinical condition or situation, or the nature of the sampling process, 
should be questioned and confirmed before reporting said values.      
First level confirmation is to rerun the sample on a different analyzer.  
If the original analyzer is found to be at fault, the problem is reported 
to the Supervisor for troubleshooting and corrective action.  Once a decision is made as to the correct result, the sample should be verified 
in the Radiometer analyzer, or the Epoc EDM  and the  patient’s 
electronic medical record. In the Radiometer analyzer the erroneous 
result will be rejected. In EPOC the inaccurate specimen is recorded 
on the Unacceptable Error Log as erroneous. (This log is reviewed by 
the Blood Gas Lab Supervisor or Respiratory Care Supervisor.) In the 
EMR, the correct values will be resulted and verified into the patient’s 
chart.  
  c. Data Transmission Errors 
    Once the values have been accepted as valid, the therapist checks the 
printed or computer displayed results to confirm that the values are 
indeed those reported by the analyzer. Additionally, the accession 
number in the blood gas analyzer must match the one entered in the 
computer system in order for the data to transmit successfully. 
  d. Clerical Errors 
    There is potential for clerical errors if the entry of an incorrect 
Accession number is inputted in the blood gas analyzer or in the  
EMR, requiring the therapist to manually input the values in  the 
EMR. Patient demographic information must be reviewed in the 
EMR after the Accession # is entered. Mis-entry of the Specimen ID 
can be virtually eliminated by using the bar code reader instead of 
keying in the number.  If manual entry is necessary, great care must 
be exercised to avoid transposition of digits . Clerical errors as a 
source of faulty results are quite limited as all reports are sent directly 
from the analyzer to a printer (through an intervening computer 
system).  Only in periods of equipment or computer failure would 
handwritten results occur, and in such times, great care must be 
exercised to assure accuracy in transcription. If a clerical error within 
the laboratory records occur, the error will be corrected in the EMR. 
The correct result will replace the incorrect entry and a system 
comment will be posted below the new result stating the previous 
result value. The EMR will maintain the record of the person, date, 
and time of the corrective entry.   
  e.  Specimen Labels 
   If the lab personnel become aware of a potential error in patient 
   identification or other information on the specimen label, the sample  
   should be discarded immediately and the specimen recollected. 
 2. Computer Restrictions  
  a. The EMR includes Abnormal and Critical Value Ranges and on -
screen flags of these ranges.  Values within the normal range are 
displayed and do not have any letter designations next to them.   
Values that are not within normal limits and those that are critical, will 
have an indicator to alert the clinician of abnormal results.  
   Physicians will be notified for critical values within sixty minutes.  
This affords the physician the opportunity to question or reject the 
results if unreasonable.   b. The EMR will not accept values in the wrong format.  For example, it 
will not accept a pH with two leading digits or no leading digit. 
   c. The EMR has absolute reject ranges beyond which input will not be 
accepted. The reference ranges and units of measure for every test are 
transmitted with the patient result across the interface. 
  d. The EMR will not report results for a test other than the ordered Blood 
Gas test because of its unique specimen number.  Therefore, it will 
not, for example, send Blood Gas results as a CBC order if the wrong 
Specimen ID is entered and it is for a CBC. 
 3. Review of Results 
   The Respiratory Care Blood Gas Lab Supervisor will review blood 
gases analyzed since the last review 2 times per week to detect any 
clerical errors, significant analytical errors, or unusual results.  
Samples analyzed over the weekend and holidays will be reviewed on 
the next working day by the Respiratory Blood Gas Lab Supervisor as 
part of our Quality Management program. 
   Values that seem inconsistent with the recorded patient information, 
or that are in questionable ranges are flagged and investigated.  The 
therapist is contacted for input on quality of sample, patient condition, 
oxygen device, etc., and possible education. On site supervisors are 
available 24 hours a day 7 days a week to address any questions. 
4. Accession number availability/order entry 
When an accession number is unavailable, the sample identifier will 
be the patient’s medical record number.  The respiratory therapist will 
enter the patient’s medical record number into the accession number 
field on the blood gas analyzer. When the accession number becomes 
available, the respiratory therapist will replace the medical record 
number with the accession number in the accession number field. The 
results will be approved and sent to the patient’s EMR.   
5. PI Checks for Instrument/Report Agreement 
Results from the blood gas analyzers are placed in the patients' medical 
record.  The blood gas instruments are integrated with the EMR and 
results are transmitted from the analyzer into the medical record upon 
verification of results. This integration allows for accurate 
transmission of results into the patient’s medical record. 
 
    
 
B. CORRECTION OF DETECTED ERRORS 
1. Every effort is made to assure that errors are detected before being sent to the patient's 
medical record.  If investigation finds that incorrect values have been reported in a 
patient’s medical record, timely correction is completed.  
 
2. The patient's physician and nurse are contacted by the therapist, or the Supervisor, and 
made aware of the erroneous report and the reason for it. This is documented in EPIC 
via a Corrected Results communication log.   
3. If the error is the result of reporting to the wrong patient or some other clerical or 
computer transmission failure, the results in the EMR shall be manually corrected.   
 
4. If the error is found to be due to sample or analytical problems, a new sample shall be 
collected and analyzed, unless directed otherwise by the physician.  When the correct 
values are available, the results in the EMR shall be manually corrected.   
 
5. The corrected results shall be manually entered and verified in the EMR. The EMR 
will retain both the corrected results as well as the erroneous results. 
 