 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Blood Gas Lab 
Subject: Proficiency Survey report for the Blood Gas  
Laboratory  
Date of Origination: January 1982 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision: February 24, 2022 Serial Code: RC9-21 
       Reviewed:  March 20, 2024 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
POLICY: 
To validate quality controls and analyzer function, we perform CAP approved 
proficiency testing three times per year, provided by an external independent agency.  
The proficiency samples are processed on a minimum of one blood gas analyzer used for 
routine blood gas determinations in a manner consistent with the handling of routine 
patient samples, by personnel who routinely test patient samples. 
 
The report of performance on this testing is reviewed by the Director of Respiratory Care 
and the Laboratory Director within 30 days of its return, for evidence of problems.  Any 
unacceptable scores are reviewed for needed corrective action (see below), and such 
action is taken and documented.  If corrective action is indicated, that is so noted.  
Attestation sheets indicating personnel who tested proficiency samples will be retained 
for College of American Pathology review. In the event that CAP instructs the laboratory 
to cease patient testing for an analyte due to repeat unsuccessful proficiency testing, the 
laboratory will not analyze or report values for the analyte in question until approval from 
CAP has been received.   
 
In accordance with Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act of 1988, report of this 
proficiency testing will be sent to the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services.   
 
Interlaboratory communication about proficiency testing samples before the submission 
deadline of data to the proficiency testing provider is strictly prohibited.  Referral or 
acceptance of proficiency specimens to outside laboratories is prohibited.  
 
STEPS TO BE FOLLOWED IF PROFICIENCY TESTING IS UNACCEPTABLE: 
 
A. Complete the PT Exception Investigation Worksheet from the College of American 
Pathologists to evaluate the following possible sources of error:  
1. Clerical 
2. Procedural 
3. Analytical 
4. Specimen Handling 5. PT Material 
B. Review the information from the investigation and document the 
conclusion/summary on the Worksheet. 
C. Develop an action plan and document it on the worksheet. 
D. Review all information and action plan with Laboratory Director for approval prior to 
implementation. 
E. All Proficiency testing challenges that were intended to be graded but were not must 
be evaluated by comparing the results to the reported results in the Participant 
Summary.  This evaluation and comparison will be completed by the Blood Gas Lab 
Supervisor, Manager or Director of Respiratory Care and documented.   
1. If results are acceptable, no investigation is required. Acceptable limits may 
be handwritten by the test results using the Participant Summary  
2. If coded results are unacceptable, investigate and complete the PT Exception 
Investigation Worksheet as described in the above step “A”.  