  
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  Drawing arterial blood from an 
arterial line  Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Origination: September 1987 Signature:  
Date of Last Revision: March 31, 2021 Serial Code: RC9-02 
       Reviewed: October 3, 2023 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBIUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to outline the acquisition of arterial blood drawn from a 
closed arterial line system. 
 
EQUIPMENT 
A. 1-3cc dry heparin syringe with shielded blunt cannula 
B. Bio-Hazard bag 
C. Unsterile gloves 
D.  Patient label or accession label 
E. Alcohol pad 
 
PROCEDURE 
1. Verify order from authorized person. Authorized persons include physicians and mid-
level providers with prescriptive rights. This may be through a written, verbal, 
telephone, electronic or protocol orders. All telephone orders must be entered into the 
patient’s EMR by the therapist and read back to the provider.  Any unclear or 
ambiguous order will be clarified by the ordering physician prior to testing. 
2. Obtain patient label.  The information should include at least patient name and medical 
record number. 
3. Verify the identity of the patient from whom the sample is to be drawn by utilizing the 
two or three (for pediatric patient) ID process. 
4. Utilize universal precautions. 
5. If more than one line present, trace arterial line to verify. 
6. Pull back on waste syringe until sufficient amount has been withdrawn for proper 
sample analysis.  
7. Close the stopcock to the “waste” blood.  
8. Scrub the hub with an alcohol wipe for 30 seconds.  Ensure top of the hub as well as 
the sides of hub are scrubbed with an alcohol pad closest to the patient.  
9. Obtain blood from the safe-set port and withdraw 0.2cc – 1.5cc of blood, the amount 
dependent on patient size.  
10. Remove the syringe from the safe-set port and place air vent cap on syringe. Evacuate 
air bubbles. Attach patient label. 11. Open the stopcock and inject the “waste” blood back into the patient. Care must be 
taken not to inject any air bubbles.  Ensure that the waste syringe clicks into place.  
12. Flush the arterial line with flush solution until the line is clear. 
13. Verify the waveform returns on the patient’s monitor.  If the waveform is not present 
or any problems occur with the line, contact the patient’s nurse immediately. 
14. Place label on the sample syringe, place the sample in the Bio -Hazard bag, remove 
gloves and transport to the blood gas lab. 
. 