 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Volume 4 
Subject:  Quality Control for EPOC Analyzer Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Origination: April 1, 2012 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision:January 31, 2024 Serial Code: RC9-22A 
                 Reviewed: January 31, 2024 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to assure reliable performance of blood gas instruments by 
application of defined QC Limits. 
       
EQUIPMENT: 
A. epoc Reader and epoc Host 
B. Epoc Test Cards 
 C. Manual record logs  
 D. RALS 
 
POLICY:    
A. The epoc Reader comes equipped with automated internal quality control procedures 
which are performed electronically during the initialization of the epoc Reader when 
connecting with an epoc Host and immediately before testing process each time a Test is 
run.  Such tests are automated, so no User procedures are required.  
B. External quality controls, of three levels, will be run once monthly. These control 
specimens will be tested in the same manner and by the same personnel as patient 
samples are tested. 
C. QC Limits 
1. QC ranges are established by the manufacturer. Target ranges for external QC will be 
retrieved from the Siemen’s website at https://www.siemens-healthineers.com and the 
user will verify that all QC results were within the target range.  
2. Prior to a new analyzer being placed in service and in accordance with our 
IQCP plan, three levels of QC will be ran for 31 consecutive days. QC will be 
reviewed and analyzed to determine precision of the instrument. 
3. If a QC fails, the same QC will be reran with a new Test Card.  In the event that the 
QC fails a second time, then the supervisor will contact the Siemens Technical 
Support. The EPOC analyzer will be removed from service until the problem has 
been corrected.  The Epoc RALS System automatically records the controls, and the 
Blood Gas Lab Supervisor will document on each QC that it passed or failed the QC. 
If more maintenance is needed it will be documented in the service report Section of 
the CAP binder or in the Epoc RALS System in the Comments Section of the failed 
samples. 4. The departmental Quality Committee periodically assesses the above procedure for 
appropriateness.  
   