 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center  
Subject:  Quality Control Program Definition and 
Evaluation Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Origination: April 1995 Signature:  
Date of Last Revision: March 20, 2024 Serial Code: RC9-23 
       Reviewed:  March 20, 2024 
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to define the Blood Gas Laboratory Quality Control 
Program, and to plan for its periodic evaluation. 
 
POLICY: 
A. The Quality Control Program has the following components: 
1. Per-shift Quality Control procedures, as defined in the policy and procedure 
manual RC9-22.  
2. External Quality control procedures, performed monthly, per policy and 
procedure manual RC9-22. 
3. CAP Proficiency Testing program, performed three times annually in accord 
with CLIA requirements, per policy and procedure manual RC9-21. 
4. Manufacturer's CVM (Calibration Verification Materials) program to assure 
linearity of performance performed at least every six-months, per the policy 
and procedure manual RC9-10. 
B. Data from the above components are reviewed monthly and recorded electronically in the 
Aqure System by the Director of Respiratory Care or the designee or by the Laboratory 
Director. 
C. All policies are reviewed biennially, including the components of the QC program 
described above. 
D. All indicators will be monitored as directed by regulatory management in accordance 
with the Joint Commission, CLIA, and CAP requirements. 
E.   The department will develop and adjust its own indicators in addition to the above as 
deemed necessary by the Blood Gas Lab Supervisor and approved by the Director of 
Respiratory Care.   
F. In blood gas sampling, pre-analytical stability of patient specimens is a limiting 
factor.  CVM has the same response as fresh human samples for the 
instruments/methods involved and is therefore used for comparability studies.  
Comparability of instruments is performed by use of quality controls performed 
on the same instrument platform with control materials of same manufacturer and lot number.  Comparability studies determine all analyzer results are within 
comparable range. 