 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Volume 4 
Subject:  Standardization and Calibration  
                of Thermometers Signature: 
Date of Origination: June 25, 2013 Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Last Revision: October 1, 2024 Serial Code: RC9-33 
Date of Last Review: October 1, 2024  
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure that thermometers are accurate and verified by calibration. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
STANDARDIZATION AND CALIBRATION OF THERMOMETERS 
 
I.  PRINCIPLE 
 
A. Thermometers used for measurement of refrigerator temperature and room 
temperature should be calibrated and standardized to prevent inaccurate indication of 
temperatures. 
B. Each thermometer should be calibrated before initial use unless calibrated by the 
manufacturer and annually thereafter or if there is any reason to suspect change or 
damage. 
C. Liquid-in-Glass Laboratory thermometers should be calibrated and standardized at a 
temperature close to that required by the instrument for which they will be used. 
 
II. MATERIALS 
 
A. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) –certified thermometer or 
thermometer with NIST-traceable calibration certificate. 
B. NIST Thermometer Calibration Log 
C. NIST Certified Hygro-Thermometer 
 
III. PROCEDURE- LIQUID IN GLASS THERMOMETERS 
  
A. Annually, a NIST certified liquid-in-glass thermometer will be borrowed from the 
main lab. The liquid-in-glass thermometer will be used to verify the room 
thermometer and refrigerator thermometer in each blood gas lab. 
a. The liquid-in-glass thermometer will be placed into the refrigerator for ten 
minutes. The temperature of both thermometers will be documented and 
should be within 10C of each other. 
b. The liquid-in-glass thermometer will be placed on the counter next to the room 
thermometer for ten minutes. The temperature of both thermometers will be 
documented and should be within 10C of each other. B. The following must be documented in the NIST Thermometer Calibration Log: 
a. date of testing 
b. thermometer location (refrigerator/room) 
c. the temperature of both thermometers  
d. initials of person conducting test 
 
IV.     PROCEDURE – HYGROMETER THERMOMETER 
 
A. Annually the NIST certified hygro-thermometer will be compared to the room digital 
hygrometer thermometer. This is done by comparing both thermometers side-by-side 
at room temperature. The humidity will be within 10% of each other. If the humidity is 
not within range, the room digital thermometer will be replaced.  
B. The following must be documented in the NIST Thermometer Calibration Log: 
a. date of testing 
b. thermometer location  
c. the humidity of both thermometers  
d. initials of person conducting test 
 
V. RESULTS 
 
A result is acceptable if the reading on a thermometer agrees with the NIST 
thermometer within 10C for all thermometers and within 10% humidity for all 
hygrometers. If the expected result is not achieved, the thermometer should be 
returned to the distributor (if newly purchased), or discarded. 
 
NOTE: Our Lady of the Lake Ascension purchases a new NIST-certified Hygro-
Thermometer annually. 