Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Subject:  Calibration of the ABL 90 Flex Blood Gas Analyzer 
Date of Origination: October 1995 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision: October 30, 2020 Serial Code: RC9-09 
Date of Last Review:  October 1, 2024 
Purpose 
To properly ready the ABL 90 Flex equipment in order to be assured correct values are 
obtained. 
 
Equipment 
A. ABL 90 Flex Blood Gas Analyzer 
B. Sensor Cassette 
C. Solution Pack 
 
Calibrations 
Calibration material is labeled for content and calibration values by the manufacturer.  
The date in which calibration materials are placed in service is tracked through Aqure 
with expiration dates monitored by the ABL 90 Flex analyzer.  The system performs 
calibrations automatically at prescribed intervals and with each sample. No operator 
action is necessary for routine calibration; operators can manually place a machine in 
calibration if needed.  Routine calibration of the sensors occurs as follows: 
 
 
A. 1-Point calibrations  
The analyzer calibrates most parameters automatically. Only the recommended 
sensitivity calibration of the oximetry parameters is manual. The calibration 
adjusts the optical system of the analyzer to make sure that the results of the 
oximetry parameters are accurate and reliable. This tHB calibration is performed 
every three months. 
  
B. Errors in calibration 
If the system detects a problem for a parameter, the system repeats the calibration 
twice. If the calibrations are not successful, the system disables the parameter. A 
parameter will reactivate automatically once it has completed a successful 
calibration.  
 
C. Storing calibrations in Aqure 
Calibration data is automatically sent and stored in the Aqure data management 
system and reviewed by management at weekly and monthly intervals. 
 
D. Recalibration will be performed by lab personnel in the event that QC fails to 
meet established criteria, after major maintenance/service, or when it is 
recommended by the manufacturer. 
 