 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center  
Subject: Test methods and performance of EPOC BGEM Blood Gas Analyzers    
Date of Origination: April 1, 2012 Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Last Revision: February 18, 2021 Signature: 
Date of Last Review: January 31, 2024 
 Serial Code: RC9-31A 
         
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define the methodologies and performance specifications of the epoc BGEM Blood 
Gas Analyzers and how the communications of changes in these methodologies are 
provided to physicians. 
 
Operating Principles 
The epoc Reader is a simple to use raw-signal acquisition peripheral.  The Reader and 
Host mobile computer together compose all of the subsystems generally found in a 
traditional blood analyzer that operates on single use sensors and reagents.  
The Reader has a card slot for accepting a Test Card, and an Electro-Mechanical 
Actuation Assembly for engaging the Test Card after it is inserted into the Card Slot.  
When the Internal Motor Drive is activated , a Push Pin in the Reader breaks the Valve in 
the Test Card and drives Plungers causing the Calibration Fluid to flow across the Sensor 
Module.  The reader includes circuits for amplifying, digitizing and converting the raw 
sensor signals to a wireless transmittable Bluetooth format.   
 
There are three (3) types of sensor measurements used in epoc Test Card – potentiometric, 
amperometric and conductometric.  
In potentiometry, (for sodium, potassium, ionized calcium, pH and pCO2) the open circuit 
potential of a membrane coated sensor electrode (which is responsive to the concentration 
of the analyte) is measured versus a reference electrode (which is approximately non -
responsive). The measurement is performed by a high input i mpedance operational 
amplifier in the epoc Reader connected to each of the electrode pairs comprising sensor 
electrode and reference electrode.  
The potential difference, V, between the electrode pair follows the modified Nernst 
equation (Nicolsky equation) which is) where C is the concentration of the analyte being 
measured and s, the slope of the electrode response, is about 60mV per decade 
concentration change for a univalent analyte (pH, K, Na, pCO2) and about 30mV per 
decade for divalent (iCa). V0 is a constant. The term 
  = 
 KiCi models the combined effects of interferents of type i at concentration Ci, with Ki being the interference 
coefficient. When the measurement includes a calibration, the electrodes first being 
immersed in a calibration fluid with concentration, Ccal, then in the sample fluid with 
unknown concentration, Csmpl, t he calibrated sensor signal is the potential difference in 
sample and the calibrator given by the equation reference in 11.5.1 of the epoc System 
Manual. 
In amperometry (for pO2 and Glucose) the current, i, flowing through a membrane-coated 
amperometric indicator electrode to the ground electrode is measured, when the indicator 
electrode is poised at a fixed potential versus the reference electrode. In the amperometric 
measurement of dissolved oxygen, the electrode selectively reduces the analyte species that 
diffuses through the membrane covering the electrode. In the amperometric measurement 
of glucose, the analyte diffuses through the top membrane and is enzymatically 
transformed into hydrogen peroxide, that is further reduced at a small negative potential 
using a red-ox mediated horseradish peroxidase, HRP, catalyzed reaction. 
The design of each sensor is optimized for measurement of the substance of interest, as 
described in the following table: 
 
Sensor  
pH The pH sensor is comprised of a plasticized PVC membrane ion selective 
electrode containing the pH selective ionophore tridodecylamine.  
pCO2 
The pCO2 sensor is a modified Severighaus electrode comprising a gold 
electrode surface coated with an internal layer containing quinhydrone, 
sodium bicarbonate and carbonic anhydrase catalyst, and an outer, 
heterogeneous carbon dioxide permeable membrane.  
pO2 The pO2 sensor is a modified Clarke electrode comprising a gold cathode 
surface coated with a heterogeneous oxygen permeable membrane.  
Glucose 
The Glucose sensor is a hydrogen peroxide electrode comprising a gold 
cathode surface coated with an internal layer containing glucose oxidase, 
peroxidase (HRP) and a redox mediator (diammonium salt) and an outer, 
heterogeneous oxygen permeable membrane.  
Reference 
The reference electrode is a salt bridge type structure with a redox 
couple at the electrode surface coated by a heterogeneous water vapor 
permeable salt bridge electrolyte containing membrane. 
Na+ 
The sodium sensor is comprised of a plasticized PVC membrane ion 
selective electrode containing the sodium selective salt sodium 
methylmonensin.  
K+ 
The potassium sensor is comprised of a plasticized PVC membrane ion 
selective electrode containing the potassium selective ionophore 
valinomycin.  
Ca++ 
The ionized calcium sensor is comprised of a plasticized PVC membrane 
ion selective electrode containing the ionized calcium selective salt 
calcium tetra methyl butyl phenyl phosphate.   
          
For additional information regarding operating principles refer to the epoc System 
Manual 11-1 