 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Blood Gas Lab 
Subject:  Blood Gas Machine Maintenance POC Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Origination: April 1, 2012 Signature:  
Date of Last Revision:January 31, 2024 Serial Code: RC9-08A 
                   Reviewed: January 31, 2024 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure that the required maintenance for the analyzer is completed and thus provide 
proper operation of the analyzer.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Daily, weekly, monthly and semiannual maintenance will be performed in 
accordance with Policy RC9 -08. External Quality Controls  will be performed 
monthly in accordance with RC9-22A. 
 
B. All Monthly, Weekly, Semiannual and Yearly maintenance will be recorded in the 
analyzer’s log sheets and in the Blood Gas Lab’s Maintenance binder.  A record of 
date when placed in service and serial numbers for all cartridges are maintained and 
tracked in the RALS.  All repairs and routine service procedures are maintained for 
each instrument in the Blood Gas Lab’s Maintenance binder.  
 
C. "As Required Procedures" 
1. Temperature corrections.  
If refrigerator or ambient temperature is outside the acceptable range as 
defined by manufacturer for temperature dependent equipment and 
environments, the following steps must be taken. Acceptable ranges are 
specified on all logs.  
a. Adjust the thermostat to correct the temperature problem. While 
waiting for the temperature to come in range, perform step “b”. 
b. For refrigerator, transfer cartridges to a refrigerator that is functioning 
properly. For room temperature, the analyzer will be placed “out of 
use” and all other controls or cartridges will be transferred to a lab 
that is in compliance with manufacturer temperature 
recommendations.  
c. Notify Plant Services for inspection and/or repair of faulty unit if 
reset of the thermostat does not correct the problem. 
d. Note and initial occurrence and corrective measure taken in the 
temperature log. 2. Before each sample is analyzed, a new test card will be inserted and an 
electronic QC and calibration is done.  
3. For instrument set up, refer to the operator’s manual.  If the instrument 
requires a shut down refer to operators manual. The operator’s manual is 
readily available at each instrument. 
4. Record the "as required" maintenance in the Maintenance Checklist. 
 
D.  Service and repair of instruments 
 Performance of instruments is verified after repair to ensure they run according to 
 expectations. This will be validated by running and passing three levels of quality 
 control material. This will be documented in the electronic management system. 
 
E. Laboratory Records will be retained for a minimum of two years.  Should the lab  
 cease operation all records will be maintained for a minimum of two years. 
 