   
 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Volume 4 
Subject:  Computer Downtime Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Origination:  April 1, 2012 Signature:  
Date of Last Revision:January 31, 2024 Serial Code: RC9-14A 
       Reviewed: January 31, 2024 
FORMULATED BY 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to delineate the procedures to be followed when the computer 
system associated with blood gas reporting is down. 
 
Application 
All data that is acquired by EMR originates from the analyzer and is sent to the Epoc Data 
Management System (EDM)  and then manually entered and verified in  the EMR.  The 
RALS maintains a complete historical record of all samples, quality controls and 
calibrations.  A back up of all the RALS files is maintained at the Information Systems 
Mainframe. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
During Downtime 
If a Code Purple has not been activated, then as soon as the department becomes aware of 
a problem with the computer system, the shift supervisor should call the HELP (4357) desk 
and verify that there is a problem with the EMR. If the HELP desk verifies that the EMR  
is down, the following procedures should be followed. 
 
The following general guidelines apply to downtimes: 
A. Whenever possible, the order will be entered into the EMR as soon as possible to 
allow as close to normal resulting of  blood gases as possible. Blood gases can be 
run in any of the labs. 
B. When an order has been entered into the EMR, a 13-digit Accession # is the patient 
identifier to be used. 
C. When it is not possible to enter an order into the EMR, The patient’s medical record 
number will be used as the patient ID.  Preprinted patient labels will be affixed to 
the Temporary Blood Gas Reports. 
1. Temporary Blood Gas Reports will be maintained in the Blood Gas lab s 
until all data has been entered into the EMR  and all results have been 
reviewed by a supervisor to ensure there are no transcription errors.   These 
reports will be kept on file for 2 years. 
2. When a blood gas order is received, the therapist should obtain 3 patient 
labels before the sample is collected.    
3. When the sample has been collected, it should immediately be labeled and 
transported to the blood gas lab.  After the sample has been placed in the 
analyzer, the  patient’s medical record number will be entered into the 
analyzer as the patient ID. The therapist will select the appropriate report 
layout corresponding with the test ordered. All other sample information 
should be completed in the analyzer at this time. Print two copies of the 
blood gas result from the analyzer’s printer. Place a pati ent label on both 
copies of the patient’s results.   
 4. The results will be held in the RALS until downtime recovery. Attach a 
copy of the patient’s results to a Temporary Blood Gas Report form. Place 
one report in the patient’s chart. Place the other report in the downtime 
folder in the Blood Gas Lab. 
5. Results MUST have at least two forms of ID on them, such as name and 
medical record number.  
 
Recovering from Downtime 
Some general guidelines for operations regarding the processes in recovering from 
downtime are as follows: 
A. If the sample already has an accession number. 
 1. Result those gases that already have valid accession numbers but were not 
verified in the EMR. Retrieve each specific gas by recalling the patient data on 
the specific machine where the gas was run. Collect the specimen in the EMR 
at the time it was performed. Receive the specimen in the EMR. Log-in at the 
time it was performed and result to accession result entry, as it would normally 
be done. 
B. If the patient’s medical record number was used for the accession number during the   
 downtime: 
1. Crosscheck all orders against the Temporary Blood Gas Report. The date of 
cross check and the initials of the person performing the crosscheck should 
be placed on the report. 
2. Order and log-in the test(s), which the patient’s medical record was used. It 
is CRITICAL that the test is ordered at the approximate time it was run (this 
time should be prior to the run time). Be sure to print barcode in area where 
the ordering is done. 
3. Retrieve each specific gas by recalling the patient data corresponding to the 
assigned medical record number on the specific machine where that gas was 
ran. Edit the patient data to reflect the new valid accession number which 
was received when placing the order. 
4. Result to accession result entry as it would normally be done. 
 5.      The Supervisor or Charge Therapist will be responsible for proper resulting 
       of all downtime blood gas results. The Supervisor or Charge Therapist will  
         be responsible for obtaining all Temporary Blood Gas Reports and  
         submitting them to the Blood Gas Lab Supervisor. 
 6.      The blood gas result that was placed in the patients chart will be scanned by 
             Blood Gas Supervisor.  
    
 
Documentation of Maintenance, Calibrations, QC during Downtime 
All documentation of calibration and QC will be maintained on the individual blood 
gas analyzers. Maintenance will continue to be manually recorded as normal. QC 
and calibration data will transmit to  RALS when downtime is completed. In the 
event of  RALS downtime the data automatically transmits from the analyzer when  
RALS comes back on line.  Calibration data from the blood gas analyzers will be 
resent to RLAS after downtime. (It will be important to record the start and stop 
times of the downtime to retrieve this information.) 