Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Blood Gas Lab 
Subject:  Blood Gas Lab Safety Section:  
Date of Last Review: August 24, 2022 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision: August 24, 2022 Serial Code: RC9-07 
        
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to delineate the safety practices to be followed in the Blood 
Gas Laboratory to assure employee and patient safety. 
 
POLICY: 
A. The general rules for safety for the Blood Gas Laboratory are subsumed in those 
described for the entire Respiratory Care Department. 
B. Hazardous conditions or practices shall be reported to the Blood Gas Lab 
Supervisor and/or appropriate personnel.  All incidents and accidents shall be 
reported in the Safety Event Report System. Refer to OrgOps/GN/019 for 
instruction. Blood Gas Laboratory accidents, incidents, or injuries to patients, 
visitors, or staff are recorded on a Safety Event Report System in accord with 
hospital policy. A report of each incident is forwarded to the Director of 
Respiratory Care for review and determination of any necessary corrective action. 
C. The Laboratory complies with the FDA Medical Device Reporting Requirements 
in accordance with the hospital’s Safety Event Reporting Policy.  Any laboratory 
device-related adverse patient event, which has or may have caused or contributed 
to a patient death or serious patient injury, must be reported as soon as medical 
personnel become aware of the event.  A “Safety Event Report” is completed and 
immediately sent to Risk Management, who files the report with the FDA.  Any 
piece of laboratory equipment or instrument hardware, reagents, specimen 
collection device, or other apparatus that was involved in the event must be 
removed from use and preserved.  Part numbers, lot numbers, expiration dates, 
and manufacturer information must all be recorded. Laboratory personnel are 
educated through mandatory annual hospital safety education.  Employees are 
also made aware of the reporting requirements through Department Orientation, 
departmental staff meetings.     
D. No flammable or combustible liquids are stored in the Blood Gas Laboratory in 
any quantity greater than 2 pints.  
E. The Department Supervisors, Manager, Blood Gas Lab Supervisor and Director 
of Respiratory Care meet regularly.  A variety of issues, including safety topics, 
are discussed at these meetings.   
F. The refrigerator in the Blood Gas laboratory is intended to hold measurement and 
quality control cartridges, and calibration verification material.  They are not intended for food, medication, or flammable liquids, and are so labeled.  None of 
them are explosion proof and are so labeled. 
G. Gloves are to be worn when handling blood or blood-based products in the Blood 
Gas Laboratory. 
H. Smoking is prohibited within the entire facility.  Eating, drinking, applying make-
up or lip balm or lipstick, or the handling of contact lenses, and other activities 
which might reasonably create accidental exposure of mucous membranes to 
blood or body fluids or hazardous materials are prohibited in the Blood Gas 
laboratories.  Blood Gas Laboratory personnel do not perform pipetting. 
I. Blood contaminated items are discarded in biohazard containers which do not 
leak and have solid, tight-fitting covers that are applied before transport from the 
laboratory work area. They are collected and disposed of by Housekeeping in 
accord with applicable policies, regulations, and laws.  Non-contaminated items 
are disposed of in normal trash containers, which are serviced by Housekeeping.  
The hospital and the department have an ongoing program to reduce the volume 
of biohazard waste by educating the staff as to the proper designation of 
biohazard and non-biohazard waste. 
J. Needles are not purposely bent, cut, or broken for purposes of transport of an 
arterial sample. 
K. Needles and syringes are disposed of in closed puncture resistant "sharps" boxes. 
Used syringes and needles are not retrieved from inside the sharps boxes. 
L. Blood from the waste containers on the Blood Gas instruments is discarded into 
biohazard containers. 
M. Work surfaces are cleaned with a hospital-approved disinfectant at least daily.  
Equipment exteriors and sample input ports are cleaned in accord with 
manufacturer recommendations. 
N. All fixed electrical receptacles are checked at least annually for polarity and 
ground integrity.  These checks are performed by Plant Services, who maintain 
the records of such checks. 
O. All laboratory instruments and appliances are checked at least annually for 
electrical leakage.  Records of the checks are maintained by Plant Services, who 
performs them. 
P. Should an individual have irritant materials splashed into the eyes, eye washes are 
available in all blood gas labs in the facility as free-flowing, fresh, clean tap 
water, as tested weekly.  Information for contacting CAP can be found on the 
official CAP sign, which is posted in all laboratories. 
Q. None of the reagents or substances used in the Blood Gas laboratories is corrosive 
or irritants.  Except for small quantities of alcohol for cleaning, no flammable or 
combustible liquids are used in the Blood Gas laboratories.  No carcinogenic 
materials are used in the laboratories. 
R.         Staff is highly encouraged to communicate any concerns or complaints with 
respect to the quality of patient testing and safety.  This may be done by 
communicating with management through the safety event reporting system or 
directly to CAP.  Information for contacting CAP is posted in all laboratories. 
S.        Patient complaints are handled through Manager Feedback with oversight at the 
organizational level. T.  The noise in the laboratory will be monitored, if there is an indication of 
excessive noise levels, (for example, people must shout to be heard) or in the 
event of any complaint, the Blood Gas Lab Supervisor will conduct a noise level 
test with a sound level meter to measure the sound levels. This will be 
documented on the sound study form and kept in the maintenance binder. If sound 
levels equal or exceed an 8-hour time-weighted average of 85 decibels, the 
laboratory will implement a corrective action plan.  The facility may be required 
to supply ear plugs or install sound barriers if available. 