 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Volume 4 
Subject:   Respiratory Staff to Perform Arterial/Capillary 
 Punctures                           Section: Blood Gas Lab  
Date of Origination: October 1981 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision: October 3, 2023 Serial Code: RC9-27 
Date of Last Review:  October 3, 2023 
          
DISTRIBUTION: 
Respiratory Care 
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide clear guidelines as to the protocol to be followed in authorizing a non-physician 
respiratory practitioner to perform arterial punctures and capillary sampling. 
 
POLICY: 
 
To be authorized to perform arterial puncture and capillary sampling, an employee must: 
 
1. Observe successful punctures by an individual already authorized to 
perform arterial punctures and capillary sampling in this facility. 
2. Be able to verbally present an understanding of the risks and hazards 
associated with arterial puncture and capillary sampling; a knowledge of the 
steps to take in the event of an adverse response to arterial puncture; a 
knowledge of the basic anatomy of the puncture sites; the correct technique 
including Allen’s Test, angle of puncture, aseptic technique, post -puncture 
site evaluation. 
3. Successfully perform, under direct observation, this procedure as many 
times necessary until the supervisor or preceptor feels that the team member 
is competent with arterial punctures and capillary sampling.  
4. The Blood Gas Supervisor or Technical Consultants  will document 
completion of this process, retaining this documentation in the Respiratory 
Department.   
 
This process is a part of the orientation process for the employee to the department.  Once 
this process is completed,  and the team member has demonstrated competency for radial 
brachial, and capillary punctures, the individual may perform capillary, radial, and brachial 
punctures routinely without additional supervision, with the first option being radial.  The 
number of return demonstrations required will be determined on a case -by-case basis, 
considering puncture skills and techniques at other sites, and general adeptness at 
performing the procedure.   This process is also part of the annual competencies for the 
Respiratory Department. 