 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center  
Subject: Individualized Quality Control Plan Section:  Blood Gas 
Date of Origination: September 28, 2017 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: February 24, 2022 Serial Code: RC9-36 
Date of Last Review: March 25, 2024   
 
 
PURPOSE 
To define the process for developing an Individualized Quality control Plan (IQCP) for 
applicable test systems used by Our Lady of the Lake Blood Gas Laboratories.  
 
Definition 
IQCP is comprised of three parts, a Risk Assessment, a Quality Control Plan, and a 
Quality Assessment 
• The Risk Assessment is the identification and evaluation of potential failures and 
errors in a testing process. 
• The Quality Control Plan is a laboratory’s standard operating procedure that 
describes the practices, resources, and procedures to control the quality of a 
particular test process.  
• The Quality Assessment is the laboratory’s policy for the ongoing monitoring of 
the effectiveness of the IQCP. 
IQCP also broadens the definition of Quality Control from just running controls to ALL 
of the activities laboratories do to control errors throughout the testing process.  
 
POLICY 
In response to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) approved Quality 
Control option, Individualized Quality Control Plan (IQCP), will be used in the 
laboratory to develop and customize a Quality Control procedures specific to the 
applicable instruments, EPOC BGEM, as in accordance with regulatory standards.  
The task of developing the IQCP may be performed by the Laboratory Director or 
delegated to other qualified personnel. If delegated, the Laboratory Director remains 
ultimately responsible for the proper development and implementation of each IQCP. The 
Laboratory Director must approve and sign each IQCP before it is implemented.  
 
Quality Control Plan Elements 
The individualized quality control plan must define all aspects monitored based on the 
potential errors identified during the risk assessment, including the following parameters 
as applicable: 
• The number, type (external and internal quality control systems), and frequency 
of quality control 
• Criteria for acceptable performance 
• Monitoring of the testing environment and reagents 
• Specimen quality 
• Instrument calibration, maintenance, and function checks • Training and competency of testing personnel 
• Provisions for multiple identical devices and variation for uses covered under an 
IQCP 
 
Procedure 
Risk Assessment (RA) Overview:  
Using the Fishbone Diagram, spreadsheet and applicable Policies and Procedures, we 
reviewed processes from test order through result reporting, evaluating potential errors 
for all three phases of testing (pre-analytical, analytical, and post-analytical).  
The identified risks were compared with risk mitigation features for the test system. See 
spreadsheet containing the Chart to Evaluate Risk for the documentation of identified 
risks and risk mitigation. 
 
QCP and Policy and Procedure (P&P) Updates and Revisions Based on RA 
Reinforcement of the importance of specimen collection/handling, patient/sample 
identification and bar-coding was provided in the remedial training provided to transport 
team respiratory therapist and nurses.  Reassessment of the security levels and lock-outs 
in use was performed and found to be adequate to mitigate the problem of untrained users 
accessing the analyzers. This helped to further mitigate the pre-analytical risks identified 
in the RA to an acceptable level.  
The test system risk-mitigation features and the manufacturer’s QC requirements meet or 
exceed our current regulatory requirements. The system is designed to only allow testing 
within acceptable quality performance ranges.  Manufacturer’s requirements are for 
liquid QC to be analyzed at a minimum of every 30 days.  The frequency and scope of 
analytical QC will include:  
• Liquid QC:  Eurotrol GAS-ISE Metabolite control – Levels 1, 2 and 3 for blood 
gas, Na, K, Ca and Glu control – Level 1, 2 and 3 analyzed monthly.   
• Electronic QC:  Performed automatically on each analyzer immediately before 
testing process each time a test is run.  Failures in the electronic QC disable the 
analyzer 
• Ongoing: Siemens epoc includes risk mitigation features, such as: System Checks, 
Sensor Checks, Temperature Checks, Internal Sample Detection Controls and 
Electronic QC. These checks are performed automatically and continuously 
throughout the use-life of the epoc analyzer. Sample-specific errors are also 
automatically detected and documented in the EDM.   
• Electronic QC is performed immediately before the testing process each time a 
test is run.  It is an automated process. These characteristics meet or exceed our 
regulatory requirements.  
 
 
 
 
 QA Determinations 
Monitoring of the new IQCP will include the following activities:  
• Monthly review of Critical values, Read back comments, Cancelled results and 
clerical errors. 
• Tracking of operators who have excessive pre-analytical errors, i.e. sample 
delivery, insufficient sample.  
• Environmental conditions per Policy and Procedure updates  
• Occurrence reports or applicable issues will be thoroughly investigated by the 
IQCP  
• Calibration Verification Products will be analyzed per regulatory specifications  
• Analyzer correlations will be analyzed per regulatory specifications. 
IQCP modifications will be made with subsequent staff, when deemed necessary. 
 
The Laboratory Director approved this process, the appropriate staff was educated on 
these changes and the plan was implemented. This plan will be reapproved at least 
annually by the Laboratory Director. 
 
 
 
 
 