 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Volume 4 
Subject:  Computer Downtime Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Origination: June 1993 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision: November 13, 2020 Serial Code: RC9-14 
       Reviewed: October 1, 2024 
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to delineate the procedures to be followed when the computer system 
associated with blood gas reporting is down. 
 
Application 
The primary computer system that provides information to be obtained from our blood gas 
analyzers and then transmits this information into the EMR. All data that is acquired by the EMR 
originates from the analyzer and is sent to Aqure and then loaded into the EMR. Aqure maintains 
a complete historical record of all samples, quality controls and calibrations.  A back up of all 
Aqure files is maintained at the Information Systems Mainframe. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
During Downtime 
If a Code Purple has not been activated, then as soon as the department becomes aware of a 
problem with the computer system, the shift supervisor should call the HELP (4357) desk and 
verify that there is a problem with EMR. If the HELP desk verifies that EMR is down, the 
following procedures should be followed. 
 
The following general guidelines apply to downtimes: 
A. Whenever possible, the order will be entered into the EMR as soon as possible to allow as 
close to normal resulting of blood gases as possible. Blood gases can be run in any of the 
labs. 
B. When an order has been entered into the  EMR, a 13-digit Accession # is the sample 
identifier to be used. 
C. When it is not possible to enter an order into the EMR, The patient’s medical record number 
will be used as the accession number.  Preprinted patient labels will be affixed to the 
Temporary Blood Gas Reports. 
1. Temporary Blood Gas Reports will be maintained in the Blood Gas lab s until all 
data has been entered into the EMR  and all results have been reviewed by a 
supervisor to ensure there are no transcription errors.   These reports will be kept 
on file for 2 years. 2. When a blood gas order is received, the therapist should obtain 3 patient labels 
before the sample is collected. 
3. When the sample has been collected, it should immediately be labeled and 
transported to the blood gas lab. After the sample has been placed in the analyzer, 
the accession number or patient’s medical record number will be entered into the 
analyzer as the accession number. The therapist will select the appropriate report 
layout corresponding with the test ordered. All other sample information should be 
completed in the analyzer at this time. Print two copies of the blood gas result from 
the analyzer’s printer. Place a patient label on both copies of the patient’s results.   
 4. The results will be held in the blood gas machine until downtime recovery. Attach 
a copy of the patient’s results to a Temporary Blood Gas Report form. Place one 
report in the patient’s chart. Place the other report in the downtime folder in the 
Blood Gas Lab. 
5. Results MUST have at least two forms of ID o n them, such as name and medical 
record number.  
  
Recovering from Downtime 
Some general guidelines for operations regarding the processes in recovering from downtime are 
as follows: 
A. If the sample already has an accession number 
1. Result those blood gases that already have valid accession numbers but were not 
verified in the EMR. Retrieve each specific blood gas result by recalling the patient’s 
data on the specific analyzer where the blood gas was analyzed. Collect the specimen 
in the EMR at the time it was performed. Receive the specimen in the EMR. On the 
analyzer approve the patient result and send to the EMR. Document all other 
information in the EMR. Document a Comm Log for a critical result at the actual time 
of notification. Complete and verify the result as it would normally be done. 
B. If the patient’s medical record number was used for the accession number during the 
downtime. 
 1. Place the appropriate order in the EMR and print the accession label. 
 2. Collect the specimen in the EMR at the time it was performed . Receive the 
specimen in the EMR. 
 3. Retrieve the specimen on the blood gas analyzer where the test was performed. Delete 
the medical record number as the accession number and scan the accession label. 
Verify patient information is correct. The therapist will verify the appropriate report  
layout corresponding to the test ordered. 
 4. Approve the patient’s results and send to the EMR. Document all other sample 
information in the EMR. Document a Comm Log for a critical result at the actual time 
of notification. Complete and verify the result as it would normally be done. 
 5. The Supervisor or Charge Therapist will be responsible for proper resulting of all 
downtime blood gas results. The Supervisor or Charge Therapist will be responsible 
for obtaining all Temporary Blood Gas Reports and submitting them to the Blood Gas 
Lab Supervisor. 
 6.  The blood gas result that was placed in the patients chart will be scanned by Health 
Information Management.  
  
 
Documentation of Maintenance, Calibrations, QC during Downtime 
All documentation of calibration and QC will be maintained on the individual blood gas 
analyzers. Maintenance will continue to be manually recorded as normal. QC and 
calibration data will transmit to Aqure when downtime is completed. Calibration data from 
the blood gas analyzers will be sent to Aqure after downtime.  
 
 
 