 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Blood Gas Lab 
Subject:  Chemical Hygiene Plan Section: Volume 4 
Date of Origination: April 1995 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision: February 24, 2022 Serial Code: RC9-12 
         Reviewed: March 20, 2024  
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
POLICY: 
The Blood Gas Laboratory’s Chemical Hygiene Plan is the hospital’s Hazardous Materials 
and Wastes Policies and Procedures. 
 
Procedure/Key Points 
 A. The hospital’s Hazardous Materials and Wastes Policies and Procedures are 
followed in relation to any potential or actual hazardous materials or situations. 
B. The number of potentially hazardous materials used in this limited function lab is 
very small. 
C. Safety Data Sheets (SDS) for materials used in the lab are readily available in the 
blood gas laboratories and in the hospitals computer system.   They provide 
guidance for the individual materials regarding degree of hazard, cleanup of spills, 
etc. 
D. The SDS indicate that the materials used in our blood gas laboratory are of very 
limited risk to employees or patients. 
E. Should an individual have irritant materials splashed into the eyes, eye washes are 
available in all blood gas labs in the facility as free-flowing, fresh, clean tap water 
with covers on outlets. Eye wash stations will be visually examined, activated and 
documented as such on a weekly basis.  
F. All materials are stored and handled as directed by the manufacturer/supplier. 
G. During all sample analysis, universal precautions is utilized, as some Proficiency 
Testing and control materials have the potential of transmitting disease and/or may 
be otherwise potentially hazardous. 
 
Review/Revision 
The Hazardous Materials and Wastes Policies and Procedures and its effectiveness are 
reviewed/evaluated annually by the hospital’s Safety Officer and Safety Committee and 
revised as necessary. The Blood Gas Laboratory will be represented on the Environment 
of Care Committee by the Director or Supervisor of Respiratory Care.  
 