 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  
Subject:  Insertion Arterial Lines Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Origination: October 1991 Signature:  
Date of Last Revision: September 1, 2019 Serial Code: RC9-03 
       Reviewed: October 1, 2024 
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to establish clear guidelines for authorization of non-physician 
respiratory care personnel to perform insertion of indwelling arterial lines when requested 
by the attending physician. 
RESPONSIBILITY: 
The Laboratory Director, Director of Respiratory Care, Manager of Respiratory Care, and 
all Respiratory Care personnel are responsible for assuring compliance with this policy. 
Non-physician Respiratory Care personnel shall be any Licensed Respiratory Therapist 
holding the CRT or RRT credential.  
IMPLEMENTATION: 
A. Non-physician Respiratory Care personnel must be able to describe the correct 
techniques of placing and securing arterial lines, the indications and 
contraindications for this procedure, the hazards and adverse outcomes associated 
with the procedure, and actions to be taken in the event of an untoward event during 
the procedure. 
B. Following successful completion of step  A, non-physician Respiratory Care 
personnel will observe successful insertion of an indwelling arterial line for proper 
technique. 
C. Following successful completion of step B, non -physician Respiratory Care 
personnel will perform a  successful insertion  of an arterial line  under the direct 
supervision and observation of a  Respiratory Care S upervisor, Respiratory Care 
Supervisor of Blood Gas Labs, Respiratory Manager, Director of Respiratory Care 
or Laboratory Director.  During this observation, demonstration of proper technique 
is required prior to approval to perform this procedure.  Questionable performance, 
technique, or knowledge may justify the need for additional insertions under 
supervision prior to approval. 
D. Upon completion of steps A, B, and C of the above-described protocol, the individual 
shall be authorized to place arterial lines without further direct supervision.  
Documentation of this approval shall be signed by the Manager of Respiratory Care 
or the Director of Respiratory Care and retained in the department.  
E. Competence of arterial line insertion will be assessed every two years.  
 
 
 