 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Volume 4 
Subject: Test methods and performance 
Specifications of ABL90 Flex Blood Gas Analyzers Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Origination: December 2000 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision: October 30, 2020 Serial Code: RC9-31 
Date of Last Review:  October 1, 2024  
         
 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define the methodologies and performance specifications of Series ABL90 Blood Gas 
Analyzers and how the communications of changes in these methodologies are provided 
to physicians. 
 
General construction 
Sensors 
In this manual, the term sensor refers to an individual sensor as part of the sensing 
array within a Sensor Cassette. The electrical signal from each sensor is measured by 
proprietary analog electronics contained within the analyzer unit. 
The sensors are located on sensor boards in the Sensor Cassette. 
 
General measurement principles 
Introduction 
There are four different measuring principles employed in the sensors in the ABL90 
FLEX analyzer. 
• Potentiometry: The potential of an electrode chain is measured by a voltmeter, 
and related to the concentration of the sample (the Nernst equation). The potentiometric 
measuring principle is applied in the pH, pCO2, K+, Na+, Ca2+, and Cl sensors. 
• Amperometry: The magnitude of an electrical current that flows through an electrode 
chain is proportional to the concentration of the substance that is oxidized or 
reduced at an electrode in the chain. The amperometric measuring principle is 
applied in the cGlu and cLac sensors. 
• Optical pO2: The optical system for pO2 is based on the ability of O2 to reduce the 
intensity and time constant of the phosphorescence from a phosphorescent dye that 
is in contact with the sample. This measuring principle is applied in the pO2 sensor. 
• Spectrophotometry: Light passes through a cuvette that contains a hemolyzed 
blood sample. The absorption spectrum is used to calculate oximetry parameters. 
This measuring principle is used for ctHb, sO2, FO2Hb, FCOHb, FHHb, FMetHb and 
FHbF and cLac.  
Measurement process 
The measurement process is similar for all types of measurement, patient sample 
analysis, built-in QC measurements, ampoule-based QC measurements, calibration-
verification measurements and calibration measurements. 
1. The sample (patient sample, QC solution or calibration solution) is aspirated or 
drawn into the sensor measurement chamber and the oximetry measurement 
chamber. 
2. Measurements are done as soon as the sample is in the chambers. Liquid sensors 
control the process and can detect sample inhomogeneity and air bubbles in the 
sample. If any problems are found or the sample volume is too low, the measurement 
is aborted and the problem reported in a message attached to the result. 
3. A rinse is done. 
4. A status calibration is done for all parameters. 
 
Rinse process 
A rinse is done after a measurement is completed. 
1. The sample is removed. 
2. The system is rinsed with a mixture of solution and air/gas. 
3. The system is filled with CAL1 to prepare for next sample. 
During the rinse procedure, a check of the fluid transport system is done. 
   
For additional information regarding operating principles refer to the Radiometer ABL90 
Flex operating manual’s section Principles of Operation. 
 
The laboratory manages notifications from vendors of defects or issues with reagents, 
supplies, instruments, equipment, or software that may affect patient care/client services. 
The laboratory maintains records of manufacturer recalls and any follow up 
documentation. All instrument users will be notified at the discretion of the laboratory 
director or the laboratory director’s designees. 