 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center  
Subject:  Capillary Sampling of Pediatric Patients Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Origination: January 1983 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision: September 28, 2022 Serial Code: RC9-11 
       Reviewed: October 1, 2024 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
Acquisition of capillary blood from pediatric patients 
 
EQUIPMENT: 
A. One (1) heparinized plastic capillary tube with capillary caps 
B Lancet 
C. Heel warming device (optional) 
D. Alcohol swab 
E. 2" X 2" gauze or cotton and pressure dressing  
F. Unsterile gloves 
G.  Band-Aid 
 
PUNCTURE SITES: 
A. The primary site is the heel 
 1. The medial or lateral aspect of the plantar surface of the heel is used. 
 2. The posterior curvature should not be used. 
B. Secondary sites include the lateral aspect of the middle finger tip, the index finger 
tip, and the big toe. 
C. The puncture should NOT exceed 
2.4mm in depth. 
D. The therapist should be aware of the 
arterial supply relative to site of capillary 
puncture. 
 
Procedure 
1. Verify order from authorized persons. 
Authorized persons include physicians and 
mid-level providers with prescriptive rights. 
This may be through a written, verbal, 
telephone, electronic or protocol orders. All 
telephone orders must be entered into the 
patient’s EMR by the therapist and read back 
 
to the provider.  Any unclear or ambiguous order will be clarified by the ordering 
physician prior to testing. 
2. Verify the identity of the patient from whom the sample is to be drawn by utilizing the 
two ID process for adults and the three ID process for pediatrics.  The therapist will 
identify the patient in accordance to hospital policy titled Patient Identificati on/Alert 
Bands, policy reference number OrgClin/018. 
3. Explain procedure to patient and/or family. 
4. Place the patient in a comfortable position and one that enhances the ease of your 
obtaining the sample. 
5. Choose a site for capillary sampling. Site should be rotated with frequent capillary 
sampling. 
6. Wash hands. 
7. Utilize heel warming device if indicated. 
8. Place unsterile gloves on hands. 
9. Clean site with an alcohol swab. 
10. Puncture with a weight appropriate commercial lancet  
11. Wipe off the first drop of blood. 
12. Collect a full capillary tube of capillary blood.  Place capillary caps on the capillary 
tube. 
13. Collect blood into capillary tube as soon as it appears on the surface of the skin. 
(Allowing blood to remain on the surface of the skin will cause equilibration with 
room air.) 
14. Avoid getting air bubbles into capillary tubes. (Holding tubes parallel to the floor will 
minimize air bubbles.) 
15. Apply pressure to puncture site with 2" x 2" gauze or cotton ball until bleeding stops. 
16. Apply band aid to puncture site. 
17. Label specimen with a minimum of two patient identifiers in the presence of the patient. 
18. Sample should be taken to lab and run immediately after obtaining the sample.  All 
capillary blood gases analyzed by the Radiometer ABL 90 Flex must be ran within ten 
minutes from the collection time.  EPOC capillary samples must be analyzed in one 
minute after collection. 
 
 
Hazards 
A. Infection 
B. Excessive bleeding 
C. Thermal injury 
D. Calcaneal osteochondritis 
Any significant complication will be reported as a safety event and sent to the Quality 
Department. In the event of an adverse reaction; administer immediate patient care, notify 
nursing staff, and call rapid response team if patient condition warrants.    
 
 
Special considerations 
A. Capillary punctures are not recommended when poor perfusion (i.e. age less than 
24 hrs.), edematous extremities, or unstable cardiovascular status exist. B. Do not squeeze site; allow blood to flow freely. Squeezing introduces lymphatic 
fluid and venous blood, contaminating the sample. 
C. In case of an adverse reaction, patient care will be administered and nursing staff 
will be notified.  Any significant complication will be documented on a safety 
event form and reported to risk management.  
 
All patient results are recorded and reported in the patient’s EMR and will have normal  
reference ranges: 
 
Normal, Age specific capillary values. (REF: Malley, pg 4, Barnhart, Czervinske pg 122) 
 For reference ranges, see RC9-04 Appendix: Reference/Panic Ranges. 
  
Neonatal Reference (Referenced by: Neonatal/Pediatric Respiratory Care, A Critical 
Care Pocket Guide, 3rd edition, 1996. Dana F. Oaks. pg 8-3) 