 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Volume 4 
Subject:  Arterial Sampling Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Origination: October 1980 Supersedes:  
Date of Last Revision: April 25, 2024 Serial Code: RC9-04 
Date of Last Review:   April 25, 2024 Signature: 
          
 
PURPOSE: 
This policy is to define the procedure to safely and accurately obtain an anaerobic arterial 
blood sample from a peripheral artery (radial, brachial, femoral, or dorsalis pedis).   
 
Equipment (all supplies/equipment will be used within expiration date and stored per 
manufacture recommendations) 
A. Arterial Blood Gas kit 
 1. Plastic syringe with needles 
 2. Appropriate anticoagulant, preferably dry lithium heparin and pre -loaded in 
syringe. 
 3. Patient label 
 4. Isopropyl alcohol pads or other suitable antiseptic solution 
 5. Gauze squares or similar material 
 6. Syringe cap 
 7. Acceptable device to embed/protect needle following puncture 
 8. Patient bandage 
B. Bio-Hazard bag  
C. Unsterile gloves 
 
Indications 
A. The need to evaluate the adequacy of ventilation, oxygenation, metabolic balance, 
electrolyte balance and co-oximetery.   
B. The need to quantify the patient’s response to therapeutic intervention and/or 
diagnostic evaluation (e.g., oxygen therapy, exercise testing). 
C. The need to monitor severity and progression of a documented disease process. 
D. To establish base line values or as ordered by a physician. 
 
Contraindications/Precautions 
A. Negative results of a modified Allen test (collateral c irculation test) are indicative 
of inadequate alternate blood supply to the hand and suggest the need to select 
another site for the puncture, provided another site with lower relative risk is 
available.  Therapists perform a modified Allen’s test in lieu of Allen’s test.  This 
is charted in Epic under Accession result entry for patient samples prior to 
verification. 
B. Arterial puncture should not be performed through a lesion or distal to a surgical 
shunt (e.g., as in a dialysis patient). 
C. If there is evidence of infection or peripheral vascular disease involving the selected 
limb, an alternate site should be selected. D. Arterial puncture should not be performed on extremities with indwelling catheters 
if avoidable. 
E. Alternate sample sites when repeating sample whenever possible. 
F. Exercise caution to draw the minimum sample volume required. 
G. Avoid arterial puncture on sites where hematoma or skin discoloration is present. 
H. A coagulopathy or medium -to-high-dose anticoagulation therapy is a relative 
contraindication. 
I. Arterial puncture should not be performed on the same side of the body as a 
mastectomy.  In the case of bilateral mastectomy, the physician must be consulted 
for further instructions.  
J. For pediatric patients, the respiratory therapist must receive permission from the 
ordering physician to draw a brachial sample.  
 
Procedure 
A. Essential elements 
1. Verify order from authorized person. Authorized persons include physicians and 
mid-level providers with prescriptive rights. This may be through a written, verbal, 
telephone, electronic or p rotocol orders. All telephone orders must be written by 
the therapist and read back to the provider.  Any unclear or ambiguous order will 
be clarified by the ordering physician prior to testing. 
2. Personnel will perform hand hygiene practice in compliance with the organizational 
policy IC 3000. PPE will be applied according to hospital policy. 
3. Verify the identity of the patient from whom the sample is to be drawn by utilizing 
the two ID process for adults and the three ID process for pediatrics.  The therapist 
will identify the patient in accordance to hospital policy titled  Patient 
Identification/Alert Bands, policy reference number OrgClin/018. 
4. Verify that the patient is on the correct oxygen or ventilatory support settings, and 
that the patient has been on these settings for sufficient time to allow valid results.  
See B. Validation of Results/Factor Affecting Sample Values elsewhere in this 
document. 
5. Explain procedure to patient. 
6. Place the patient in a comfortable position and one that enhances the ease of your 
obtaining the sample. 
7. Palpate the right and left radial pulses to determine which is more prominent. 
8. Perform the modified Allen’s test on the hand with the best radial pulse to ensure 
adequate collateral circulation. 
  a. Compress both the ulnar and radial arteries at the wrist to obliterate the 
pulses. 
  b. Have the patient clench and release a fist until blanching of the hand 
occurs. 
  c. With the radial artery still compressed, release pressure on the ulnar 
artery. 
  d. Watch for the return of pinkness to the hand. 
i. If pinkness fails to appear within twenty (20) seconds, this site 
should be rejected as site of first choice.  The modified Allen’s 
Test should then be performed on the other radial artery. 
9. Choose site of puncture   NOTE: In case of bilateral negative Allen tests or bilateral mastectomy, the 
therapist may defer to the ordering  physician regarding alternate sites or 
cancellation of test.  The radial or brachial artery should  not be stuck on the 
same arm as a mastectomy or A-V shunt.  
  a. The first site of choice will be the radial artery of the wrist on which the 
modified Allen test was positive.  
  b. At the discretion of the therapist, the second choice of site will be either 
the other radial or the brachial artery at the antecubital fossa. For pediatric 
patients, ordering physician will decide consent for brachial stick. 
  c. At the discre tion of the therapist , the third choice of site will be the 
dorsalis pedis artery of the foot. 
  d. The fourth and least desirable site is the femoral artery, which requires a  
   physician’s order.  
10. Ensure that you have an appropriate means of transporting the sample available. 
11. Disinfect the anticipated puncture site, using alcohol preps. 
12. Attach appropriate sized needle to the heparinized syringe. Preset the plunger to an 
appropriate level to allow pulsation of the blood into the syringe.  
13. Remove the needle cap, with the bevel of the needle up, reassess the puncture site 
and pierce the skin at the puncture site and advance the needle in one plane.  When 
the artery is properly entered, blood will rise into the syringe by force of the arterial 
pressure. 
14. With your free hand prepare the gauze pad for application over the puncture site. 
15. After enough blood (minimum 0 .2cc- 1.5cc dependent on type of patient and 
sample) has filled the syringe, withdraw the needle and immediately apply pressure 
directly on the puncture site with the gauze until no visible signs of bleeding are 
present. 
16. After collection, immediately place the needle in the needle protection device. Do 
not recap the needle.  Once the needle is protected, it  should be remo ved and 
replaced with the air vent cap for the syringe. 
17. Make sure that any air bubbles have been removed  to prevent ambient air 
contamination. 
18. Thoroughly mix heparinized sample by rolling the syringe back and forth.  
19. Attach patient label to syringe  with a minimum of two patient identifiers  in the 
presence of the patient. Then place the sample in a bio-hazard bag and transport to 
blood gas lab.   In the event a specimen is suspected to be mislabeled the  sample 
should be discarded, redrawn and labeled appropriately.   
20. After applying the pressure pad at the puncture site for a minimum of three minutes 
time to stop the bleeding, remove the pad and again check for a pulse distal to the 
puncture site. All personnel removes  gloves and cleans hands using an effective 
antimicrobial method after obtaining and manipulating patient specimens.  The 
hand hygiene practice will be in compliance with the organizational policy. 
21. Take the blood to the blood gas laboratory . Proper PPE should be applied. Ensure 
that the analyzer is ready to analyze the ordered analyte s. Select the appropriate 
analytes ordered by the physician. Lift the inlet handle to the syringe position. Place 
and hold the tip of the syringe in the center of the inlet gasket. Push the syringe into 
the analyzer as far as it will go and hold it there until the analyzer prompts you to 
remove it. Close the inlet.  When analyzing samples from a green top tube, the 
sample will be transferred to a syringe prior to analysis. Assure that you have documented the appropriate clinical data necessary for validation and interpretation 
of the results, including such things as oxygen support, ventilator settings, etc.   
a. Use the EMR computer system to store and send the results to the patient 
floor for the patient’s chart.  These records can easily be access ed by the 
staff and medical staff at any time. Only in periods of downtime with the 
computer systems is it necessary to manually record data and take results to 
the patient unit.  In such case, please refer to Policy RC9 -14, which details 
the downtime procedures.  
  
Sample-Handling Considerations 
A. Analyze the sample as soon as possible to minimize oxygen consumption. 
B. Position the label on the syringe barrel  so that patient and sample information is 
legible. 
C. Cap the sample device immediately after you collect the sample to avoid room air 
contamination. 
D. Plastic syringes should not be iced but kept at room temperature as long as the blood 
is analyzed within 30 minutes of collection  for the Radiometer ABL90flex 
analyzer. Specimens will be discarded if the collected time is greater than 30 
minutes of the received time. The interval between specimen receipt by laboratory 
personnel and results reporting will be less than 60 minutes. If this time is exceeded, 
the lab personnel will notify the ordering provider. The EPOC syringe and capillary 
samples must be analyzed in 5 minutes.  
E. Before you analyze the sample, roll the syringe or the capillary tube between your 
palms and gently invert it several times to mix the sample thoroughly. Mix all 
samples using a consistent technique. 
 
 
Hazards/Complications 
  A. Infection – The needle passing through the skin can carry potential pathogens with 
it. Correct skin preparation reduces this potential. 
B. Hematoma - Blood may extravagate from the punctured artery and into the tissue 
or layers beneath the skin, causing discoloration if more than one puncture is made 
into an artery, too much time is spent in drawing, or inadequate pressure is applied 
after the puncture. Proper application o f digital pressure to the puncture site after 
the puncture allows the wound to heal and prevent hematoma.  More time may be 
required if the patient is on anticoagulant therapy. 
C. Peripheral nerve damage (depending on site) - One of the advantages of choosing 
the radial artery is that the radial nerve does not lie immediately adjacent to the 
radial artery in the area of wrist where the puncture will be performed, whereas 
there is a nerve adjacent to the puncture site at the brachial and femoral locations. 
D. Thrombus - The possibility of an intra-arterial thrombus occurring must always be 
kept in mind.  If a good pulse cannot be palpated downstream of the puncture site 
after the puncture is performed, notify the attending physician immediately. 
E. Air emboli 
F. Arteriospasm 
G. Hemorrhage 
H. Trauma to the vessel 
I. Arterial occlusion J. Vasovagal response 
K. Pain 
L.   Any significant complication will be reported as a safety event and sent to the 
Quality Department . In the event of an adverse reaction, administer immediate 
patient care, notify nursing staff, and call MET team if patient condition warrants.    
       
Limitations of Method/Validation of Results/Factors Affecting Sample Values 
A. Limitations 
 1. Artery may be inaccessible because of periarterial tissues (overlying muscle, 
connective tissue, or fat). 
 2. Pulse may not be palpable 
 3. Arteriospasm may prevent collection despite successful introduction of the 
needle into the artery. 
 4. Arterial blood specimens only reflect the physiologic condition at the moment 
of sampling. 
B. Validation of Results/Factors Affecting Sample Values 
1. Clotting - Blood must not clot in vitro because even the slightest clot will 
prevent proper aspiration of the blood sample into the sample chamber of the 
blood gas analyzer. The Blood sample should be mixed well as soon after 
collection as possible to prevent clotting. 
2. Air contact - Generally, air contact will change the blood gas values by moving 
the PO2 toward room air PO2 (approx. 150mmHg) and decreasing the PC O2.  
Any bubbles inadvertently introduced to sample must be immediately 
expelled. 
3. Temperature - Recent studies have shown that the impact of red cell 
metabolism in vitro is minimal if the sample is analyzed within 30 minutes. 
4. Steady State - The arterial blood sample should be drawn when the patient is 
equilibrated - when at least ten (10) minutes have elapsed since any change 
has occurred or been made that might affect the blood gases.  The following 
would be significant changes: respiratory rate, tidal volume, FI O2 mode of 
ventilation, PEEP/CPAP level, pressure support, exertion of the patient, and 
suctioning. Specimens from mechanically ventilated patients with minimal 
pulmonary pathology adequately reflect the effects of oxygen concentration 
changes 10 minutes after the change.  In spontaneously breathing patients, at 
least 20 -30 minutes should elapse followi ng oxygen concentration change 
(patients with obstructive defects and increased residual volumes may require 
the full 30 minutes or longer). 
5.    Interfering Substances – refer to Radiometer operators manual page 238-268 
 for information on potential interfering substances for each analyte. 
 
Unacceptable Specimens 
Sampling of arterial blood is useful for patient management only if carried out in 
accordance with an established, proven protocol.  The validity of test results may be voided 
if any of the following occur: 
A. Samples contaminated with excessive bubbles or air contact. 
B. Sample sizes which are inadequate for proper analysis (<0.5 ml). 
C. Samples clotted because of improper anticoagulation of the collection device, 
improper mixing, exposure to air, or samples with excessive clots. D. Samples that have been exposed to room temperature for longer than 30 minutes . 
If sample is unacceptable  or sub-optimal, it will be discarded, and a new sample 
will be obtained.  If unable to obtain a new specimen, therapist must notify the 
ordering physician and document in the patient chart. 
 
 In the event the collector is not the therapist analyzing and resulting the test, the 
respiratory therapist will call the collector of the specimen for any questionable 
issues related to specimen quality and labeling. 
 
 
Normal Reference Ranges and Critical Values 
All patient results are recorded and reported in the EMR and will have normal reference 
ranges in the report: 
Normal, Age specific values. (REF: Malley, pg 4, Barnhart, Czervinske pg 122) 
 For reference ranges, see Appendix: Reference/Panic Ranges. 
 
Panic Ranges – Age specific values for panic ranges, see Appendix: Reference/Panic  
Ranges. Panic ranges are critical values to be reported by the therapist to the ordering  
physician or patient’s nurse within 60 minutes. When values are given over the phone, 
the person receiving the values will read the values back to the therapist to assure 
appropriate transmission of data. Documentation of read back (RB) as well as the name 
of the individual receiving the values will be done in EMR. In the Operating room 
setting, the perfusionist will report critical alert values to the ordering physician in the 
operating room immediately. 
 
Back-up 
At O LOL main campus there are twelve analyzers available for use in the event one 
analyzer is not operational. At OLOL Children’s Hospital there are five blood gas analyzers 
available in the event one analyzer is not operational, however if all analyzers are 
inoperable, an analyzer from main campus will be utilized until service can be restored. At 
Lake Livingston campus, if the blood gas analyzer is not operational, an analyzer from 
main campus will be utilized until service can be restored. At Lake North Baton Rouge 
campus, if the blood gas analyzer is not operational, an analyzer from main campus will be 
utilized until service can be restored. At OLOL-Ascension there are two analyzers available 
for use in the event o ne analyzer is not operational.  If both analyzers are inoperable, an 
analyzer from main campus will be utilized until service can be restored. 
       
Infection Control 
A. Universal Precautions/Standard Precautions and directives from the Department of 
Labor concerning occupational exposure to blood -borne pathogens must be 
followed in all circumstances involving blood or blood contaminated collection 
devices. 
B. The site should be cleaned prior to puncture. 
C. All blood specimens, contaminated syringes, needles, capillary tubes used in 
sampling blood will be disposed of in the contaminated materials sharps boxes. 
D. All tissues and gloves grossly contaminated with body fluid will be disposed of in 
biohazard bags. E. Needles used for blood sampling should be by careful insertion into a needle 
protection device to prevent the sharp point from being accessible. 
F. When sharps boxes or biohazard bags are  filled, they are to be sealed and made 
available for disposal by the housekeeping department.  Housekeeping is 
responsible for the disposal of the material. 
  
 
 
 
 
