 
Policies and Procedures Manual Manual: Respiratory Care 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter: Volume 4 
Subject:  Calibration Verification Material Section: Blood Gas Lab 
Date of Origination: March 1995 Signature: 
Date of Last Revision: February 24, 2022 Serial Code: RC9-10 
         Reviewed:  February 24, 2022 
FORMULATED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
DISTRIBUTED BY: 
Respiratory Care 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this policy is to verify the calibration of blood gas, electrolyte, glucose and 
total hemoglobin systems throughout the patient reportable range.  
 
EQUIPMENT: 
A. Blood gas/electrolyte analyzer or co-oximeter 
B. Calibration Verification Ampoule 
C. Qualicheck Opener/Adapter 
D.  Gloves 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Preparation of equipment 
1. Calibration verification materials is provided by Radiometer for the purpose 
of calibration verification. Calibration verification material include a low, 
mid, and high range of the AMR. The Radiometer Qualicheck box that 
contains the QC ampoules for ca libration verification has been stored at a 
constant temperature (18-32°) for 5 hours. Make sure to wear gloves when 
performing a QC measurement. 
2.         Perform scheduled maintenance on the analyzer. 
3. Calibrate the analyzer.  
4. Verify that quality control results do not indicate a problem with the 
analyzer.   
B. Instructions for analyzing CVM 
1. Obtain one QC ampoule from the box. Close the box . Note: the ampoules 
are sensitive to light. 
2. Hold the ampule  between your thumb and first finger and shake for a 
minimum of 15 seconds. 
3. Hold the ampoule neck-side up and tap the top until all the solution collects 
in the lower part of the ampoule. 
4. Put the ampoule in the Qualicheck opener/adapter. Apply pressure to break 
open the neck of the ampoule. 
5. Place the ampoule in the Qualicheck opener/adapter. 6. Perform a calibration-verification measurement immediately after opening 
the ampoule.  
7. Follow the Operator’s Manual for  performing a calibration -verification 
measurement.  
8. Repeat steps 1-7 for all levels. If all levels for each analyte are within the 
performance variability, continue to repeat this sampling sequence for each 
ABL90 Flex blood gas analyzer.  
a. At OLOL main campus, steps 1 -8 will be repeated on every blood gas 
analyzer in the facility.  At Livingston and North Baton Rouge campus, 
steps 1 -8 will be repeated a minimum of three times on the same 
analyzer for comparative results.  At OLOL -Ascension and OLOL 
Children’s steps 1-8 will be repeated a minimum of three times on each 
analyzers for comparative results. 
b. After major preventative maintenance or change of a critical instrument 
component, each level of CVM will be ran once on that analyzer to 
verify accurate results within measurable range.  
 
C. Verifying calibration of CVM 
1. Record the results for each analyte per level.  
2. Verify that your result is within the performance variability range listed for 
the ABL90 Flex system provided in the packet. 
3. If your result is not within the performance variability range, recalibrate the 
system with a two-point calibration, and contact Radiometer for Technical 
Assistance.   
4.  The Analytical Measurement Range will be determined by the  following 
method:  
 Take the highest of the low range values for each analyte. Subtract 15% of 
each analyte. Record each analyte value as the low Analytical Measurement 
Range. Take the lowest of the high range of each analyte and add 15% to 
each value. Record this as the high Analytical Measurement Range. If the 
calculated ranges exceed the manufacturer’s reportable range, then the 
manufacturer’s reportable range will be utilized. The Analytical 
Measurement Range will be posted in the Blood Gas Lab at each analyzer. 
5. Results falling outside of the Analytical Measurement Range will be 
reported as greater than or less than the value of the analytical measurement 
range in the EMR. The physician will be notified that the result falls outside 
of our reportable measurement range. 
 
D. Continuing the Analytical Measurement Ranges  
1.   The initial Analytical Measurement Range (AMR) will be established using 
the above method, and so recorded in the CAP binder (CVM tab). 
2.  After the initial AMR is set, each time Calibration Verification Material is 
ran, the values will be recorded in the CAP binder.  These values will then 
be compared to the current set AMR values.  AMR values will not be 
changed unless the high range CVM results is lower than the AMR for two 
consecutive times, or the low range CVM results  is higher than AMR for two consecutive times. If the AMR is changed, the new AMR will be set by 
calculating the mean value from all samples measured that is lowest or 
highest from the Calibration Verification Material . This new AM R value 
will be set on all like instruments within the same CAP number. 
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS: 
A. Calibration Verification must be performed every six months.  This material has 
been approved as matrix appropriate and is obtained from the manufacturer.  
B. Qualicheck ampoules  require refrigerat ion at 2 -8°C. Ampoules for calibration 
verification must be stored at a constant temperature 18 -32°C for 5 hours prior to 
analysis. 
C. You must sample Qualicheck ampoules within 30 seconds of opening the ampule.  
Prolonged contact with the atmosphere affects the pH, PCO2, and PO2 result.  
D. Aspirate Qualicheck ampoules  directly into analyzer.  Do not inject or transfer 
CVM to a syringe or capillary tube. 
E. Excessive handling of the ampule can affect the temperature of Qualicheck 
ampoules and cause erroneous results. 
F.  AMR values will differ for OLOL main campus, OLOL-Ascension Campus, OLOL 
Children’s Hospital, Lake Livingston campus and the North Baton Rouge campus. 
 
 
 
 
 