 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Documentation 
Subject:  Therapy Assessment/Evaluation Section:  200 – Assessment 
Date of Origination:  September 1994 Supersedes:  
Date Last Reviewed: July 4, 2024 Serial Code:  RC/D/201 
  
PURPOSE: To ensure that thorough and accurate assessment data is documented in accordance with the 
hospital’s mission and placed in patient’s chart in a timely manner. 
 
POLICY: Initial assessments shall be performed by a licensed therapist and placed in the patient’s chart 
within the appropriate time frame from which the order/referral was received.  All assessments 
will be conducted in accordance with state and federal regulations, each discipline’s scope of 
service, and the hospital’s mission. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
 
1. Evaluations are initiated following receipt of written orders from a physician. 
2. Evaluations are documented in accordance with each discipline’s scope of service.  In addition to assessing 
the patient’s impairment, activity limitations, and participation limitations, the evaluation will assess: 
• PT: ROM, strength, balance, functional mobility, gait, patient goals, and long/short term goals of 
treatment 
• OT: ROM, strength, sensation, coordination, ADL status, cognitive and perceptual functioning, patient 
goals, and long/short term goals of treatment 
• ST: Communication disorders and swallowing deficits, receptive/expressive language skills, speech 
clarity, voice, cognitive function, patient goals, and long/short term goals of treatment 
3. Evaluations/ Subsequent orders are completed via electronic documentation.    
• Initial evaluations must be completed within 36 hours of the midnight of the day of admit to the rehab 
unit. The evaluation documentation must be completed on initial contact. If there is data which is 
unable to be obtained at this time, it will be collected at the next encounter and updates to the plan of 
care will be included. Evaluation documentation must be completed by a qualified, licensed therapist. 
• Subsequent orders must be completed within 48 hours 
 
 
 
 
 