 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Human Resources 
Subject:  Holidays Section:  800 – Daily 
Operations 
Date of Origination:  October 1998 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
May 24, 2024 
  
Serial Code:  RC/HR/805 
  
POLICY: The Physical Medicine/Rehabilitation department will be closed on Thanksgiving Day, Christmas 
Day, and New Year’s Day.  The department will run full operations on the remaining holidays 
throughout the year. 
PURPOSE: To establish staffing coverage for holidays. 
PROCEDURE:  
Assigning Hospital Approved Holidays: 
1. Therapy coverage will be equally distributed with consideration of prior year coverage.  Holiday coverage 
may include one winter holiday (Christmas, Thanksgiving and New Year’s Day) and one summer holiday 
(Good Friday, July Fourth, and Labor Day).   
2. Management will have final authority over holiday assignments to ensure fairness and compliance. 
3. The following criteria will be taken into consideration to ensure the process is fair and equal. The items 
are not ranked by order of importance. 
a. Seniority 
b. Prior year holiday work schedule 
c. Census 
d. Staffing levels 
e. PRN availability 
4. The department will be closed on the three Winter holidays (Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year’s 
Day). The department will be open during the three Summer holidays. Requests off for these days will be 
handled by the Supervisor/Senior Therapy leader of each discipline. 
5. Weekends surrounding the holiday will be scheduled based on the same criteria as the holiday days to 
ensure equality. Working these holiday weekends may include Saturday and Sunday. This may be 
necessary to ensure compliance with all therapy regulations and requirements.                                                      2 
The weekend holidays assignment will be: 
a. Thanksgiving—the weekend following the holiday 
b. Christmas, New Year, 4th of July—the most immediate weekend to the holiday. If the holiday is 
on a Wednesday, the weekend will be the weekend before the actual holiday. 
c. Good Friday—the weekend following the holiday 
d. Labor Day—the weekend before the holiday 
6.  Requests for the days surrounding the holidays, not including the weekend, will be submitted to the 
appropriate designee for each discipline. Time off will be granted based on the prior listed criteria with 
the necessity to meet all therapy requirements for each patient.  
7. Once a staff member has been assigned to the holiday/weekend, it is up to the assigned therapist to find 
coverage if he/she cannot work the assigned weekend.  
 
 
 