 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Human Resources 
Subject:  Case Management Student Internship Section:  600 – Student 
Program 
Date of Origination:  April 1993 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
June 18, 2024   Serial Code:  RC/HR/602 
  
PURPOSE: To outline the protocols in which students in the Department of Case Management must follow 
while performing internships within the Department. 
 
POLICY: Internship students must agree to follow all hospital policies and procedures while performing 
their internship duties.  Refusal to follow policy or insubordination to any member of the 
OLOLRMC staff will possibly result in termination of the internship experience. 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1.  Students must follow the dress code of OLOLRMC.  Students are expected to look and behave in a 
professional manner, at all times while acting as a representative of the Rehab Center of OLOLRMC.  Refusal 
to follow the dress code or expected behavior guidelines will result in disciplinary action by the supervisor.  If 
more than one instance of the above occurs, the student may be asked to terminate the internship experience, 
this resulting in a failing grade for the class. 
2. Students are prohibited from possessing, using, or being under the influence of alcohol or illicit drugs while 
on the OLOLRMC premises. 
3. Students are expected to practice courteous behavior to all patients, staff, and visitors at OLOLRMC.  
Students will not behave in an abusive or insolent manner to anyone at OLOLRMC, during the internship 
experience.  Violation of this policy will result in dismissal from the internship. 
4. Theft or destruction of hospital property will result in discharge from the internship. 
5. Disorderly conduct, fighting, rowdiness or other loud or aggressive behavior will be considered forms of 
insubordination and will not be tolerated.  Weapons are prohibited at OLOLRMC. 
6. Sexual harassment of any kind will not be permitted at OLOLRMC. 
7. Students are expected to keep regular hours.  These hours will be mutually agreed upon by the supervisor and 
the student.  If the student is unable to be present for internship hours for any reason, or will be late in 
arriving, the student will contact the supervisor.  At the beginning of the internship, the student will be given a 
time sheet to be filled out daily.  The supervisor will tally the hours each week and sign the time sheet 
weekly.  No student will be allowed to change his/her hours or otherwise alter the agreed upon schedule 
without first consulting the supervisor. 
8. Students will agree to abide by all the policies concerning safety.  Students will participate in all safety drills 
and be familiar with the procedure for a fire drill. 
9. The student will follow all hospital required orientation classes and requirements for the student internship 
program.   2 
10. The students will be oriented within the Case Management department and once a nametag is issued, then the 
student will wear it at all times while in the facility.  Hospital policy requires that name tags be returned to the 
hospital at the time of an employee’s termination, therefore, the student will be required to relinquish the 
name tag at the end of the internship. 
11. Students are required to submit to the supervisor at the beginning of the internship any relevant assignments 
that are to be completed during the internship period.  Students are to be responsible for performing 
assignments in a timely manner and having the supervisor sign off on any work to be given to the school 
instructor.  Supervisors or other staff are not responsible for keeping track of the student’s assignments. 
12. Students will be under direct supervision of Case Management.  Students will agree to take instructions and 
directions from all members of the Case Management staff. 
13. Students must agree to adhere to all written and stated policies within the Rehab Center and OLOLRMC. 
 
 
 
 