 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Human Resources 
Subject:  Organizational Structure & Relationships Section:  100 – Organizational 
Structure 
Date of Origination:  August 1994 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
May 24, 2024   Serial Code:  RC/HR/101 
  
PURPOSE:  To define organizational structure and relationships of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation Department within the hospital. 
 
POLICY:  The Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Department provides patient services within 
OLOLRMC in a manner which services patient needs. 
 
) The Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation (PM&R) Department is a medical service component within 
OLOLRMC.   Services of the Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation department are: 
    1) Rehabilitation Center 
    2) Inpatient Physical Therapy 
    3) Inpatient Occupational Therapy 
    4) Inpatient Speech/Language Pathology 
B) The Medical Director of the Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Department is a member of the 
Medicine Division of the Medical Staff. 
C) The lines of authority to Administration and the inter-relationships between the department of Physical 
 Medicine and Rehabilitation and other departments within OLOL hospital are illustrated in the OLOL 
 organizational chart. 
D) The Medical Director is responsible for the medical management of patients at the Rehabilitation Center 
and in the Physical Medicine department and for the quality and appropriateness of all services in the 
department. 
E) The Director is responsible for the management, planning, controlling, budgeting, and personnel in the 
department. 
 
F) The Medical Director and Director are jointly responsible for many operative issues such as equipment  2 
purchasing, staffing composition, planning and program development.  A comprehensive statement of the 
responsibilities of the Medical Director and Director is found in the Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 
Organization Structure statement. 
G) The Director participates in the Manager’s meeting, the hospital directors meeting, the hospital quality 
improvement meeting, the committee for clinical information documentation and other committee/task 
force meetings as appropriate. 
H) The Medical Director participates in Medical Staff, Medical Division Services, and other committee 
meetings as appropriate. 
I) Communication between disciplines and departments of the hospital is maintained by verbal or written 
communication with other department managers/staff, meetings conferences, etc. as appropriate. 
 