 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Human Resources 
Subject:  Staff Training and Education Section:  500 – Staff Education 
Date of Origination:  June 1994 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
June 18, 2024   Serial Code:  RC/HR/501 
  
POLICY: Educational opportunities will be provided for all professional and support staff in order to further 
the knowledge and skills so that quality patient care is maintained. 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. Mandatory Hospital Educational Event 
All staff of Physical Medicine/Rehabilitation Division is responsible for attending the mandatory hospital 
educational event upon hire and annually per hospital policy.  This event covers all safety, emergency, 
and infection control topics. 
 
2. In-service Education/Training 
a. All Physical Medicine/Rehab staff is eligible to attend educational programs offered by the 
department and the hospital as staffing permits. 
b. Professional staff is encouraged to attend clinical seminars each year with approval of departmental 
administration.  Support is provided for funding and workshop days per funding availability and 
staffing levels.  All funding must have administrative approval at least thirty (30) days prior to 
seminar date. 
c. Training and education needs are identified by the following criteria: 
(1) Individual staff member needs 
(2) Program needs 
(3) Patient population served and the type/nature of care provided by OLOL and the PMR 
division 
(4) Information from quality assessment and improvement activities 
(5) Hospital and departmental plant, technology, and safety programs 
(6) Infection control activities 
(7) Findings from performance appraisals of department staff 
d. In-services are documented on the hospital’s program documentation attendance form.  A master list 
is maintained in Human Resources. 
 
3. Orientation 
a. All staff must attend OLOL general orientation to learn hospital policies, rules, and regulations. 
b. All staff will be oriented to the department policies and job responsibilities as specified in the 
orientation policy. 
 
4. Continuing Education 
a. Departmental Commitments  2 
(1) An annual needs assessment will be performed to coincide with the annual departmental 
goals/budget process 
(2) All discipline CEU requirements will be considered 
b. Courses eligible for finding by OLOLRMC 
 (1)  Location – conferences that will be considered for payment by OLOLRMC will 
primarily be courses hosted by OLOLRMC (ie. Critical Care Symposium, or specific therapy 
courses). All contracts will be managed through administration and legal services.  
 (2)  Courses not hosted by OLOLRMC may be paid by the individual or OLOLRMC based on  
        the department needs. 
c. Eligibility 
(1) To be eligible for funding for continuing education by OLOLRMC, an employee must be a 
full time benefitted staff member or part time benefitted staff member.  PRN or non- 
benefitted employees are not eligible for funding for continuing education. 
(2) If employed 0-6 months, not eligible for continuing education 
(3) If employed 6 months to 1 year, continuing education in local and regional areas may be 
considered 
(4) If employed 1 year or more, continuing education in the Southern Region will be considered 
(5) Attendance of more than one employee of the same discipline at the same conference is at the 
discretion of the department manager. 
(6) Employees attending seminars funded by the hospital will be eligible for a maximum of five 
(5) workshop days annually for such courses (per managerial approval).  Courses attended on 
Saturday or Sunday may be considered to receive 2 workshop days.  If workshop days are not 
granted, an employee may request to take a day off before or after the workshop day, a PTO 
day may be used. 
(7) Employees may attend seminars not funded by the hospital and will be eligible for a 
maximum of three (3) workshop days annually for such courses (per managerial approval). 
d. Process 
(1) The monies for continuing education will be allocated from respective cost centers.  Monies 
may be used across cost center with Administrative Director approval. 
(2) Requests made for continuing education that fall outside the guidelines established for 
location and eligibility will be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
(3) Staff may be required to pay a nominal fee for continuing education hosted by or approved 
by OLOLRMC.  
(4) Continuing education recommendations will be made jointly be the Administrative Director 
and managers.  Hospital Administration has final approval of these recommendations for 
continuing education. 
(5) Continuing Education coursework is documented by providing a copy of the continuing 
education certificate to the department manager upon return from the seminar. 
(6) An educational in-service must be conducted by the staff member for the department within 
45 days of return from the seminar.  If not completed, additional courses will not be approved 
for funding by OLOLRMC. 
e. All the above requirements are subject to modifications at the discretion of the manager and/ or 
department director. 
 
 
  3 
 