 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Human Resources 
Subject:  Medical Director Duties Section:  100 – Organizational 
Structure 
Date of Origination:   Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
May 24, 2024  Serial Code:  RC/HR/102 
  
POLICY: The Physical Medicine/Rehabilitation Medical Director will meet the following criteria: 
 
1. The Medical Director is a licensed physician with special training and experience in the medical specialty of 
physical medicine and rehabilitation. 
2. The Medical Director is responsible for all duties specified in the by-laws and Rules and Regulations of the 
Medical Staff of OLOLRMC. 
3. The Medical Director is responsible for the scope of services required to meet the needs of patients with a loss 
of function so that he/she may obtain his/her maximum potential physically, psychologically, socially, and 
vocationally with special attention to prevent unnecessary complications or deterioration and to assist in 
physiologic adaptation to disability. 
4. The Medical Director provides medical management and direction in the provision of rehabilitative medicine 
services to the patients in the Rehabilitation Center and in Physical Medicine.  The Medical Director is 
responsible for the quality and appropriateness of all rehabilitative services. 
5. The Medical Director is accessible to the department to provide consultation to the Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation staff, as well as consultation to the physicians at OLOLRMC during normal business hours.  
After hours and on weekends the Medical Director or a designee is available via telephone or on site if 
needed. 
6. The Medical Director is responsible for approving, reviewing, implementing and revising policies and 
procedures that guide and support the provision of general rehabilitative and medical services in the 
department. 
7. The Medical Director has final authority over the decision making process for admissions to the Rehab Center 
as well as for continued stay of the patient. 
8. The Medical Director, along with the Director is jointly responsible for establishment of a performance 
improvement program, which includes various service areas in the delivery of rehabilitation services.  The 
selection of the components to be reviewed and the results of the performance improvement program are 
performed in conjunction with the Director. 
9. The Medical Director along with the Director selects the final list of equipment to be recommended for 
purchase each year. 
10. The Medical Director along with the Director ensures operational compliance with all Policies and Procedures 
of the Department and of the Hospital. 
11. The Medical Director, along with the Director is responsible for strategic planning for the department as well 
as participation in program evaluation and development and outcomes measurement. 
12. The Medical Director, along with the Director is responsible for financial planning and decision making for 
the department. 