 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Infection Control & 
Safety 
Subject:  Rehab Apartment Section:  200 – Treatment 
Areas 
Date of Origination:  October 1988 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
November 12, 2024   Serial Code:  RC/IC/201 
  
POLICY: The Rehab Apartment will be used specifically for patient treatments to allow for practice with 
kitchen skills prior to discharge.  Staff members using the kitchen will follow all appropriate 
infection control procedures. 
PROCEDURE: 
Guidelines for Use of Kitchen: 
1. When a patient has reached a point in his rehabilitation that he is both physically and cognitively able to 
perform kitchen skills, he/she may be brought to the Rehab Apartment by his therapist to practice the 
mechanical and safety procedures of kitchen use (e.g. – reaching into cupboards, open/close oven, operate 
knobs on stove, remove pots/pans from cabinets, etc.). 
2. Patient and therapist discuss items to be prepared and make a list of ingredients to be ordered.  Therapist 
receives approval from Manager to order items from the kitchen.   
3. Food will be brought in the Rehab Apartment at the time of the activity and discarded after use. Food will not 
be store in the Rehab Apartment between scheduled patient activities.  
4. During food preparation activities, therapist and patient must wash hands before/after handling of food, and 
wear gloves at all times when in contact with food items. 
5. Patients may perform clean-up tasks.  Staff member is ultimately responsible for clean-up of kitchen 
according to infection control standards. 
6. Therapist will make proper recommendations for safety or adaptive equipment as necessary. 
7. Staff members are to alert housekeeping for garbage removal and cleaning of floor should it become soiled. 
8. No patient may use the kitchen without supervision/permission of their therapist. 
9. Cooking groups may be limited to no more than four patients at one time. 
 
General Guidelines: 
1. No patient or employee with an active or suspected infectious process, including open sores on hands or arms 
should handle food. 
2. Garbage should be discarded in trashcan. 
3. No shelf liner paper is to be used in cabinet areas. 
4. Handwashing sign and fire extinguisher should be clearly visible. 
5. Pest prevention should be maintained by Plant Services. 
6. No supplies are to be stored under the sink. 
7. Persons preparing food shall have long hair restrained. 
  2 
 
Food Preparation: 
1. Food for patient use shall be obtained by staff member from a grocery store or requisitioned from Food 
Services in labeled portions. 
2. Disposable paper/plastic items should be stored in the original container and discarded after use. 
3. Food supplies are not to be stored in the cupboard. 
4. Non-consumable items will be labeled and used for therapeutic purposes per therapist discretion. 
5. Plastic or acrylic cutting board shall be used.  Boards must be washed/sanitized prior to and after use. 
 
Environmental Cleaning: 
1. For general sanitizing agent, bleach wipes will be used on kitchen counters and table surfaces.  
2. Stove top shall be cleaned after each use. 
3. Cooking utensils are to be washed in hot soapy water immediately after use.   
4. Sink will be rinsed after use with an acceptable cleansing agent. 
5. Cooking and eating utensils will be rinsed, then washed in dishwasher.  After washing they shall be stored in 
cabinets. 
6. Electric or handheld openers shall be cleansed and sanitized after each use. 
 
 
 