 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Program Overview 
Subject:  Case Management Patient/Fly Orientation Section:  200 – The Rehab 
Program 
Date of Origination:  November 1995 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
May 24, 2024   Serial Code:  RC/PO/210 
  
PURPOSE: 
  To provide an orientation of the program to the patient and family upon admission 
POLICY: 
The program of the Rehabilitation Center will be explained and discussed with the individual and, if appropriate, 
the family 
 
The role of the case manager will be discussed as a mechanism by which the individual’s program will be 
managed. 
 
The process for the development of program goals will be discussed with the individual and, if appropriate, the 
family. This will include discussion on how the individual is to participate in the goal setting process. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
The case manager is notified of individual’s arrival upon admission and will meet with the 
patient/family at or shortly after admission to discuss the individual’s rehabilitation program and 
services in which they may be involved. 
 
The process for the development of program goals will be discussed with the individual and, if 
appropriate, the family.  A team conference will be scheduled and take place within one week of 
admission.  At this conference the rehabilitation team will discuss appropriate program goals.  The Case 
Manager will review stated goals with patient, and or family within 48 hours conference.   
 
The role of the case manager will be discussed as the mechanism by which the individual’s program will 
be managed.  In addition, the patient/family will be informed that the case manager will be the liaison 
person responsible for communication of the individual’s rehabilitation program to the family and/or 
insurance company.   
 
Each patient and/or family member will be provided a copy of the “Patient Rights” during the admit 
process by the Admissions Clerk. 