 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Program Overview 
Subject:  Patient Transportation Section:  200 – The Rehab 
Program 
Date of Origination:   Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
May 24, 2024 Serial Code:  RC/PO/208 
  
POLICY: 
Each patient should be transported to and from the Rehab Center in a safe and secure manner. 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Transporting Patients 
1. All patients with orders for therapy are transported to and from the department by Rehab personnel 
using a wheelchair or by patient ambulation. 
2. Rehab personnel will follow safety precautions and employ proper body mechanics in transferring 
patients.  The wheelchair should always be locked before beginning a transfer. 
3. Family members and/or visitors are not allowed to transport patients to and from the department 
unless by special permission from the treatment team.  
4. Nursing students and aides may transport patients once they have been properly trained. 
B. Transfers 
1. Stabilize anything that is moveable (lock brakes on wheelchair, etc.). 
2. Adjust the bed to convenient height. 
3. Have nursing disconnect IV’s and tubing if necessary to complete the transfer. 
4. If a brace is needed for therapy, apply brace as stated per physician order in the medical chart. 
5. Transfer across the shortest possible distance. 
6. Choose method of transfer based on: 
a. Patient’s condition 
b. Your skills/ability 
c. Patient’s willingness to cooperate 
d. Availability of others to assist 
7. Tell patient what to do in clear simple instructions. 
8. Note and protect catheters, IV tubes, oxygen, etc. 
9. Give only the assistance necessary to aid with the transfer. 
10. Use proper body mechanics: 
a. Broaden base of support 
b. Maintain normal lumbar curve 
c. Bend hips and knees 
d. Motions should be smooth and steady 
e. Do not lift while trunk is twisted 
f. Push rather than pull 
g. Hold objects close to body 