 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Program Overview 
Subject:  Program Philosophy Section:  100 – Overview of 
Services 
Date of Origination:   Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
May 24, 2024 8-1-2021 RC/PO/102 
  
  
POLICY: 
This policy was developed to be congruent with the Mission Statement of OLOLRMC sponsored by the 
Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady.  This program of healing reflects our respect for Natural Law, the sanctity 
of life, and the essential dignity of each individual.  The Rehabilitation Program has been designed to enhance the 
physical, cognitive, communicative, and psychosocial functioning of those served in order to maximize their 
ability to live independently and to reintegrate into their community.  The Rehabilitation Program is provided by a 
dedicated team of professionals, which is prepared to care for individuals with the most complex disabilities.  
Goals of the Rehabilitation Program include: 
 
1. Assisting each individual to reach his/her highest level of emotional, psychosocial, and socioeconomic 
function. 
2. Restoring physical functioning to the maximum extent of each patient’s potential. 
3. Supporting and aiding the family and significant others in understanding the individual’s disease, impairment, 
or injury and adjusting to the changes needed. 
4. Ensuring that each patient receives and individualized Rehabilitation program including all necessary 
disciplines and which is continually revised as the patient progresses. 
5. Ensuring that the goals of the patient and family are included in the treatment plan. 
6. Ensuring that each patient receives a discharge plan and disposition congruent with his highest level of 
functioning. 
 
It is also the goal of the Rehabilitation Center to continually monitor and improve upon the quality of patient care 
and services rendered.  Continual emphasis on staff development for all health professionals within the 
Rehabilitation Center is necessary for the achievement of the above goals. 
  
 