 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Program Overview 
Subject:  Overview of Services Section:  100 - Overview of 
Services 
Date of Origination:   Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
May 24, 2024   Serial Code:  RC/PO/103 
  
Medical Director 
The purpose of the Medical Director role is to provide medical leadership to the physicians, nursing, and 
treatment staff; to serve as a resource to the family, patient and treatment team; to determine appropriate 
admission standards and program standards for providing direction to meet the standard of accreditation; 
and to develop new programs to meet the needs of the community. 
The philosophy of the Medical Director is that all patients of the Rehabilitation Center will receive 
Rehabilitation Medicine and appropriate medical consultations, individualized nursing and therapies.  
All patients will be treated with compassion and dignity, and afforded every opportunity to return to 
their highest level of functioning. 
Administrative Director 
The purpose of the Administrative Director is to provide assistance to the Medical Director in the 
planning and delivery of patient care to patients of the Rehabilitation Center; to provide leadership to the 
rehabilitation disciplines; to ensure that the accreditation standards are met; to provide assistance with 
the recruitment and retention of staff; and to develop, plan and implement new programs to meet the 
rehabilitation needs of the community. 
The philosophy of the Administrative Director is that all patients of the Rehabilitation Center will 
receive individualized treatment by the disciplines of physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech 
therapy, recreational therapy, case management, and psychology and that all patients are treated with 
compassion and dignity and provided every opportunity to return to their highest level of functioning. 
Interdisciplinary Services 
Each patient at the Rehabilitation Center is assigned an interdisciplinary team upon admit comprised of 
the following disciplines as required: The Person(s) Served, Rehabilitation Medicine, Rehabilitation 
Nursing, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Speech/Language Pathology, Case 
Management/Social Services, Activity Therapy, and Nutritional Services.  The Case Manager is 
responsible for coordinating the treatment planning efforts of all disciplines in order to help ensure 
achievement of outcomes.  The Case Manager also facilitates the involvement of the persons served 
throughout the rehab process via regular visits, informal meetings, team conferences,   2 
Page 2 
and family conferences as appropriate.  The term “interdisciplinary” denotes that each member of the 
treatment team will follow the guidelines established in the treatment plan when interacting with the 
patient in all areas of functional activity and behavior.  Uniformity of goals and response to the patient is 
required among all disciplines if the patient is to achieve optimal progress in the most efficient time 
frame.  Although it is recognized that the specific areas of therapy differ within each discipline, it is 
desired that the response to the patient in regard to problems of recovery which crosses all disciplines 
(such as transfer skills, toileting, feeding, emotional, and cognitive impairments) be the same in all 
interactions with the patient.  For each detailed descriptions of the services provided within each 
discipline, please see the appropriate chapters of the policy and procedure manuals. 
Team Conference 
Team Conferences are formally held for each patient within the Rehabilitation Center on a weekly basis, 
pending necessity of frequency.  Informal meetings may occur as needed on an interim basis.  
Conferences are chaired by the attending Rehabilitation Physician with the Case Manager providing 
additional leadership during the conference.  The Case Manager provides patient/family representation 
during the conference; however, they may be invited to attend on an as needed basis.  Consulting 
physicians on the patient’s team may also be invited to the conference when appropriate.  These 
conferences serve the purpose of ensuring interdisciplinary communication, establishing treatment plans, 
predicting outcomes, and establishing discharge/transfer plans.  The initial conference for each patient 
includes the following format: (1) Brief medical report; (2) Initial assessment reports; (3) Discussion of 
areas of concern / barriers to discharge; and (4) Estimate of length of stay.  Interim conferences include 
the following: (1) Brief medical report; (2) Updates of functional status; and (3) Discussion of areas of 
concern/ barriers to discharge.  For a more detailed format of Team Conferences, please see the 
appropriate section of this manual. 
Interdisciplinary Treatment Plan 
Each discipline involved in the patient’s care plan provides input into the patient’s interdisciplinary 
treatment plan based on their functional assessment findings for that patient.  The needs of the individual 
patient determine the goals of the treatment plan.  The achievement of these goals is brought about by 
the adherence to the treatment plan by all team members on a 24 hour, seven day a week basis.  The 
specific format of the treatment plan shadows the functional rating scale currently in place.  For more 
details on establishing treatment plans, please see the appropriate section of this manual. 
Therapy Teams 
The rehabilitative services within this Center are organized into therapy teams.  A team will consist of a 
PT, OT, and ST as deemed necessary as well as intervention from Activity Therapy.  The team devises 
individual therapy schedules upon admission and begins the evaluation process.  The patient’s schedule 
may be adjusted throughout the stay pending necessity (e.g. - if more PT time is needed, and increase 
with PT intervention is made; if the patient is appropriate for a treatment group, it will be added to the 
schedule pending decision of team members; etc.)  The patient should remain in that team’s care 
throughout their recovery, thus helping to facilitate the most efficient achievement of recovery potential.  3 
Page 3 
Appropriate Staffing Levels 
Staffing plans within the Rehab Center are designed to be congruent with the teams as mentioned above.  
As such, it is necessary that the staffing plan be dynamic in response to the patient mix.  Numbers of 
patient caseloads, diagnostic categories, acuity levels, and levels of cognitive and behavioral 
rehabilitation needs are all taken into account when assigning staffing. 
Program Management 
A Case Manager is designated to coordinate the provision of care for each person served upon admission 
to the Rehab Center.  The Case Manager will serve as a liaison to the person served, all team members, 
as well as other stakeholders as needed (e.g. - payor sources).  She assumes responsibility for facilitating 
orientation to rehab services, facilitating involvement of the person served throughout the rehabilitation 
process, and coordinating discharge planning.  In addition, the Case Manager ensures that the 
individual’s treatment program proceeds in an orderly, goal-directed, and efficient manner.  For details 
on the role of the Case Manager, please see the appropriate section of this manual. 
Discharge Planning 
Discharge planning is initiated early in the patient’s stay, during the Initial Goal Setting and Treatment 
Planning Team Conference.  Responsibility for coordinating and achieving optimal discharge plans rests 
with the Case Manager.  The Case Manager will identify the types of services which will be necessary to 
continue with the furthering of program goals after discharge.  She, in coordination with other team 
members, will ensure that referrals are made to other agencies as appropriate to obtain supportive 
services that are unavailable within the Rehabilitation Center.  Discharge criteria are developed within 
each person’s treatment plan. 
For patients requiring further services after discharge, such as Home Health or Outpatient Therapy, a 
referral will be made by the Case Manager, based on input from the person(s) served and other members 
of the treatment team. For patients who will be going to a nursing home or group home, a list of nursing 
or group homes will be provided to the family for review in order to help them make an informed 
decision.  Discharge status documentation is shared with these referral services in sufficient time to be 
well informed before providing services in an effort to facilitate continuity of care. 
For more details on discharge planning, please refer to the appropriate section of this manual. 
Follow-up Services 
Follow-up appointments are scheduled for patients to visit the attending rehab physician post-discharge.  
Each discharged patient is provided with a written plan of follow-up care at the point of discharge.  
Follow-up reports on patients are made by the Discharge Nurse via phone interviews.  These reports 
indicate patient progress and current status, patient interpretation of the quality of referred services, as 
well as the necessity for additional intervention.  The Case Manager will assist with intervention as 
needed.  For more details on follow-up services, please refer to the appropriate section of this manual. 