 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Program Overview 
Subject:  Discharge Planning Protocol Section:  400 – Admissions/ 
Discharges 
Date of Origination:  January 1992 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
June 18, 2024  Serial Code:  RC/PO/405 
  
PURPOSE: To clearly describe and outline the Discharge Planning Process and assure implementation in a 
timely manner. 
POLICY: All patients will be assessed for discharge planning needs prior to discharge to foster continuity 
of medical and/or other care to meet their identified needs.  The Case Manager will coordinate all 
home health referrals, equipment, etc.  No home health/outpatient services will be arranged 
without the approval of the patient/family, physician, payer, and/or case manager.  The Case 
manager will arrange for community resources as well as skilled nursing facilities as deemed 
appropriate by the patient/family, physician and team. 
  PROCEDURE: 
1. To assist in identifying possible disposition problems, the Case Manager will review a copy of the pre-admit 
assessment on all patients. 
2. All inpatients will be screened for high risk factors and even if no discharge problems exist, patients will need 
information on follow-up care. 
3. The case manager will complete an initial assessment, which evaluates the needs of the patient along with the 
resources to meet those needs. 
4. The attending physician will consult the Case Manager regarding recommendations for after care and follow-
up. 
5. Case Manager will coordinate all discharge planning needs with the appropriate resources, including any 
teaching needed before discharge and evaluation of barriers to discharge.  
6. Discharge plans are made as the patient progresses through the hospital stay, not just at the time of discharge. 
7. The Case Manager is responsible for initiating the implementation of the discharge plan and documenting it 
on a timely basis. 
8. The Case Manager will document all contact with patient and/or family and will coordinate patient/family 
training as needed. 
9. All phone calls or correspondence to outside agencies (home health, extended care facilities, etc.) will be 
documented in the medical record. 
10. The Case Manager and the Discharge Nurse Coordinator will communicate additional needs / 
recommendations of patient to the team during team and/or family conferences and acquire necessary 
orders/approvals. 
11. The Case Manager will advise on the most cost-effective manner of acquiring supplies/services needed for 
discharge. 
12. The Case Manager will arrange for all home health services and/or outpatient services and equipment as 
approved by the physician, patient/family, payer, and/or Case Manager.  2 
 
13.  If patient is unable to return to their previous living arrangement, the Case Manager will provide the 
patient/family with available alternatives and assist with arranging for same. 
14. The Case Manager will coordinate discharge plans with the discharge nurse.  
 