 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Program Overview 
Subject:  Preadmission Process Section:  400 – Admissions/ 
Discharges 
Date of Origination:  April 1992 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed: 
June 18, 2024 Serial Code:  RC/PO/401 
  
POLICY: 
Our Lady of the Lake Rehabilitation Center will efficiently monitor and manage all inquires for services and 
facilitate admission of Rehabilitation candidates according to established guidelines. 
PROCEDURE: 
1.  Inquiries may be received by:  
  a.  Clinical Information System 
  b.  Community Liaison 
  c.  Rehabilitation Medicine Physician 
  d.  Administrative Assistant 
  e.  Nursing Staff on Rehabilitation Unit 
 All inquiries are directed to the Rehab Liaison. 
2. The Community Liaison will complete primary data on the Inquiry/Referral and verify patient funding. 
Community Liaison adds referral to Daily Admission Status Report.  Community Liaison channels 
financial decision to Rehabilitation Medicine Physician and verifies insurance inquiries through the 
financial business office. 
3. In-House Inquiries - Community Liaison will complete patient data collection on the Preadmission 
Assessment form by including: 
a. Review of medical record 
b. Patient/Family interview 
c. Completion of Preadmission Assessment Form 
d. Presentation of an overview of Our Lady of the Lake’s Rehabilitation Center philosophy and 
services to patient/family as appropriate.  Give supporting literature to patient/family.  2 
e. Interviews health care professional (as appropriate with physician, physical therapist, nurse, 
etc.) and arranging for a tour of the unit when indicated. 
f. Rehabilitation Medicine Physician may also complete a consultation and decide if patient 
meets rehabilitation center’s admission criteria.  A written note and consultation (if 
completed) by the Rehabilitation Physician will be placed in the medical record.  The note 
will state if the patient has been accepted for inpatient Rehabilitation at Our Lady of the Lake.  
The physician will verify his review and concurrence with the preadmission assessment by 
signing the form. 
4. Inquiries from Other Facilities – Rehab Liaison will contact discharge planner/Social Worker in the 
referring facility to schedule the assessment.  Rehab Liaison will complete patient data collection 
including:  
  Steps a-e, same as above 
f. Rehab Liaison documents that the assessment has been completed on the physician progress 
note 
g.  In the event the patient is geographically inaccessible, interviews with patient, family and 
healthcare professionals may be conducted by telephone and facsimile 
h.  Rehab Liaison will present referral to the Rehabilitation Medicine Physician 
i.  Rehabilitation Medicine Physician reviews Preadmission Assessment Form, Medical Record 
when appropriate, and communicates with referring physician 
j.  Rehabilitation Medicine Physician decides if patient meets rehabilitation center admission 
criteria 
5. Home Inquiries- Rehab Liaison will contact patient/family for home bound patients to schedule the 
assessment.  Rehab Liaison will complete patient data collection including: 
a. Patient/family interview 
b. Completion of Preadmission Assessment Form 
c. Presentation of brief overview to OLOL Rehab Center’s Philosophy and service to 
patient/family as appropriate 
d. Obtain written permission to request medical record from previous hospital admission 
e. Healthcare professional interview(s) as appropriate with physician, physical therapist, nurse, 
etc. 
f. Rehab Liaison will present referral to Rehabilitation Medicine Physician 
g. Rehabilitation Medicine Physician reviews the Preadmission Assessment Form, Medical 
Record, and communicates with referring physician 
h. Rehabilitation Medicine Physician decides if patient meets rehabilitation center admission 
criteria  3 
6. If the referral is approved (financially and clinically), then the Rehabilitation Medicine Physician and 
admissions team will decide on admission date.  Rehab Liaison will notify referral source (Rehabilitation 
Medicine Physician, Discharge Planner, Social Worker, family member, and/or nurse) of admission date 
and room assignment.  The day of admit, the Rehab Liaison presents patient information to the clinical 
treatment team via email and the charge nurse is informed of the anticipated admission.  The patient is 
transferred to the Rehabilitation Unit with a copy of the acute care chart, current orders, and a nursing 
transfer sheet.  The transfer nurse provides report to the Rehabilitation Nurse from the sending unit, prior 
to the transfer of patient. 
7. If referral is clinically denied, the Rehabilitation Medicine Physician and/or Rehab Liaison notifies the 
Medical Management team, Social Worker, referring physician and patient/family of denial, and the 
reason why the patient was not accepted.  The Rehabilitation Medicine Physician and/or Rehab Liaison 
will offer alternate recommendations and appropriate recommendations. 
If clinically denied due to present medical instability (meets other Rehabilitation Admission Criteria) the 
Rehab Liaison and/or Rehabilitation Medicine Physician will follow the patient until the patient is 
medically stable and cleared for Rehabilitation Admission.  In-house patients will be followed daily 
(Monday-Friday) by the Rehab Liaison and PRN by the Rehabilitation Medicine Physician.  Patient in 
other acute care facilities will be reviewed 2-3 times/week either by telephone or onsite assessment by the 
Rehab Liaison. 
8. If financially denied the Rehabilitation Medicine Physician and/or the Community Liaison notifies the 
Discharge Planner/Social Worker, referring physician, and patient/family of denial.  The Rehabilitation 
Medicine Physician and/or Rehab Liaison will recommend alternate placement options. 
 
 
 