 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Nursing Scope of Services Section:  200 – Rehab Nursing 
Date of Origination:  September 1994 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: July 3, 2023  Serial Code:  RC/TS/202 
  
PURPOSE: 
To provide rehabilitation nursing care to the patient and coordinate patient care activities with the 
various rehabilitation therapies.  Rehabilitation nursing care is designed to provide for the prevention of 
complications of physical disability, the restoration of optimal functioning, and adaptation to an altered 
life style through the use of the nursing process. 
PROCEDURE: 
1. Assessment of the patient’s physical and psycho/social needs and developing a nursing care plan 
in compliance with the referring physician’s and/or the medical director’s care plan to aid in 
restoring the patient to his/her optimum level of independence and prevent any untoward effects.  
Assessments and care plan are recorded within 24 hours. 
2. Rehabilitation nursing care includes the assessment of all body systems, including: 
A. Skin integrity 
B. Bowel and bladder management 
C. Respiratory and circulatory systems   
D. Self-care skills development 
E. Interpersonal relationships 
F. Adaptation mechanisms for managing stress 
G. Sleep and rest patterns 
H. Nutrition, hydration, appetite 
I. Cognitive functioning 
3. Rehabilitation nursing care also includes: 
A. Health maintenance and discharge teaching  2 
B. Steps to prevent complications of immobility 
C. ADL’s such as hygiene, grooming, skin care and dressing 
D. Physical transfer from one surface to another 
E. Positioning 
F. Bowel and bladder care 
4. Psycho/social care includes socialization and adaptation of the patient and/or his/her family to an 
altered life style and reference the interdisciplinary treatment plan. 
5. Explanation to the patient and hi/her family of the rehabilitation concept and need for total 
involvement for attainment of goals, whether it be independence, semi-independence, or self-
direction of care.  The nursing staff monitors the degree to which the individualized nursing care 
and goals are achieved for each patient. 
6. Help the patient and family gain insight and understanding of the illness through health teaching, 
explanation, and on-the-unit practice of patient care. 
7. Provide encouragement and emotional support to the patient and family during the rehabilitation 
process in preparation for discharge, especially if patient placement will be other than the normal 
home environment. 
8. Provide a liaison between the different therapies of the rehabilitation team and the nursing staff 
to encourage follow through with activities and exercises learned in these departments. 
9. Rehabilitation nurses collaborate with the patient, family, and other health care providers in 
regard to discharge planning and teaching. 
10. Serve as a resource person to other nursing service personnel in assessing patient care needs. 
11. Provide liaison between Home Health Care and the hospital in providing continuity and follow-
up care of patients. 
12. Provide education to patient and family including:  medications, food/drug interactions, disease 
process, maintenance of skin integrity, and bladder/bowel maintenance. 
13. Provide staff members who are fully qualified nursing personnel with additional knowledge of 
rehabilitation nursing.  All are familiar with rehabilitation concepts and techniques and their 
independence. 
14. Provide an atmosphere conducive to learning and independence. 
15. Provide stimulation and motivation, but tempered with patience and understanding. 
16. Provide evaluation of each patient by each member of the rehabilitation team as to potential as 
soon after admission as possible and appropriate treatment plan devised.  3 
17. Provide nursing care in such a manner as to not hamper therapy sessions, but fulfill the treatment 
plan. 
18. Assess the patient’s physical status, decubiti, casts or any other problems which might hamper 
the rehabilitation progress.  Consideration of these aspects of care is essential when formulating 
a treatment plan. 
19. Provide a nursing progress report at the staffing conference and discuss problems or needed 
adjustments.  
20. On unit conferences will be held to ensure continuity of care. 
21.  Ongoing reassessment is done throughout the course of the patient’s stay with changes to the 
plan of as appropriate. This is documented in the electronic medical record.  
22. Plans nursing care while acknowledging that rehabilitation nursing is practiced within a 
dynamic, therapeutic, and supportive relationship that is constantly changing, as nurses and 
clients influence one another.  
23. Develops goals, in collaboration with clients, their families, and the rehabilitation team, that is 
oriented to wellness behavior and is reality based and that encourage socialization with others.  
24. Intervenes with team members and other healthcare professionals to ensure that the optimal 
opportunity for recovery is made available to the client, the most significant member of the 
rehabilitation team.  
25. Collaborates with team members to achieve cost-effective care by utilizing appropriate clinical 
measures to meet emergent physical, psychosocial, and spiritual situations.  
26. Actively listens, reflects, and guides clients that their families through the stages of the grieving 
process to mourn the loss of abilities and roles.  
27. Advocates for policies and services that promote the quality of life for individuals with 
disabilities and participates in activities that will positively influence the community’s awareness 
of disabilities.  
28. Contributes to a safe and therapeutic environment and supports activities that promote clients’ 
return of function and prevent complications of chronic illness.  
 
 
 
Reference: American Nurses Association and Association of Rehabilitation Nurses. (1986). 
Standards of rehabilitation nursing practice.  