 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Case Management Scope of Service Section:  800 – Case 
Management 
Date of Origination:  August 1988 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: 
Date Last Revised: 
May 24, 2024 
June 6, 2022  
Serial Code:  RC/TS/801 
  
PURPOSE: To outline the scope of services provided by the Case Management Department, along with the 
goals and objectives of Case Management. 
POLICY: Each patient referred to the Rehabilitation Center will be assigned an individual Case Manager.  
This individual will be responsible for carrying out initial evaluations, orienting the patient and 
family, ensuring smooth transfer procedures, and coordinating the patient'’ plan of treatment from 
admission through discharge.  Social Work Services are also provided as necessary within 
framework of the Case Management department. 
 Case Management Services provide for assessment and intervention of psychosocial factors and 
social context in which the physically disabled patient lives.  The scope of the Rehabilitation 
Center Case Management Services includes:  (1) Assessment of the patient’s personal coping 
history and current psychosocial adaptation to his disability; (2) Assessment of immediate and 
extended family members and other support persons relative to support networks; and (3) 
Assessment of housing, living arrangements and stability, and source of income relative to 
facilitating discharge plans.  Intervention strategies designed to increase the effectiveness of 
coping strength and informal support systems and to facilitate continuity of care include the 
following: (1) Discharge planning activities; (2) Group work for families and patients focused on 
education; and (3) Community service linkage/referrals. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. A single program manger (Case Manager) is assigned to each individual when admitted to the Rehabilitation 
Center.  The provision of services to each client is organized through the Case Manager.  Following 
admission, the Case Manager will visit the patient and family and perform an initial evaluation. 
2. The Case Manager serves as a key individual during the initial Treatment Planning and Goal Setting 
Conference for the patient. 
3. Based on review of referral information and evaluation of the individual’s needs by each discipline, a 
comprehensive individualized transdisciplinary treatment plan is developed. 
4. The Quality Indicator tool used by this Rehabilitation Center is made up of Self Care, Mobility and Cognitive 
scales.  All functional activities addressed within each discipline are evaluated periodically.  In addition, the 
treatment plan outlines (1) The client’s primary rehabilitation problems, goals, treatments, or services to be  2 
provided; (2) Specific goals within each discipline; (3) Time intervals at which treatment outcomes will be 
reviewed; (4) anticipated time frame for the accomplishment of the individually specified goals; (5) Measures 
to be used to assess the effects of modalities of treatment; and (6) The persons responsible for the 
implementation of the plan. 
5. Treatment Planning and Goal Setting Conferences are held on each patient on a weekly basis.  Department 
Heads are ultimately responsible for ensuring that each patient efficiently receives the services outlined in the 
treatment plan.  It is the responsibility of the Case Manager to ensure that the patient’s accomplishment of 
specified goals is reviewed regularly and communicated to the patient, to the treatment team, to the patient’s 
family or significant other, and when appropriate, to the referral source and purchaser of services. 
 
Discharge Planning 
1. It is the responsibility of the patient’s Case Manager to coordinate the discharge planning efforts of the 
treatment team.  Discharge planning is initiated early in the patient’s stay with the initial estimate of proposed 
length of stay.  Discharge planning is further developed at each weekly team conference.  The Case Manager 
will ensure close communication, as appropriate, with the referral source and with others that might have an 
impact on the patient’s program and its follow-up. 
2. The Case Manager will ensure that services essential to the attainment of the individual’s goals and objectives 
will be provided, whether through staff within the Rehabilitation Center or through formal affiliation or 
consultation with appropriate agencies or individuals. (see program overview for available services) 
 