 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Interdisciplinary Treatment Plan Section:  300 – Treatment 
Planning 
Date of Origination:  November 1988 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: June 17, 2024  Serial Code:  RC/TS/301 
  
POLICY: It is the policy of the Rehabilitation Center to ensure that a treatment plan is developed based on 
the functional assessment and evaluation of each patient.  A plan of treatment for each patient at 
the Rehabilitation Center is comprised of input from the patient and family as well as from each 
of the following disciplines: Rehabilitation Medicine, Rehabilitation Nursing, Physical Therapy, 
Occupational Therapy, Case Management/Social Services, and when appropriate input can also 
be obtained from Psychological Services, Activity Therapy and Speech-Language Pathology.  
The term “interdisciplinary” denotes that uniformity of goals and response to the patient is 
required among all disciplines if the patient is to achieve optimal progress.  Although it is 
recognized that specific areas of therapy differ within each discipline, it is desired that the 
response to the patient in regard to problems of recovery which cross all disciplines (such as 
toileting, transfers, emotional and/or cognitive impairments) be the same.  The needs of the 
individual patient determine the goals of the treatment plan.  The achievement of these goals is 
brought about by the development of a treatment plan that is adhered to consistently by all 
members of the treatment team throughout the entire therapy day. 
PROCEDURE: 
 
Treatment planning is begun early in the patient’s hospital stay.  Each patient has an assigned Case 
Manager who collaborates with other treatment team members in the development of the treatment plan 
at weekly Team Conferences.  Leadership is provided by the patient’s attending Rehabilitation 
Physician.  Data from initial assessments carried out by each therapy service are used in the 
development of the initial goals and treatment plan.  The initial Team Conference is held on each patient 
approximately one week following admission to the Rehab unit.  The initial treatment plan is updated 
weekly by all disciplines.  A team conference will be held on a weekly basis to discuss the treatment 
plan. 
The patient and family participate in the development of goals and implementation of the treatment plan.  
The patient’s Case Manager plays an ongoing role in this process by assessing patient and family needs 
and concerns and reporting this information to the treatment team.  The Case Manager also acts as a 
liaison with the family, patient, or significant other by discussing with them the goals and treatment plan 
that have been generated for the person served.  2 
Measurable goals, which are described in functional and/or behavioral terms, are established with the 
patient and/or family and include the time frames of expected achievement.  Goals are revised per 
discipline as goals are achieved in the medical record.  
Evidence of progress and any problems in the patient’s treatment process are documented and updated 
frequently.  This process ensures continued appropriate patient care. 
The patient and/or family may appeal treatment decisions regarding their care in the following manner: 
1. Address the decision with the primary service provider and/or Case Manager.  If unable to 
resolve the issue, the person(s) served may contact the next administrative level. 
2. Address the decision with the departmental manager. If unable to resolve the issue, the 
person(s) served may contact the next administrative level. 
3. Address the decision with the Director of Physical Medicine/Rehab. If unable to resolve the 
issue, the person(s) served may contact the next administrative level. 
4. Address the decision with the OLOL Medical Director. If unable to resolve the issue, the 
person(s) served may contact the next administrative level. 
5. Address the decision with the organization’s COO. 
6. Can file a Medicare appeal (if criteria met).  
 
 