 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Fiberoptic Endoscopic Evaluation of 
Swallowing (FEES) 
Section:  600 – Speech 
Pathology 
Date of Origination:  June 1994 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: July 3, 2024   Serial Code:  RC/TS/605 
  
PURPOSE: To define the FEES procedure and the qualifications for performing the procedure. 
 
The use of fiberopotic endoscopy to evaluate swallowing is a procedure, which utilizes technology most familiar 
to otolaryngologist.  At this time, it is not routine practice for Speech pathologist to receive hands-on training in 
fiberoptic endoscopy, although the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association has endorsed the practice of 
endoscopy as being within the scope of practice of Speech-Language Pathologist (ASHA, 1992).  In order to 
ensure excellence in patient care and in the training of the speech pathologist, specific criteria establishing clinical 
competence in FEES are herein outlined.  The criteria adopted meet national and local standards as recommended 
by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals. 
 
In the FEES procedure, a fiberoptic laryngoscope is passed transnasally to the hypopharynx, where the larynx and 
surrounding structures are viewed.  Laryngeal airway protection is assessed, and food and liquid boluses are given 
to the patient so that the integrity of the oropharyngeal swallow can be determined.  Information obtained from 
this examination includes ability of the vocal folds to protect the airway, ability to sustain airway protection for a 
period of several seconds, ability to initiate a prompt swallow without spillage of material into the hypoharynx, 
timing and direction of movement of the bolus through the hypopharynx, amount and location of pooling and 
residue of material into the hypopharynx, coordination of respiration and swallowing, timing of bolus flow and 
airway protection, and sensitivity of the pharyngeal/laryngeal structures.  The most critical observation is the 
occurrence of aspiration or laryngeal penetration, which can be detected with this tool.  Therapeutic maneuvers 
are often tried during this examination in order to find a safe diet and to maximize the efficiency of the swallow. 
 
Recommendations from this exam include a judgement regarding safety of oral feeding, appropriate diet, posture 
to assume when eating, behavioral compensatory strategies to use when swallowing, need for behavioral therapy, 
and need for other examinations.  The protocol to be used for the FEES, (Langmore, 1993), is found following 
this policy. 
 
This examination is not intended to replace the standard otolaryngological evaluation of the structural integrity of 
the hypopharynx/larynx.  The procedure will be performed cooperatively with an otolaryngologist, who will place 
the endoscope and assess the structural integrity of the hypopharynx/larynx prior to the Speech Pathologist’s  2 
assessment of swallowing function.  Speech Pathologists are not qualified to make decisions regarding mucosal or 
structural abnormalities which my indicate pathology.  The FEES examination is intended solely to assess 
function for swallowing. 
 
POLICY: It is the policy of the Speech-Language Pathology division to  ensure that personnel performing 
the FEES procedure are trained appropriately and follow the standards for competency defined by 
the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association and the Louisiana Board of Examiners for 
Speech Pathology and Audiology. 
 
  In order to begin formal training in FEES and to perform clinical assessments of 
swallowing via FEES, the candidate must satisfy the following requirements: 
1. Education:  The applicant shall hold, as a minimum, the master’s degree in Speech-
Language Pathology, with courses in anatomy, physiology, and neurology of the 
vocal tract.  Lab practicum with dissection of the head and neck is highly desirable.  
A course in dysphagia is highly desirable. 
2. Clinical Training: The candidate shall have completed the Clinical Fellowship Year 
and be in receipt of the Certificate of Clinical Competence awarded by the American 
Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 
3. Preliminary Dysphagia Training:  Clinical experience in dysphagia using 
traditional procedures such as the clinical examination and the videofluoroscopy 
procedure.  The applicant shall have performed and interpreted at least 25 
fluoroscopy examinations independently. 
4. Specific FEES Training: 
a. Successful completion of a seminar or workshop in the methodology and use 
of fiberoptic endoscopy as a technique for investigating swallowing function, 
equivalent to those taught by Dr. Susan Langmore.  A minimum of 10 hours 
training is recommended. 
b. Successful performances and interpretation of a minimum of 25 FEES 
procedures.  At least 10 of these must be done on patients with dysphagia to 
evaluate their swallowing function.  The remaining 15 exams can be done on 
normals or on patients needing a laryngoscopy exam for other reasons.  The 
supervisor must be physically present for these exams.  This person can be a 
speech pathologist who holds clinical privileges to perform FEES or he/she 
can be an otolaryngologist or other physician who is privileged to perform 
flexible nasendoscopy, and who is responsible for placing the scope and 
assessing the structural integrity of the hypoharynx/larynx. 
c. Demonstration of knowledge of the medical contraindications and possible 
adverse reactions to this procedure, including the use of topical anesthesia to 
the nares.  Demonstration of knowledge of impending signs of patient 
distress and knowledge of appropriate action to take if a complication should 
occur. 
d. Successful completion of a certified CPR course. 
 
  3 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. The Speech Pathologist obtains an order from the physician for “Fiberoptic Endoscopic Evaluation of 
Swallowing (FEES)”. 
2. The Speech Pathologist contacts the participating ENT (who will place or supervise placement of the scope) 
and schedules a time for the procedure which is agreed upon by both parties. 
3. The Speech Pathologist and ENT work as a team performing the procedure and assessing structural integrity 
and swallowing function according to the protocol established by Langmore, 1993.  The Speech Pathologist is 
responsible for writing the swallowing assessment report.  The physician is responsible for documentation 
relative to structural integrity and diagnosed abnormalities. 
4. Upon completion of the procedures, the Speech Pathologist is responsible for the equipment, its cleaning (via 
Endoscopy department) and storing, and reporting needed repairs to the director. 
 
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (1992).  Instrumental Diagnostic Procedures for Swallowing.  
ASHA, 34 (March, Suppl. 7) 25-33. 
 
 