 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Home Evaluation Section:  500 – Occupational 
Therapy 
Date of Origination:  October 1988 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: June 7, 2024   Serial Code:  RC/TS/515 
  
PURPOSE:  To maximize the patient’s safe ADL independence in the home environment by making 
recommendations to minimize architectural barriers and provide the family with training 
and to assess the patient’s needs for transition back home.  During a home evaluation, the 
Occupational Therapist and/or the Physical Therapist and the patient go to the patient’s 
home and go through a daily routine.  This includes getting in and out of the home, 
performing in the kitchen, getting in and out of bed, on and off the toilet, in and out of the 
bathtub.  Recommendations are given to the family and patient if changes are needed to 
ensure the safety and independence of the patient or if any equipment is needed.   
POLICY:  A home evaluation shall be performed on patients as deemed necessary by the clinical 
team, during the Team Conference.  The patient must live within a 60-mile radius and be 
transported by the family member’s vehicle. The employee will travel in their own 
vehicle. 
PROCEDURE:  
1. The patient’s need for a Home Evaluation is decided upon in Team Conference and is 
based on the following criteria: 
a. Using a wheelchair as a main source of mobility in the home. 
b. Returning home alone with a concern for safety and mobility. 
c. Has an odd architectural or structural barrier(s) in and around the home (i.e., 
stairs, garden tub, etc….). 
d. The therapist has attempted to meet the patient’s needs for transitional home by 
suggesting ways to alter the home environment and these still remain a concern 
for the patient’s safety and transition to the home. 
e. The family has expressed concerns and feels there are needs that have not been or 
cannot be addressed in the clinic. 
f. The patient must be able to enter the home by means of a wheelchair or walking 
with an assistive device or by stairs.   
g. Therapists will get measurements from the family prior to the Home Evaluation, 
for doorways within the home to make sure the patient’s current wheelchair can 
fit through the doorways and the patient’s living spaces (bedroom, bathroom, 
hallways). 
h. Therapists will communicate with the patient and family for toileting needs prior 
to going on the Home Evaluation and be prepared for toileting needs while at the 
patient’s home. The therapist can bring the appropriate BSC if needed to the  2 
Home Evaluation if the bathroom isn’t accessible or if needed over the patient’s 
exiting toilet. 
 
2. Occupational Therapy will have a discussion with the patient, the Physical Therapist, and 
a family member (if necessary), the day and time to perform the evaluation. 
 
3. Doctor’s order will specify the home evaluation and the transportation arrangements.  
The patient will ride in a family member’s vehicle, to the patient’s home. The therapists 
are to follow in their own vehicle separately.  
 
4. Occupational Therapy obtains the physical address of the home from a family member. 
 
5. On the day of the evaluation, the patient is signed out at the nurse’s station before leaving 
the unit. Patient’s nurse is notified before leaving to check for need of medications prior 
to leaving. 
 
6. At the scheduled time, the patient is assisted into a family member’s vehicle.  Family 
training is provided at this time for car transfers. 
 
7. Upon reaching the patient’s home, the evaluation is performed. 
 
8. Recommendations are recorded in the EMR once returning back to the hospital. Results 
and recommendations are also verbally reported to the family.  
 
9. Upon returning to the unit, the patient is signed back in, and nursing is notified. 
 
10. Therapists will follow up with the case manager on findings from the Home Evaluation, 
reviewing recommended equipment, further education recommendations, or discharge 
recommendations. 
 
 