 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Rehabilitation Nursing Service 
General Guidelines 
Section:  200 – Rehab Nursing 
Date of Origination:  September 1991 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: July 3, 2023  Serial Code:  RC/TS/201 
  
POLICY: 
The facility provides 24-hr. nursing service which meets the patient needs in accordance with the patient 
care policies.  The policies ensure that each patient receives treatments, medications, diet as prescribed, 
and rehabilitative nursing care as needed; receives proper care to prevent decubitus ulcers and 
deformities, and is kept comfortable, clean, well-groomed, and protected from accident, injury, and 
infection; and is encouraged, assisted, and trained in self-care and group activities.  Nursing personnel, 
including at least one registered nurse on each tour of duty 7 day a week, licensed practical (vocational) 
nurses, nursing assistants, and clinical service representatives are assigned duties consistent with their 
education and experience, and based on the characteristics of the patient load and the kinds of nursing 
skills needed to provide care to the patients.  Weekly time schedules are maintained and indicate the 
number and classification of nursing staff including relief personnel, who worked on each unit for each 
tour of duty. 
 1. Twenty-four hour nursing service requires that the number and type of personnel are 
sufficient to meet the total needs of the patient in terms of: 
  A. Maintaining physiological functions, i.e., fluid balances, elimination, electrolyte 
status, respiratory status, functional capacity of musculature, neurologic status and 
nutritional status. 
  B. Assisting patients to learn to live with their condition and to care from 
themselves. 
  C. Giving assistance in maintaining optimal physical and psychological functioning. 
  D. Encouraging out-of-bed activities as permitted and with assistance. 
  E. Protecting from accident and injury by appropriate safety measures. 
 2. The staffing pattern is dependent upon: 
  2 
  A. Intensity of illnesses, the nursing needs, and the degree of dependence for care of 
the patients. 
  B. Level of preparation of the staff. 
 
There is an organized Nursing Service Administration with a sufficient number of qualified nursing 
personnel to meet the total nursing needs of all patients in the facility.  In the event of insufficient 
Rehabilitation staff the NSA Administration House Manager works with the Rehabilitation Charge 
Nurse to provide adequate staff to meet patient needs, Orientation of additional staff is provided.  When 
supplemental staff is utilized, they will come from the Medicine Division, work under direct supervision 
of the Charge RN and Orientation will be given the staff person to provide basic information about 
Rehabilitation. 
The Director of Rehabilitation Nursing Services is a qualified registered nurse employed full-time who 
has, in writing administrative authority, responsibility, and accountability for the function of the unit.  
The Director or Rehab Nurse Supervisor are responsible for coordinating nursing services with other 
patient services, and for recommending the number and levels of nursing personnel to be employed.  
 1. The Director of Rehabilitation Nursing Services  
  A. Establishes departmental standards for the evaluation of personnel performance 
and satisfies employee training and development needs. Monitors and evaluates 
the performance of reporting personnel and strives to ensure that all employees 
are treated fairly and with compassion and respect. 
  B. Ensures that all staff members are oriented and continuously educated regarding 
their roles in sustaining and improving the overall environment. Assess the 
learning and development needs of staff members and is responsible for the 
provision of appropriate educational services.  
  C. Coordinates and manages high quality health care services that recognize 
individual patient rights while acting as a role model for the nursing personnel. 
Educates staff and monitors the care delivery in order to ensure that patients 
exercise their rights to be informed and to participate and make decisions in all 
aspects of their medical care. Ensures that patient care demonstrates respect for 
personal values and beliefs and is focused on the unique needs of each individual 
and family.  
  D. Provides ongoing assessments of the patient care delivery system in order to 
identify existing and potential health care needs within the scope of care for the 
unit. Evaluates and makes recommendations for current and potential unit staffing 
needs, assesses and introduces technological and procedural changes that enhance 
the efficiency and quality of patient care services and outcomes, and supervises 
the ongoing assessment of patients for physical, psychological, and social status 
needs and discharge planning.  3 
  E. Utilizes advanced clinical knowledge to develop and maintain a delivery system 
for individualized, appropriate, and compassionate patient care. Supports and 
encourages staff, patients, and significant others in the determination of treatment 
and rehabilitation goals for desired outcomes. Provides leadership and participates 
in emergency measures for sudden adverse patient developments. 
  F. Consults with nursing management, nursing staff, and Clinical Nurse Specialists 
in the development of instructional materials for patients and family members 
which will provide the specific knowledge and skill required to increase their 
understanding of the patient's illness, meet the patient's ongoing health care needs, 
and improve patient health outcomes. 
  G. Demonstrates clinical expertise in facilitating the timely availability, access, and 
utilization of multidisciplinary health care services, alternative levels of care, and 
community resources in a manner that ensures optimal continuity and expediency 
in the health care delivery process. 
  H. Estimates future departmental personnel, equipment, and supply needs in order to 
ensure the attainment of operating goals. Develops, recommends, and implements 
the annual capital equipment, personnel, and operating budget for the department. 
Conducts periodic reviews of departmental performance, analyzes budget 
variances, and implements responsive action. 
  I. Monitors and coordinates the effective use, maintenance, and repair of equipment, 
supplies, facilities, and resources that support patient care in order to maintain a 
functional and safe environment for patients, staff, and visitors. 
  J. Develops and maintains documentation required for successful employee 
development and administrative and divisional communication. Supervises and 
participates in the efficient recording of pertinent patient care data utilizing the 
computerized medical record and manual documentation in order to promote 
timely and efficient access to required information throughout the organization. 
Preserves the confidentiality of data and information identified as sensitive in 
order to ensure the protection of patient dignity and privacy. 
  K. Implements strategies that use current scientific knowledge to prevent and reduce 
the risk of infection transmission. Promptly and appropriately reports infections 
between and among staff, patients, and visitors in order to improve patient 
outcomes. 
  L. Utilizes continued analysis and evaluation of patient care outcomes to enhance the 
quality and efficiency of services and optimize the utilization of hospital 
resources. Participates actively in unit-specific and multidisciplinary continuous 
quality improvement and quality assurance studies in a manner that promotes 
compliance with hospital and divisional regulations and standards. 
     4 
 The Registered Nurse provides safe therapeutic care in a holistic and systematic way, incorporating 
differences into the provision of care. Integrates knowledge, skills, and experiences to meet the needs of 
patients and families throughout the continuum to include patient and family education. Relies on 
education and training to complete responsibilities within scope of licensure as registered nurse. 
   2. The Registered Nurse  
   A. Performs psycholosocial /physiologic assessments that integrate changing data. 
   B. Formulates a plan of care based on trends of similar patients, including patient 
education and discharge planning. Tailors and prioritizes caring practice to 
individual needs, including cultural/ ethical/ spiritual needs. 
   C. Participates in the planning of routine transitional health care needs. (i.e. 
treatment options patient placement options, end of life options) 
   D. Responds to changes in patient's needs and provides holistic care using 
independent clinical judgment based on knowledge drawn from education and 
experience. 
   E. Adapts planned educational programs and information to individual patients and 
family by modifying teaching strategies or content. Integrates education during 
the delivery of patient care. Collaborates with patients/ families to identify 
realistic desired outcomes. 
   F. Ensures efficiency in the delivery of care: determines immediate priorities and 
offers solution for problems. 
   G. Actively advocates for patient rights and identifies potential conflict. Seeks 
counsel for resolution of conflict. 
   H. Identifies variances from expected outcomes. 
   I. Evaluates patient outcomes and makes revisions in the plan of care. 
   J. Documents all patient care activities as per documentation standards. Assists the 
healthcare team with the documentation process. 
   K. Consistently communicates/collaborates with the health care team members, 
patients and families to maximize patient outcomes. 
   L. Appropriately delegates patient care activities to other health care team members 
and participates in making and revising staff assignments to achieve maximum 
productivity 
   M. Maintains knowledge regarding unit initiatives, and incorporates the outcomes of 
the team/ committees work into practice. 
   N. Participates on unit teams, work groups and/ or committees. Anticipates needs  5 
and voluntarily assists others. 
The Licensed Practical Nurse provides basic therapeutic nursing care according to established standards 
of practice under the direction and supervision of the RN. Provides care to those patients and caregivers 
whose care requirements are routine and standardized with predictable outcomes. Assists the RN and 
healthcare team to achieve desired patient outcomes. Relies on education, training and established 
guidelines to complete responsibilities. Initially requires instruction and guidance to accomplish job 
which should develop into working under general supervision. 
  3. The Licensed Practical Nurse  
   A. Provides direct patient care utilizing the nursing process under the direction and 
supervision of the RN. 
   B. Reviews diagnostic test results and reports abnormal results and changes in 
patient condition to the RN, physician and appropriate healthcare team members 
in a timely manner. 
   C. Administers prescribed medications, therapies and treatments in accordance with 
practical nursing standards. 
   D. Maintains and reviews patient medical records, notes and physician orders: 
documents all patient care activities in accordance with documentation standards. 
   E. Implements components of the plan of care within the LPN scope of practice and 
competency to promote desired outcomes. 
   F. Assists with discharge planning and carrying out the patient’s teaching plan under 
the direction of the RN. 
   G. Evaluates and maintains the environment to promote patient and healthcare team 
safety. 
 H. Collaborates with the supervising RN on the execution of the patient's plan of 
care. 
   I Assists physicians, RNs and health care team members with data collection, 
assessment, planning, intervention and evaluation of patient and families care to 
achieve desired outcomes. 
   J. Advocates for the patient and supports the patient's psychological, ethical, 
spiritual and cultural needs by collaborating with the RN and healthcare team. 
   K. Participates in quality improvement initiatives by utilizing standards, guidelines, 
and pathways for care delivery. 
   
  6 
  
 The Nursing Assistant performs various patient care activities and related nonprofessional services 
necessary in caring for the personal needs and comfort of patients. The Nursing Assistant assists with 
patient cleaning, feeding, and preparation for treatment, takes and records vital signs, changes bed linen, 
prepares treatment trays and other supplies, and assists nursing service personnel with a variety of other 
patient care duties. Relies on established guidelines to accomplish tasks. Works under close supervision.  
    4. The Nursing Assistant  
   A. Assists in preparing unit and patient room and bed in an effort to ensure that 
patients are adequately and properly accommodated during their hospital stay. 
Assists and accompanies patients during admission, transfer, and discharge 
procedures in a manner that demonstrates compassion and understanding for each 
patient. 
   B. Takes and records patient temperature, pulse, respiration, weight, height, blood 
pressure, and intake-output measurement as directed by appropriate personnel in a 
caring and efficient manner and documents information in CIS. Expediently 
reports any unusual incidents or observed changes in patient condition or behavior 
to appropriate personnel. 
   C. Assists patients with daily living activities (e.g., bed bath, oral hygiene, shaving, 
dressing, back rubs, linen freshening), and provides general care (e.g., positioning 
patients, pre- and post-operative care, assisting with bed pan use) in a manner that 
demonstrates compassion and understanding for all patients. 
   D. Prepares patients for meals, serves food, and feeds patients when needed in a 
manner that demonstrates compassion and respect for patient needs. 
   E. Transports patients to and from designated areas of the hospital in a caring, 
considerate, expedient, and professional manner. Ensures that patients have 
identification bracelets before transportation and demonstrates compassion and 
respect in all contacts with patients, family members, and fellow employees. 
   F. Expediently answers patient call lights, assists patients with personal hygiene and 
other activities of daily living (e.g., dressing, ambulation) in a caring and 
understanding manner, and efficiently maintains an attractive, comfortable, and 
safe environment for patients with special consideration to room cleanliness, 
ventilation, lighting, and patient safety. 
   G. Maintains a safe, comfortable, and therapeutic health care environment by 
cleaning rooms and equipment, preparing for sterilization and disinfection, 
promptly reporting damaged equipment and other problems to appropriate 
personnel, and efficiently and properly handling linen and supplies. 
   H. Provides input for end of shift reports and CIS documentation, and participates in  7 
unit quality assurance programs in an effort to enhance the quality and efficiency 
of unit services. 
   I. Utilizes all equipment, supplies, facilities, and resources in a prudent and efficient 
manner in order to ensure efficient departmental operations and the provision of 
high quality health care services. 
   J. Strives to promote the quality and efficiency of his/her own performance through 
participation in staff educational programs, approved continuing education 
courses, and specialized skill training programs. 
   K. Assists physicians with examination, treatments, and special tests and procedures 
as directed by a Registered Nurse. Collects patient specimens in a caring manner 
and expediently transports specimens to the lab when necessary. Assists with 
patient rehabilitation under the supervision of a Registered Nurse and in 
accordance with the patient's care plan in an efficient and professional manner. 
   L. Runs inter-departmental errands (e.g., transporting lab specimens, picking up 
patient medications from pharmacy) for nursing personnel in an expedient and 
professional manner. 
 The Discharge Nurse Coordinator’s position operates on the nursing unit. This position is responsible 
for coordinating all Rehab discharges from a nursing perspective. Represents nursing team at team 
conferences. Educates patient/family at time of discharge. Does not function as a floor nurse. 
 5. Discharge Nurse Coordinator 
  A. Prepares patient records and nursing documentation for multidisciplinary team 
conferences.  Participates in team conference in order to provide nursing input towards 
the patient’s discharge plan.  Works with members of the healthcare team to develop the 
interdisciplinary treatment plan.  Facilitates discharge communication between nursing 
and other members of the healthcare team. 
  B. Prepares documentation for patient discharge by organizing prescriptions and 
physician orders.  Assists medical management team in obtaining orders for necessary 
durable medical equipment.  Sets up post-discharge follow-up appointments with 
physician offices. 
  C. Prepares documentation for skilled nursing placement by completing necessary forms 
and ensuring completion of PPDs and chest x-rays.  Coordinates the nursing continuity of 
care with representatives from home health agencies, long term care facilities, and/or 
nursing homes. 
  D. Conducts patient/family disease education for dialysis, wound care, orthotics, etc. and 
provides written instructions prior to discharge.  Educates patient/family on discharge 
information, medications, and nutritional needs.  Responds to post-discharge follow-up 
questions from patients as necessary.  8 
  E. Demonstrates ability to access and utilize community resources.  Is knowledgeable of 
ADA and other federal guidelines that support individuals with disabilities.  
Appropriately refers patients/families to community resources for additional support. 
  F. Attends meetings as required and participates on committees as directed.  Strives to 
improve the quality of meetings by taking an active role in meeting topics.  
 
 The Clinical Services Representative assists the clinical staff by performing a variety of clerical tasks 
that ensure the efficiency of the unit and provide outstanding customer service to our patients and 
visitors. Relies on established guidelines to accomplish tasks. Works under close supervision. 
   5. The Clinical Services Representative  
   A. Assembles and maintains the patient chart from admission to discharge. 
   B. Collects all printouts and files in charts, runs necessary reports, and retrieves data 
as requested by physicians and nurses. 
   C. Orders necessary equipment and unit supplies and maintains adequate inventory 
levels. 
   D. Consistently processes patient orders, requests for exams and other ancillary 
services, such as x-rays, lab tests and transportation accurately and timely. 
   E. Coordinates patient admissions, transfers and discharges. 
   F. Assist nursing staff with retrieving medications from pneumatic tube system and 
places medication in appropriate locations for administration by nurse. 
   G. Acts as a receptionist and greets patients, directs visitors, and provides patient 
information to the medical staff. 
   H. Answers the phone and uses proper phone etiquette. Responds to the patient call 
lights in a timely manner. Maintains a work area that is neat, clean and orderly. 
Maintains office equipment for the unit. 
   I. Call physicians for consults and notifies the nursing staff of the consultation. 
  
 