 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Goal Setting and Treatment Planning Conference Section:  300 – Treatment 
Planning 
Date of Origination:  November 1988 Supersedes:       
Date Last 
Reviewed/Revised: 
June 17, 2024   Serial Code:  RC/TS/304 
  
POLICY: It is the policy of the Rehabilitation Center that each patient admitted to this service be reviewed 
at a weekly Goal Setting and Treatment Planning conference attended by his/her Rehab 
Physician, Case Manager, and all other treatment team members by discipline.  In addition, as 
deemed appropriate, referring physicians, consulting physicians, representatives of third-party 
payers, and family members may also attend the conference.  These conferences are held to set 
goals for the patient’s progress, determine functional progress, and to develop and update the 
treatment plan. 
 
Each Goal Setting and Treatment Planning conference will include a medical report involving a review 
of all pertinent medical information, a review of the evaluations and/or treatments conducted by each 
discipline, and a discussion of areas of progress and concern. 
The following detailed format outlines the procedure for initial and periodic conferences: 
1. Initial Conference 
A. Brief Medical Report – review of pertinent medical information. 
i. Structural Diagnosis/Impairments 
ii. Physical, Cognitive, and Personality/Emotional Syndromes 
iii. Medications and Treatments 
iv. Limitations and Restrictions 
B. Initial Evaluations 
i. Functional review will be reviewed and rated according to the chosen 
motor scale for the Rehabilitation Unit.  Each discipline reports on 
functional activities and outlines patient disabilities and limitations 
according to functional status.  This report includes status at initial 
evaluation, current status, and discharge goal status. 
ii. Review of functional activities on which therapy will be focused during 
the next week. 
C. Discussion on Barriers to Discharge 
i. Case management report emphasizes patient, family, and social situation 
factors along with barriers to discharge that impact the prioritizing of  2 
goals for transdisciplinary team planning. 
ii. Problems affecting the patient’s ability to participate and make progress in 
therapy as well as suggested solutions are discussed. 
iii. Estimated length of stay is discussed. 
2. Weekly Conference 
A. Brief Medical Report 
i. Recent evaluations and changes in medical status. 
ii. Changes in medical treatment. 
iii. Review of medical restrictions and limitations. 
B. Update of Functional Status (in terms of disabilities and handicaps) 
i. Review of changes in functional status.  Each discipline reports on those 
functional activities.  Reports are provided concerning all activities for 
which there is presently ongoing treatment. 
ii. Review of the team goal which will be focused on during the next week. 
C. Discussion of Barriers to Discharge 
i. Case management report emphasizes new information or changes in 
previously presented information concerning patient, family, and social 
situation factors that impact the prioritizing of goals for transdisciplinary 
team planning. 
ii. Review of previously recognized problems as well as new situations and 
suggested solutions which affect the patient’s ability to participate and 
make progress in therapy. 
iii. Review of estimated length of stay. 
 
 