 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Inpatient Rehabilitation Center 
Pharyngograms 
Section:  600 – Speech 
Pathology 
Date of Origination:  June 1990 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised: 
Date Last Reviewed: 
June 11, 2024   
June 11, 2024 
Serial Code:  RC/TS/603 
  
POLICY: It is the policy of the Speech-Language Pathology division to conduct formal evaluations of the 
swallowing function, make appropriate dietary and therapeutic recommendation, and devise a 
treatment program to remediate the patient’s swallowing deficits.  According to the standards and 
regulations of the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association and the Louisiana Board of 
Examiners for Speech Pathology and Audiology.  Pharyngogram procedures are performed in 
conjunction with OLOLRMC Radiology Department. 
PROCEDURE: 
1. The pharyngogram is an elective procedure, which is available Sunday through Saturday. Pharyngograms will 
be performed during normal operating hours.   
2. A pharyngogram may be ordered by the attending and/or consulting physician via CPOE or phone order. 
3. The nurse’s station enters the order via computer system to both Physical Medicine and Radiology.  
4. Upon receiving the pharyngogram order, the Speech Pathologist schedules the procedure with Radiology.  If 
there is a change in the time agreed upon, Radiology would contact the Speech Pathologist to arrange a 
different time.  The Speech Pathologist communicates the schedule with Physical Medicine/Rehab staff as 
appropriate. 
5. Hospital Transportation will transport the patient to Radiology via wheelchair or stretcher.  Every attempt 
possible should be made to transport the patient by wheelchair in order to obtain the best position for the 
procedure.  Once the patient has been transported to Radiology, radiology notifies the Speech Pathologist. 
After the procedure is completed, Radiology will be responsible for transporting the patient back to his/her 
room. 
6. All pharyngograms will be performed in the Radiology Department with the patient in an upright sitting 
position.  Exceptions to this will be dealt with individually by the Radiologist and Speech Pathologist. 
7. All pharyngograms are performed by the Radiologist/ Radiology Physician’s Assistant, the Speech 
Pathologist, and Radiology Tech in conjunction with the policy and procedure of the Radiology Department. 
8. The Speech Language Pathologist will setup the food consistencies in accordance with Varibar mixing 
instructions and prepared trays will be used within 30 minutes of prep.  
9. The Speech Pathologist or Radiology Technician will position and feed the patient during the procedure.  
Assistance from the radiology tech may be utilized as needed.  The Speech Pathologist will supervise the 
procedure in direct collaboration with the Radiologist or Physician Assistant so that discussion of diagnoses 
and plan of care can occur simultaneously with the procedure. 
10. The results of the procedure will be reported as follows: 
a. The Radiologist evaluates the patient’s swallowing mechanism and reports his findings via  2 
computerized report.  The results may also be called-in to the attending physician. 
b. The Speech Pathologist interprets the patient’s swallowing function and makes appropriate 
therapeutic and dietary recommendations.  The report is entered in the medical record within 24 hours 
and may be called-in to the attending physician as needed. 
 
 
 