 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Team Conferences Section:  300 – Treatment 
Planning 
Date of Origination:  September 1995 Supersedes:       
Date Last Reviewed: 
Date Last Revised: 
June 17, 2024  
June 6, 2022 
Serial Code:  RC/TS/306 
  
PURPOSE: To delineate a format for all patient/family conferences and/or team conferences to ensure the 
following: 
 
1. Communication between the treatment team, physician, consultants, and patient/family 
2. The development of an individualized rehabilitation program with specific patient and/or 
family goals. 
3. The ongoing evaluation of and/or revision of the treatment and/or discharge plan. 
4. To address all patient and/or family issues in an effective, timely manner. 
5. To provide organization and consistency to the rehabilitation program by means of a 
coordinated interdisciplinary approach. 
 
POLICY: Team conferences will be scheduled weekly beginning with the initial conference which will be 
held within seven days of admission.  Patient and family conferences may be scheduled at the 
request of the treatment team or the patient and/or family.  The case manager will be responsible 
for the scheduling of all conferences.  Each team member will present a summary of the patient’s 
progress, concerns, goals, and Quality Indicators with supportive documentation. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
Team Conference Structure: 
1. Initial team conference will be held within seven days of admit. 
2. Case manager will schedule patient/family conferences at the request of the patient/family, treatment team or 
payer. 
3. The physician directing the rehabilitation plan of care begins each team conference by reviewing and updating 
the team on medical issues, rehabilitation problems and other issues. 
4. Team members provide an interdisciplinary summary and report focusing on clinically pertinent information 
and progress toward rehabilitation goals to the physician and other members of the rehabilitation team. 
  2 
Goal Setting: 
1. Therapy goals are captured in the team conference update and discussed in relation to how the patient is 
progressing.   
 
Patient Involvement: 
1. Patient and/or family input and understanding is to be reflected in program unit goals and service goals. 
2. The attending physician or designee and Case Manager will meet with the patient and/or family after every 
team conference to discuss the rehabilitation plan of care and to incorporate patient and/or family input and 
participate in decision making regarding the individualized plan of care. 
3. Patient and/or family may be invited to team conferences on an as needed basis. 
 
Documentation: 
1. Each service is responsible for weekly progress notes, justifying services provided and patient’s response to 
treatment. 
2. Team members are to be prepared to discuss the following at the team conference: 
a. Rehabilitation Barriers to Discharge 
b. Patient’s progress 
c. Goals based on identified problems 
d. Interventions 
e. Estimated time to accomplish goals 
3. Initial team conference reports include: 
a. Initial assessment results 
b. Rehabilitation Barriers to Discharge 
c. Treatment goals 
d. Treatment plans 
e. Quality Indicator scores or other objectives ratings as applicable 
f. Estimated length of stay 
g. Initial discharge plans 
h. Persons participating in team conference 
4. Interim team conference reports include: 
a. Patient Status – summary of objective clinical findings within each service (e.g. – status of self-care, 
mobility, bladder care, comprehension, etc.) 
b. Barriers to Discharge or Clinical Concerns – issues interfering with or affecting treatment, 
rehabilitation goals, not mentioned in patient status section.  These tend to be more general in nature 
and are likely to affect more than one member of the team (e.g. – incontinence, fatigue, pain etc.) 
c. Treatment Plans – statements are to be specific as to treatment stated goals, time for accomplishment, 
measures to be used, persons responsible, etc. 
d. Updated Quality Indicator scores or other objective ratings 
e. Updated estimated length of stay 
f. Discharge planning update 
g. Persons participating in team conference 
5. Discharge team conference reports include: 
a. Destination 
b. Additional treatment in a specific service 
c. Home education / activities to improve the individual’s post discharge functioning  3 
d. Completed Quality Indicator scores or other objective ratings 
e. Persons participating in team conference 
6. The Team Conference report is maintained in the medical record.  Clinical updates are sent to third party 
payers as appropriate. 
 
General Information: 
1. The physician directing the rehabilitation plan of care participates in all team conferences. 
2. A designated team member attends each team conference meeting, to ensure a representative from each 
discipline. 
3. The scribe or designee accesses the electronic medical record and notes participants. 
4. The average discussion time per patient at each team conference is ~ 10 minutes. 
5. External case managers or new persons involved in the decision making of the individual rehabilitation plan 
of care may be invited to attend on an as needed basis. 
 
 
 