 1 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Rehabilitation Center 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:  Transdisciplinary 
Services 
Subject:  Emergency Procedures During Home 
Evaluations/Outings 
Section:  1000 – Community 
Re-Entry 
Date of Origination:  January 1990 Supersedes: RC/TS/1007 
Date Last Reviewed: June 17, 2024  Serial Code:  RC/TS/1004 
  
PURPOSE: To ensure efficient and safe handling of any emergency that may occur during a home evaluation 
or recreational outing. 
 
POLICY: Community outings should only occur under optimal weather conditions.  If a medical emergency 
should occur during an outing, the attending caregiver will classify the type of emergency and 
promptly begin the appropriate procedure outlined below: 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A. If a MAJOR medical emergency (e.g. – patient complains of arm/chest pains and difficulty breathing, 
passes out, etc.) occurs while en-route to the outing destination: 
1. If possible, quickly proceed to the nearest hospital or emergency room. 
2. Call 911 “Emergency Medical Services”. 
3. If necessary, position patient comfortable on the floor and begin CPR. 
4. Call the Rehabilitation Nursing Unit at 765-8880 and notify the attending physician of the patient’s 
condition. 
5. If the patient is admitted to Our Lady of the Lake’s Emergency Room, the Rehabilitation Nursing 
Manager will be notified so that they can assist with patient care as needed. 
 
B. Once the outing destination has been reached, in the event of MAJOR medical emergency (e.g. – patient 
passes out, experiences respiratory distress, etc.): 
1. Monitor the patient constantly, checking vital signs intermittently.  Blood pressure cuff located in the first 
aid bag. 
2. Call 911 (Emergency Medical Services) if necessary. 
3. Call the Rehabilitation Nursing Unit at 765-8880 and notify the Charge Nurse of the patient’s condition.  
The charge nurse will notify the attending physician and the Nurse Manager. 
4. Rehabilitation staff will accompany the patient to his destination (Our Lady of the Lake’s Emergency 
Room or elsewhere). 
5. If patient is escorted to Our Lady of the Lake’s Emergency Room, the Rehabilitation Nurse Manager will 
be notified so that they can assist with patient care as needed. 
  2 
C. In the event of a MINOR accident (e.g. – cut, scrape, fall, etc.): 
1. Promptly return the patient to a comfortable position. 
2. Monitor the patient constantly. 
3. Obtain the first aide kit located in the patient care bag. 
4. Apply first aid as needed. 
5. Call the Rehabilitation Nursing Unit at 765-8880, contact the Nurse Manager or Charge Nurse and report 
the patient’s condition.  Request to notify the attending physician. 
6. Promptly return to the Rehabilitation Center depending on the severity of the accident. 
 
D. In the event of personal safety and security issues that occur during an outing (e.g. criminal acts, 
environmental disaster, etc.), the attending caregiver will call 911 “Emergency Services” for assistance and 
return to the Rehab Center as soon as safely possible. 
 
E. If upon arrival, the outing destination does not appear to be a safe physical environment, the attending 
caregiver will return to the Rehab Center and reschedule the outing for an alternative date and location. 
 
F. All incidents involving patients, visitors, or employees will be reported on the Patient/Visitor Safety Event 
Report according to hospital policy. 
 
 
 