Page 1 of 2 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL Manual:  Access Services 
Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center Chapter:    
Subject:  Registration Section:    
Date of Origination:     April 27, 2001 Supersedes:       
Date Last Revised or 
Reviewed:APRIL 2011 ; 
Jan 2018 
April 2011   Serial Code:    
 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
To obtain accurate and complete demographic, clinical, insurance and financial information from patients 
in an efficient and courteous manner. 
 
POLICY: 
 
All components of the registration process are to be completed when the patient arrives.  A registration 
must be recorded for each patient on each occasion of service.   All demographic, clinical, insurance and 
financial information must be obtained.  Benefits Verification should be obtained at the time registration 
is completed.  Pre-notification and/or precertification must be obtained as appropriate at the time of 
registration.  All necessary signatures including consent for treatment, consent for release of information 
and financial responsibility, and proper witnessing must be obtained at the time of registration. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
The Access Services Reps must obtain comprehensive demographic, financial, clinical, and other 
pertinent information that will ensure the quality of the patient account at the time of registration and 
allow us to follow up with the patient in case of denials or other issues. 
 
The patients insurance card must obtained and the address on the card must match the address in the 
system.  If the address in the system is not there or incorrect, the address must be changed in the system. 
All other information on the patient’s insurance card must be keyed correctly in the system (member and 
group numbers, member and group names, phone numbers, effective dates). 
 
Benefits verification that can be processed through EPIC or Passport and should be done at the time of 
registration (this includes all ER registrations, as well as Admits, Outpatient registrations and pre-
registrations). The verification method that is used should be documented in the patient’s insurance screen 
under HAR account notes. 
 
Benefits verification and pre-notification to the insurance company should be done for all admissions.  
You should verify benefits for admits by using EPIC, Passport or by calling the insurance company 
directly.  The verification method that is used should be documented in the patient’s insurance screen Page 2 of 2 
under HAR account notes.  If it is after hours, and the patient’s insurance cannot be verified using EPIC 
or Passport, a pre-notification attempt should be done by leaving a voicemail message with the patient’s 
insurance company. If unable to leave VM message the attempt should be documented using the HAR 
account notes.    The insurance clerks will follow-up and document with benefits verification for these 
admits the following day. 
 
Benefits verification is especially important for patients over 65.  Benefits must be checked by using 
EPIC or Passport to verify if the patient has Medicare, a replacement, or other coverage.  If it’s Medicare 
and the patient was involved in an MVA or any other type of accident, the MSP Questionnaire must be 
answered accordingly and the liability insurance associated with this accident must be obtained and 
entered into the system. 
 
All Access Services Employees are responsible for helping to maintain good relations among the patients, 
hospitals, clinics, physicians, and community by performing all aspects of the registration process in a 
professional, courteous, and timely manner. 
 
 