 1 
  OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Anesthesia 
Title: Patient Care, Anesthesia Policy Reference #: SAA010 
Supersedes #: 03/00 
Date of Origination: 10/14/1988 Review Date: 4/17/2024 
Revision Date: 3/28/2023 
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish a policy for the provision of anesthesia patient care from the pre-anesthesia evaluation 
period to patient discharge post anesthesia. 
 
POLICY: 
The same quality of anesthetic care should be available for all patients 24 hours a day, seven days a 
week, on emergency as well as elective patients. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
I. Pre-Anesthesia Period: 
A. Preparation of Patients prior to Anesthesia 
1.  The Anesthesia provider will be responsible for obtaining informed consent from the 
patient and documenting in the patient record. 
2. NPO Status  
a.  All patients will not have had solid or liquid food or drink as per NPO 
restrictions below prior to the anesthetic unless documented by the surgeon 
that the procedure must be done on an emergency basis. 
 
 
NPO Recommendations 
 
Ingested Material 
 
Minimum Fasting Period 
Clear liquids3 2  hours 
Breast milk (Neonates and Infants) 4  hours 
Infant formula 6  hours 
Non-human milk4 6  hours 
Fried, fatty, or meat meal5 8  hours 
1. These recommendations apply to healthy patients who are undergoing elective procedures.  
They are not intended for women in labor.  Following the guidelines does not guarantee a 
complete gastric emptying has occurred. 
2. The fasting periods noted above apply to all ages 
3. Examples of clear liquids include water, fruit juices without pulp, carbonated beverages, clear 
tea, and black coffee. 
4. Since non-human milk is similar to solids in gastric emptying time, the amount ingested must 
be considered when determining an appropriate fasting period. 
5. A light meal typically consists of toast and clear liquids.  Meals that include fried or fatty 
foods or meat may prolong gastric emptying time.  Both the amount and type of foods 
ingested must be considered when determining an appropriate fasting period.     2 
 
b. NPO Recommendations for Enteral Feeds  
a. Non-intubated patients, or patients to undergo a procedure where the 
trachea will be unprotected who are receiving tube feeds, should be 
fasting for 8 hours prior to any elective surgical procedure. Patients may 
receive their medications with small amounts of water. 
b. For patients to undergo tracheostomy, tube feeds should be held for 8 
hours prior to the procedure as there will be some period of time with an 
unprotected airway during the procedure. 
c. For intubated patients (cuffed orotracheal, nasotracheal, or tracheostomy 
tube) with an orogastric or nasogastric tube, feeds should be held just 
prior to transfer to the Operating Room and the tube should be placed to 
suction to remove any residual gastric contents prior to proceeding. 
d. For intubated patients with a post pyloric feeding tube or a jejunostomy 
feeding tube, enteral feedings should continue until the patient is called 
for transport to the OR for surgery. 
e. For intubated patients with a percutaneous gastrostomy tube, feeds 
should be stopped on transport to the OR and aspiration of the contents 
should be done prior to the procedure. 
f. For patients who have a surgically placed post pyloric feeding tube, feeds 
should continue until the patient is called for transport to the OR for 
surgery. 
3. Dentures and dental bridges may or may not be removed prior to anesthesia.  The 
Anesthetist will inquire as to their presence and make the appropriate determination. 
a. If removed in the OR, dentures and dental bridges will be placed in covered, 
labeled container and accompany the patient to Post Anesthesia Care Unit 
(PACU) and will be the responsibility of the circulator.  The OR & PACU 
RN will document in their respective nurses’ notes the disposition of 
dentures, bridges, etc…  
b.   An effort will be made to replace the dentures or bridges when the patient 
awakens. 
  
 
B. Pre-Anesthesia Evaluation: 
1. The CRNA or Anesthesiologist will complete a pre-anesthesia evaluation 
and review the patient’s history during their assessment.   
2. After the determination of ASA status, the anesthesiologist develops and/or 
coordinates with the CRNA a plan of care for the patient and then signs the 
pre-anesthesia evaluation form in the space. The Anesthesiologist must sign 
the form or provide an electronic signature on elective cases before the 
patient can be brought to the operating room.    
3. The development of an appropriate anesthesia plan should be based upon 
(but not limited to): 
a. Review of the medical record   3 
b. An interview and examination of the patient to determine medical, 
surgical, anesthetic and drug history, as well as an evaluation of any 
physical findings which might affect the conduct of anesthesia. 
c. The obtaining and/or reviewing of test and consultations necessary to 
the conduct of anesthesia. 
d. Nature of the procedure to be done. 
 
C. Anesthesia Period: 
1. Appropriate monitoring of the patient will be initiated prior to the induction. 
2. The following monitoring equipment is available:  EKG/ECG, hemodynamic, 
end tidal CO2, pulse oximetry, temperature, and peripheral nerve stimulator. 
3. Immediately prior to the administration of any anesthetic, the patient will be re-
evaluated by the individual administering the anesthetic. 
4.  Immediately prior to administration of any anesthetic, there will be a check of 
all anesthetic equipment, drugs, and fluids. 
5. The anesthesiologist should be readily available to any CRNA to address 
immediate patient care needs or emergencies. 
 
D.  Intra-Operative / Anesthesia Period: 
1. Anesthesia or deep sedation may not be administered to the patient unless the 
Surgeon is in the hospital. 
2. An intra-operative anesthesia record will record monitoring of the patient 
during anesthesia and documentation of, at minimum, the following: 
a. Prior to induction of the anesthesia, all anesthesia drugs and 
equipment to be used have been checked and are immediately 
available and are determined to be functional by the practitioner who 
is administering the anesthetic. 
b. Dosages and total dosages of all drugs and agents used, including any 
narcotic wastage. 
c. Type and amount of all fluids administered, including blood and 
blood products. 
d. Technique(s) used. 
e. Patient vital signs 
f. Unusual events during the anesthesia period. 
g. The status of the patient at the conclusion of anesthesia. 
 
II. Post-Anesthesia Period: 
A. Post-Anesthesia Evaluation 
1. A post-operative evaluation / follow-up report is documented in the 
Anesthesia record by an Anesthesia provider within 48 hours. 
 
B. Post-Anesthesia Period 
1. At the conclusion of surgery, the patient will be transferred directly to the 
PACU, SMA Unit or to a Critical Care Unit.  The admitting nurse should be 
given a report by the individual who administered the anesthesia. 
PACU by the anesthesia provider should include, but not limited to:  4 
a. Patient Name 
b. Operative procedure 
c. Type of anesthesia 
d. Pertinent diagnosis other than operative procedure and general 
condition of patient i.e., brief history to include allergies, home meds, 
etc. 
e. Agents and medications used during the care (to include antibiotics 
and reversal agents) with documentation in the Anesthesia Record. 
f. Type and amount of IV fluids and/or blood received in OR, with 
documentation on Anesthesia Record and a reported total OR intake. 
g. Vital signs 
h. Estimated blood loss and a reported total OR urine output. 
i. Ectopy, if any, during surgical procedure. 
j. Any pertinent abnormal Lab values that might affect post-op care. 
k. Any intra-operative complications that will effect post-operative care. 
l. Level of consciousness. 
m. Post Anesthesia Plan of Care 
2. The receiving nurse should evaluate and document the patient's vital signs 
(blood pressure, pulse, respirations, EKG reading, and pulse oximetry reading) 
and other parameters according to the Post Anesthesia Recovery Score Policy. 
3. If the patient is unstable, the responsible anesthesia provider or his/her 
designated replacement should remain immediately available until the nurse 
and/or the patient’s primary care physician is ready to assume responsibility for 
the patient’s management.  
4. The anesthesiologist should be notified immediately of any signs of hypoxia or 
difficulty breathing post extubation. 
 
C. Discharge Criteria for Patients in PACU: 
Reference PACU policy SSPP007 Criteria for Discharge form Post 
Anesthesia Care Units 
  
D. Discharging Patients Home from SDS: 
Refer to Nursing Policy N/PC123 Discharge Criteria: Patient Receiving Anesthetic 
Agents   
  
REFERENCES: 
Criteria for Discharge from PACU (SP/P007) 
PAR (Post Anesthesia Recovery) Score (SP/P014) 
Discharge Criteria: Patient Receiving Anesthetic Agents (N/PC123) 
 
 
 
 