 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Anesthesia 
Title: Anesthesia Medication Handling Policy Reference #: SAA030 
Supersedes #: STELSUR160 
Date of Origination: 03/2005 Review Date: 11/15/2024 
Revision Date: 11/23/2020 
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish guidelines for management of anesthesia medications, handling anesthesia kits, and 
labeling medications.  
 
POLICY: 
All Anesthesia providers handling anesthesia trays and medications must follow established 
procedure to ensure appropriate handling of medications.   
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. A. Label each medication as soon as it is prepared or withdrawn from original container, 
unless it is immediately administered. This applies even if there is only one medication 
being used. Note: An immediately administered medication is one that is prepared or 
withdrawn from the vial and administered directly to a patient without any break or 
delay in process.   
Labels should include: 
1) Medication or solution name 
2) Strength 
3) Amount of medication or solution (if not apparent on container) 
4) Diluent name and volume (if not apparent on container) 
5) Date and time drawn with initials or assigned unique identifier 
 
 
B. Any IV medication will contain the labeling requirements from step A.  
In addition,  IV medications and solutions must be labeled with the date, time, and 
initials from when the medication/solution was spiked. The medication/solution and 
IV line system must remain closed and integrity must remain uncompromised.  
All spiked medications/solutions must begin infusing within 1 hour of being spiked.   2 
 
C. Any opened vials or containers of medications, narcotics and controlled substances must 
not be left unattended. If not attended, must be securely locked in the medication 
dispensing unit in the procedural rooms.   
 
D. The anesthesia provider is responsible for discarding all used medications and syringes in 
the appropriate disposal containers. Vials and needleless syringes containing unused 
portions of medications are disposed of in the approved pharmaceutical waste 
containers.  Controlled substance will be disposed of in the appropriate controlled 
substance bins. Anesthesia personnel are responsible for return of un-used medications 
back to the patient in the dispenser inventory. 
 
E. Anesthesia personnel are responsible for completing counts for removal of scheduled 
medications.  Proper narcotic/controlled substance wastage must be completed in the 
medical dispensing unit for controlled substance medications. Narcotic usage and 
waste for the Operating Room is documented and witnessed by two licensed 
practitioners.  (Anesthesiologist, CRNA, or R.N.) 
 
F. If an anesthetizing location does not have an automated medication dispenser, a drug tray 
is used. After a case where a drug tray is used, the used tray is returned to the satellite 
or Main pharmacy with a patient label for identification and charging purposes. 
 
 