 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Anesthesia 
Title: Anesthesia, Control of Electrical and 
Other Safety Hazards 
Policy Reference #: SAA016 
Supersedes #: 09/01/1987; 09/20/1991 
Date of Origination: 09/01/1987 Review Date: 09/16/2024 
Revision Date: 10/11/2018 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide policy for minimizing electrical and other safety hazards. 
 
POLICY: 
Necessary precautions will be taken to reduce/eliminate electrical and safety hazards to patients, 
anesthesia providers, and surgery staff. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
Controls are in effect to minimize electrical hazards in all anesthetizing areas, as well as hazards of 
fire and explosion in areas in which anesthetic agents are used.  Anesthetic safety regulations are 
developed under the supervision of the Chief of Anesthesia Services in conjunction with the 
hospital safety committee.  These regulations are approved by appropriate representatives of the 
medical staff and administration, reviewed annually to assure compatibility with current practice, 
and enforced. 
 
The gas machines and other anesthesia equipment are owned and maintained by Our Lady of the 
Lake Regional Medical Center (OLOLRMC).  Preventative maintenance checks are made of this 
equipment by BioMedical Department or by an agency under contract with the hospital for 
preventative and corrective maintenance.  
 
The Anesthesia machine has a system check out that should be performed prior to each days use.  If 
a leak or other defect is observed, the equipment is not used.  Replacement equipment is provided 
and faulty equipment is sent for repair. 
 
Only non-flammable agents are used.  
All electrical equipment in the anesthetizing areas is tied into an audiovisual line isolation monitor.  
When this device indicates a fault by sounding an alarm, use of all electrical equipment is 
discontinued until the problem is located and corrected.  The biomedical engineer is notified 
immediately.  
 
All electrical equipment is inspected before initial use and at regular intervals thereafter by the 
Biomedical Department.  Records of all inspections or corrective action are on file in the 
Biomedical Department. 
 