Livingston -ECLS-102-4700-10313 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Policy Manual: Security Section:  
Title: Department Code RED Safety and Response Plan for 
Security-Livingston  
Policy Reference 
#: CH-ECLS-102-4700-10313 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: February 2019 Review Date: 02/2024 
Revision Date:  
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions that indicate the 
presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present by addressing aspects of fire 
prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the 
event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow the Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center -Lake Livingston written Code RED 
Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Each Livingston Campus department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan.  
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency Operations Plan 
(ECEP001) and the Livingston Code RED Safety and Response Plan Livingston -ECLS-102-470010313 
 to guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit Signs are located at the ED lobby and Exit vestibule. 
• Smoke compartment is located at the double doors of the ambulance entrance adjacent to the Emergency Room  
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response.  
• Any available team member will close the door. 
• Any available team member will move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The facility is conducting an 
emergency exercise to ensure your safety.” 
• Any available team member will assist those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with sensory or 
mobility disabilities. 
• Any available team member will ensure all employees are accounted for.  
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
Livingston -ECLS-102-4700-10313 
Page 2 of 2 
• The closest fire extinguisher is located near the food the food court.  
• The closest manual pull station is on the adjacent wall of the Security Workstation.  
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations.  
• This department will only have horizontal evacuation. 
 