OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: 
 
Operating Room 
 
Title: OR Preference Card Maintenance Policy Reference #: SOA017 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 06/14/2018 Review Date: 07/06/2024 
Revision Date: 06/15/2021 
 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define process for Operating Room (OR) Preference Card Maintenance 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A. Overview 
1. The Preference Card Builders are assigned by the leader (manger or director) overseeing 
those services 
2. The Preference Card Builders will review and maintain all preference cards for their 
service(s). 
3. The list of preference card builders for each service should be reviewed annually.  
4. Any changes in staffing should be updated to ensure the service line has a preference card 
builder. This can be by transferring the service to another builder and by credentialing a 
new preference card builder as soon as possible.  
 
B. Process 
1. On a weekly basis and as new cases are added, the Preference Card Builder should look 
at the OR Preference Card Dashboard report “Upcoming Cases without a Surgeon 
Preference Card (Next 14 Days)” and build cards for these. 
2. On a weekly basis and as new cases are added, the Preference Card Builder should look 
at the “Unreviewed Upcoming Preference Cards (Next 14 Days)” report and do a 
complete review of these for accuracy pertaining to, but not limited to, General 
Information, Supplies, Drugs, Equipment, Instruments, Positioning Information, Staff 
Information, Instructions, etc. 
3. When a complete review is performed, the Preference Card is marked in the system as 
“Review”. 
4. Preference Card change requests are submitted through the In Basket message system, or 
accepted method on the unit, by the Intra-op nurse. These requests should be reviewed by 
Preference Card Builders and appropriate updates made. 
5. When a new surgeon, service, or procedure is made a card should be created prior to their 
first case. 
When a surgeon no longer has active privileges, his/her preference cards will be changed from an 
‘Active’ to ‘Inactive’ status.    