 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: 
 
Operating Room 
 
Title: Case Cart System Policy Reference #: SOA003 
Supersedes #: 2/11/88 
Date of Origination: 02/11/1988 Review Date: 08/8/2024 
Revision Date: 08/08/2023 
 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define proper use and function of the case cart system. 
 
POLICY: 
Case carts are to be supplied with supplies from Surgical Materials and delivered to the OR in a 
timely fashion for use on scheduled surgical procedures. If a representative from Surgical Materials 
is not available or the time to get a cart ready exceeds the time required for the procedure, the OR 
will be responsible for preparing their supplies. Case carts will be returned to SPD for 
decontamination so that they may be made ready for their next use.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
Surgical Materials 
1. Case carts are ordered with preference cards from OR for each procedure performed in the 
surgical suite. 
 
2. Carts are to be proper working condition. If they are not in proper condition, they are to be 
removed from service and a work order placed for their repair or replacement.  
 
3. Carts are stocked with supplies needed for the given procedure.  These supplies are listed on 
the procedure preference card. 
 
4. Carts will have dust cover or be closed case cart system. 
 
5. Case carts will be stored in an environment with temperature and humidity ranges suitable for 
storing sterile items, such as a core) 
 
Operating Room 
1. Case carts are sent to the operating and received by case tech or other responsible team 
member. If a case care was not able to be pulled by Surgical Materials, then the supplies will be 
pulled at this time.  
2. Case carts are “matched” with the schedule and preference card.  2 
3. A preference card is printed for the case. 
4. The case tech, or responsible team member, “pulls” additional items that are needed for cases 
(per preference card supplies/instruments/equipment) and places on or by case cart. 
5. Case carts will be stored adjacent to the assigned room or close proximity where the operative 
procedure is to be performed. This location will be an environment with temperature and 
humidity ranges suitable for storing sterile items, such as a core) 
6. When OR is ready to set up a case, the supplies/instruments/equipment designated to open on 
the preference card are “laid” out in the room. PRN or hold items will remain on the case cart. 
The case is then “opened” by the case tech/scrub tech/nurse. 
7. During a procedure, the case cart for that particular case will be stored in or immediately 
adjacent to the assigned operating room. 
 
8. Clean items will not be stored with contaminated ones. (i.e. a dirty instrument should never be 
on the same shelf or above a sterile supply.) Contaminated or used items will not be stored 
outside a room, in “clean” areas such as a core, or with other clean supplies. 
9. Credits and other unused supplies that cannot be stocked in the room or core are to be returned 
at the end of case to Surgical Materials. 
Post Procedure 
1. Immediately after the surgical procedure, carts are loaded with contaminated instruments in 
closed case cart system or covered, labeled as dirty or biohazard, and sent to the 
decontamination area of SPD for proper cleaning and maintenance. 
2. Contaminated items are removed from the cart and processed according to IFU or SPD 
protocol. 
3. Carts are decontaminated and processed through a cart washer or hand cleaned with 
appropriate disinfectant before returning to use.  
 
 
 