 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
Patient Care Manual 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE:1/2011 
 
 
 
SUBJECT: 
 
Standard Operating Process  
Preoperative Skin Cleansing for Surgical Patients   
 
 
PAGE 1 OF 5 
 
 
        
I. PURPOSE 
To provide guidelines for preoperative skin cleansing with chlorhexidine (CHG) solution prior to surgical 
procedures to reduce the risk of surgical site infections.  (Instruction Sheets are attached.) 
  
II. APPLIES TO 
Patient Care Staff 
  
III. POLICY 
Preoperative preparation for ALL surgical patients, both inpatient and outpatient, (with the exception of EENT 
and Cystoscopy patients) shall include Two applications of chlorhexidine gluconate (CHG) solution prior to 
surgery. Inpatients shall receive CHG application from chin to toe with Sage CHG wipes.  Outpatients s shall 
receive Hibiclens solution during their pre-admit visit with instructions for application prior to surgery. One 
CHG application shall occur the evening prior to surgery and the second application the morning of or just 
prior to scheduled surgery.   
*The exceptions to this procedure are those with known allergies to CHG or Emergency surgery cases in 
which delay of procedure would cause detrimental effects to the patient.    
  
IV. RESPONSIBILITY 
Pre-Admit RN, Surgical Services RN, Unit Nurses, Patient Care Staff 
  
V. PROCEDURE 
A.  Outpatients or AM Admits 
1. Initiate patient education on preoperative skin cleansing during the Pre -Admit appointment. 
• Two showers (preferred) or baths are to be done at home by the patient with Hibiclens 
solution, one the evening before surgery and one the morning of scheduled surgery. The 
cumulative effect with CHG is important to reduce the amount of microbes on the skin 
surface. 
• If planning to wash hair, do so first with shampoo. Rinse hair and body well to remove 
any shampoo soap or residue. 
• Pat skin dry with clean towel. After shower, dress in clean clothing. 
• Repeat this process the morning of surgery. 
 
2. Note orders for surgical procedure which should include the specific surgical site.  
 
B.  Upon Admit to PreOp  
 
1. The CHG wipe should not take the place of a daily bath to remove dirt, soil and oils from the 
patient’s skin.  The patient should have had their daily bath before performing the wipe protocol.  
2.  Assess the skin area of the surgical site. Sites with open wounds are NOT to be cleansed with CHG           
solution.  Splints, casts, wound vacs, traction, and any other stabilizing devices should n ot be disrupted 
unless ordered by the physician. 
3. CHG wipes should not be used if there is a known allergy or sensitivity to chlorhexidine or any of 
its ingredients.    2 
4. Gather supplies.  
a. Clean gown  
b. Clean linens on the bed 
c. CHG wipes (Number of wipes depends on procedure performed) 
d. Clippers as needed 
e. Blue pad 
5. Wash your hands and apply gloves. 
6. This chin to toe wipe is to be performed by the patient and supervised by trained unit staff.  
Encourage patient to participate if able.  Follow manufacturer’s instructions for application. (See 
attached Pre-operative CHG Wipe Protocol) 
a. Instruct patient that CHG is not to be used on the face, eyes, ears, mouth or genital area.  
b. Wash with CHG wipes gently for 1-3 minutes. Allow the CHG to air dry on the skin for 
one minute before dressing. 
c. Do not wash with regular soap after cleansing with CHG. 
d. Instruct patient to dress in clean gown after application 
e. Instruct patient that soaps, lotions, powders, perfumes, and deodorants are not to be used 
on skin surfaces after CHG wipe. It is, however, acceptable to wash hands with soap and 
water as needed after CHG application. 
7. Use clippers as needed to remove hair from the surgical site as ordered. Place a blue pad under the 
site to catch clippings.  
8. Clean the surgical site with one CHG cloth after clipper to remove any loose hair and discard blue 
pad. Wipe the surgical site circumferentially if site is a limb.  
9. Re-wipe the surgical site again with the last wipe and allow to let for one minute.  
10. Document the procedure including the time in EMR under the pre-operative checklist. 
11. Document teaching effectiveness and patient understanding. Document any patient refusal in 
EMR as well as on the preoperative checklist. 
C.  Monitoring CHG Warmers and Packaging Rotation 
1. A red light indicates the package has been in the warmer for more than 84 hours and are expired. 
They should be removed and discarded, as the CHG level may not be effective.  
2. Yellow light indicates the package may not be at optimal temperature (in the warmer less than 2 
hours). 
3. Steady green light indicates wipes are ready for use. 
4. Flashing green light indicates wipes have been in the warmer for 48 hours or more. Use them first 
before they expire.   
 
 
D.  Inpatients:     Follow Policy PCM4.015 Pre-op Skin Cleansing for Surgical           
Patients. 
 
  
VI. REFERENCE 
 AORN 2008-2010 pages 351-353 AORN Journal (Nov. 2010). Evidence for Using Chlorhexidine Gluconate 
Preoperative Cleansing to Reduce the Risk of Surgical Site Infection, Vol. 92(5). Pages 509 -518. 
CDC (1999). Guideline for Prevention of Surgical Site Infection, Vol. 20(4). Pages 247 -264.  
Hibiclens Guide to General Skin Cleansing, Patient education pamphlets. 
Sage Products Inc., 
  
VII REVISIONS 
 5/21/2014:  revise: added CHG pre-op wipe, section C 
11/5/2014: revised inpatient practice from Hibiclens shower to CHG chin to toe wipe application evening                 
before surgery and morning before surgery application to occur in Pre -op, procedures revised 
12/1/2014, added instructions for chin to toe cleansing and warmer rotation 11/23/2015 added select 
populations to outpatients.   2/2016 revised wording for clarity in same day surgery applications (MMS) 
12/2016 changed to emr from cerner 7/2017 added and revised.  Revised 4/10/2018 to delete section C, 
Inpatient to refer to policy PCM4.015 6/2018: added and revised  3 
 
VIII /REVIEWS 1/2012, 1/2013; 1/2014   1/2015; 2/2016; 11/2016 no change, 7/2017; 7/2018, 07/2019, 7/2020, 
7/2021; 9/2021 January 2022 changed to SOP 
  
 
St. Elizabeth Pre-operative CHG Wipe Protocol 
 
 
Preparing the Skin Before Surgery 
Preparing or “prepping” skin before surgery can reduce the risk of infection at the surgical site. To make 
the process easier, this facility has chosen disposable cloths moistened with a rinse -free, 2% Chlorhexidine 
Gluconate (CHG) antiseptic solution. The steps below outline the prepping process and should be carefully 
followed. Use all 6 wipes contained in the package in the steps diagramed below.  
 
DIRECTIONS: 
  
   1. Wipe your neck and chest.   
   2. Wipe both arms, shoulder to fingertips. 
   3. Wipe abdomen, hips and groins.     
   4. Wipe both legs, thighs to toes. 
   5. Wipe upper back, neck to waist. 
   6. Wipe Buttocks.  
   7. THROW WIPES IN TRASH. DO NOT FLUSH! 
   8. Apply clean gown/sleepwear, and clean linens. 
 
 
Once prepping with the 2% CHG cloths begins, do not shower, bathe or apply lotions, moisturizers or 
makeup. Water and ingredients commonly found in personal care products can reduce the antiseptic effects 
of CHG. Since CHG works best when left on the skin, do not rinse it off.   
If showering or bathing is desired, the water should be warm not HOT. Shower or bathe at least one hour 
before prepping skin for the first time.  
 
*When applying CHG, your skin should be completely dry and cool. When applied to sensitive skin, CHG 
may cause skin irritation such as a temporary itching sensation and/or redness. Showering or shaving 
immediately before applying CHG may enhance this effect. Shaving should be suspended at least 2 days 
prior to surgery on all areas of the body, including the face, legs, underarms, etc. If itching or redness 
persists, rinse affected areas and discontinue use. 
 
❑ To open the package(s): Holding top of package in one hand, lift flap on backside of 
package with other hand. Grasp flap at top and pull down to tear flap away and expose foam.  
Hold outside of package to present foam and cloths to prep table, avoiding contact between  
cloths and outside of package to reduce risk of cloth contamination. 
Using sterile scissors, cut off end seal of package. Transfer contents onto prep table,  
       avoiding contact between cloths and outside of package to reduce risk of cloth contamination.  
❑ Prepping the patient’s skin: Prep the skin as diagramed above. Avoid contact with eyes, ears and 
mouth, and genitalia. Use all cloths in the package(s). DO NOT FLUSH WIPES IN TOILET!  
❑ Allow area to air dry for one minute. Do not rinse. It is normal for the skin to have a temporary  
“tacky” feel for several minutes after the antiseptic solution is applied. 
1 
2 
3 
4
  
4 
5 
6  4 
❑ Document Prep in EMR- Preoperative Checklist and as the “Task” Prep. Be specific saying that you 
used SAGE CHG wipes per protocol. 
 
 
 
 
SAGE Wipes Warmer Light Indications 
Yellow indicates that the package in this slot has been in the 
warmer less than 2 hours and may not be at the target temperature. 
 
Steady Green light indicates that the package has reached target 
temperature. 
 
Flashing Green light indicates that the package has been in the 
warmer for 48 hours and THIS PACKAGE SHOULD BE USED 
FIRST! 
 
Red light indicates that the package has been in the warmer over 
the suggested 84 hours and should be removed. 
**After the 84 hours the packages of CHG 
wipes must be removed from the warmer and 
disposed of. 84 hours was the cut off for 
effective CHG use after the wipes have been 
warmed.** 
 