1 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
 
 
 
 
SUBJECT:  
Standard Operating Process 
Positioning of the Endoscopic Retrograde 
Cholangiopancretogram (ERCP) and EUS Patient 
 
 
 
PAGE 1 OF 3 
 
 
 
 
I. Purpose: 
  To provide specific guidelines for positioning ERCP patients in the 
perioperative setting, and to ensure that position facilitates proper access for the 
procedure to be done in a safe manner, while minimizing risks and perioperative 
complications  to the patient related to the modified swimmer’s position.  To provide 
knowledge and help encourage planning and teamwork to anticipate positioning 
equipment requirements based on the patient’s identified needs and the planned 
procedure. 
 
II. Applies To: 
 Surgical Services perioperative team members, Anesthesia Providers, and 
Physicians/Surgeons 
 
III. Policy:  
 ERCP procedure specific positioning: The Prone Modified Swimmer’s Position 
should be planned and coordinated with the entire perioperative team assigned to the 
case.  Attention should be given to patient safety, as well as to assessing  circulatory, 
respiratory, integumentary, musculoskeletal, and neurological structures, before and 
during intraoperative care.  The positioning devices that are utilized should be used 
according to manufacturer’s   instructions.  The positioning of the patient should provide 
optimal access for the ERCP procedure, should provide access to the IV, and monitoring 
devices.  Additional precautions should be utilized when necessary to position patients 
with existing health concerns (obesity, COPD, implants, chronic disease, etc.) or adverse 
health issues to prevent post- operative complications. 
 
IV. Responsibility: 
 Surgical Services perioperative team members, Anesthesia Providers, and 
Physicians/Surgeons 
 
V. Procedure 
 
A. Equipment  2 
 
1. OR bed with arm boards 
2. C-Arm fluoro 
3. Bariatric extensions, right side only 
4. Gel rolls, padding 
5. Pillows 
6. SCDs 
7. Safety straps 
 
B. Planning: 
1. Turn the room so that the orientation is that of a “left” room.  The sterile 
field will be to the left of a supine patient on the OR bed.  
2.  For a “slide” bed, slide the bed all the way forward towards the head.  For 
a regular OR bed, take the head piece off the OR bed and place it at the 
foot of the bed, and secure it in place. 
3.  Turn the OR bed around so that the C-arm /Fluoroscopy machine can fit 
under the front of the bed. The C-arm must be able to visualize the 
duodenum to the esophagus. 
4. Place the bariatric extensions on the left side of the bed (the side the 
doctor will not be working from)-the non-operative side.  Bariatric 
extensions:   The blue colored extensions are the new OR slide bed s.  The 
black colored extensions are for the regular OR beds. 
5. Place one (1) gel roll on the operative side to support the patient’s chest 
from the clavicle to the iliac crest, this is to allow chest movement and 
decrease abdominal pressure.   
6. Place an arm board on the operative side of the bed at a 90 degree angle 
towards the patient’s head, with a gel pad or egg crate foam at elbow.   
7. The patient’s head will be supported by a pillow, turned to the left side, 
with care to protect, ear, nose and eyes, and all facial structures.   
8.  Place egg crate foam or gel pads at knees.  
9. Place two (2) pillows under lower slightly flexed legs to support them and 
to ensure the patient’s toes are not resting on the bed. 
10.   The patient should have on SCD’s to further support circulation. 
C. Positioning 
 
1.  Anesthesia induction occurs on the stretcher or a hospital bed. 
2.   The intubated patient will be moved to the OR table on the anesthesia 
provider’s direction. 
3.  At least four (4) persons will coordinate the move to the OR bed to ensure 
the safety of the patient.  
4. The patient’s left arm should be padded with gel or foam and tucked at the 
patient’s side with the palm of the hand facing in towards the patient’s 
thigh, and with fingers extended and not curled.   
5. If the patient is too large to tuck their arm safely at side, place an arm 
board at their side, pointing towards their feet, and padded with sheets and 
gel, not the thick arm board pad that hyperextends their arm in this 
position. 3 
 
6.  Secure the arm with a safety strap. 
7. If the patient is a female, their breasts should be positioned laterally to 
avoid a compression or torsion injury. 
8.   If the patient is a male, their genitalia should be confirmed to be in a 
downward natural position to avoid compression or torsion injury. 
9.  All bony prominences and pressure points are to be identified, checked 
and properly padded. 
10. The patient’s body should be protected from coming into contact with any 
metal portion of the procedure bed.  
11.  The bovie pad should be applied after positioning, away from implants, 
bony prominences, or skin breakdown. 
12. The patient will be covered with warm blankets, safety straps should be 
applied carefully to avoid nerve compression injury, blood flow 
compromise, or depression of respirations. 
13.  Place one (1) strap across buttocks and one (1) strap across the patient’s 
calves.  Place one or two wide Velcro strap across the patient’s chest with 
care not to restrict respirations. Make sure all straps have blankets or 
sheets under them for padding of the patient’s skin to protect from 
shearing forces. 
14. Monitor the patient during the procedure to check for and correct any 
changes in positioning that may occur. 
15. Notify x-ray before the case to avoid delay, have lead aprons in the room 
for all personnel, and have SCD machine, ERBE electrocautery machine, 
and all routine drugs and fluids to avoid delays while the patient is under 
anesthesia and in the required position.  
 
 
 
 
 
VI. References 
   
2017 Standards, Recommended Practice s and Guidelines, Association of PeriOperative 
Registered Nurses (AORN), Denver, CO.  
 
VII. Revisions:    Authored: T. Leslie, RN, BSN, CNOR, C.R. Falcon, RN, BSN, and 
M. Sheets, RN, CNOR. 10/2017, January 2022 to SOP 
 
I. Review 7/2017, 7/2018; 7/2019, 7/2020, 7/2021; 9/2021, 1/2022 (SOP) 
VIII.  
 
 
 
 
 