 
a:\staffing.or3 
Our Lady of the Lake Ascension  
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:  
SURGICAL SERVICES 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
February, 1986 
 
 
 
SUBJECT: 
Standard Operating Process 
Staffing Surgical Services 
 
Page 1 of 3  
 
 
  
 
 
Purpose:   
To provide surgical services nursing staff for the performance of surgical services procedures; to notify employees 
of their work schedules. 
 
Applies To:   
Surgical Services 
 
Policy:   
Adequate staffing of Surgical Services personnel shall be provided to perform surgical services procedures.  The 
time schedule shall be posted for six week increments at least one week before it goes into effect.  On-call staff shall 
be available to perform emergency procedures after hours, weekends and holidays. 
 
Responsibility:  
All Surgical Services Staff, Nursing Supervisors and management 
 
Procedure:   
1. Time / call Schedule 
a. Posted for six-week periods. 
c. The new six-week schedule will be posted by the end of the fourth  week of the current schedule. 
With exception of the Endo Techs 
d. All personnel shall rotate shifts as assigned. 
e. All changes in the original schedule are approved by the Surgical Services Director or Manager. 
f. Changes in the schedule are the responsibility of the person who was originally assigned, to 
communicate those changes in writing. Utilize the "Change Request" form, to make the change on 
the call schedule. 
g.  Once the “change request” form is signed, it then becomes the responsibly of the person assuming 
the call to make future changes.   
 
2. Daily Staffing 
a. Surgery is staffed from 0600 a.m. - 1700 p.m. Monday through Friday. The OR staffing is based 
upon coverage for the above hours. 
b. Only emergency procedures are done after 4:0 0 PM Monday through Friday or on  holidays and 
weekends. 
c. Personnel will be provided on an "on -call basis" for emergency procedures 
 
 
a:\staffing.or3 
 d. SDS/PACU staffing is based upon coverage from 0530 a.m. – 1700 p.m. 
e. Surgical Services employees will rotate coverage between the Main surgery departm ent of the 
hospital and the ASC 
3. On-Call Staffing 
a. The following Surgical Services staff is on-call when the units are not regularly staffed: 
   Personnel on call includes a circulating nurse, two surgical techs, two PACU nurses, and one Endo 
tech. 
b. The nursing supervisor will be provided with the names and contact numbers of the staff on-call.. 
c. The nursing supervisor will notify the OR personnel, Anesthesiologist, and radiology on-call, of the 
surgeon, procedure, location of the patient, and time the procedure is to be done.    
d. The call team is to arrive at the hospital as quickly and safely as possible for emergency procedures. 
If personnel are going to be late due to traffic or other unforeseen events, the house supervisor must 
be notified. Late is considered more than 30 minutes after the original phone call made by the house 
supervisor.   
f. Check that the patient has been given preoperative medications, if ordered. 
h. Prepare for case as quickly as possible. 
i. Check the patient's chart as in policy and procedures for "Admission of Patient to Surgical Services. 
j. If the patient is to go to Intensive Care postoperatively, notify the House Supervisor as soon as 
possible. 
k. If an individual scheduled on -call is unable to continue his/her call duty due to unavoidable 
circumstances, it is the responsibil ity of that individual to find their  replacement to assume the 
remainder of the call duty.  Upon doing so, the individual originally scheduled must notify the 
administrative call nurse and the house supervisor.  They must be advised as to who will assume the 
call duty and the time this change is to become effective. 
l. The person who is actually on-call will be paid for the duty. 
m. Any employee violating the terms and/or intent of this policy/procedure will be subject to 
disciplinary action with the possibility of termination. 
n. Upon severe weather conditions and warnings, the OR/PACU on-call staff must stay at the hospital. 
o. All holidays will be rotated fairly.  All team members are required to take Holiday call.   
p.  The On-Call schedule for the year will be added to the vacation calendar. Changes can be made  
 between mutual parties once the calendar has been completed by the OR/PACU managers. 
 
4. “Disaster” Conditions On-Call Staffing 
a. Refer to hospital policy. 
b. The Director of Surgical Services will utilize the Surgical Services disaster call list. 
 
 
5.     PTO Requests 
  
1. A calendar will be provided to the staff for available PTO time 
2. The designated calendar will go first to the person with highest seniority, which then has 3 
days to pick PTO time before turning request and calendar into the Surgical Services    director 
or manager.  Do not write on the calendar, only your request form. 
3. Seniority begins at the time the team member begins employment in the Surgical Services 
Department.  
4. Vacation selection may be up to 5 consecutive days off.  During summer months, must be 
Monday through Friday. The summer months start May 1st through Labor Day weekend.  
5. The vacation calendar will be passed around for a total of “two picks” only.  
6.  All other PTO requests will be granted on a first come first serve basis, if you have the PTO 
accrued or have not taken your allotted time.   
 
 
a:\staffing.or3 
7.  Once the calendar has been returned and the PTO pick approved, the Director or Manager 
will fill in your PTO on the calendar. 
8.  The calendar will then be passed to the next person in line of seniority. 
9.  Once everyone has had their first pick, the calendar will go back in the same order for “pick 
number two.” 
10. Your calendar requests will be approved for time off, only if you have the PTO time accrued 
at the time of your vacation. For those of you who do not accrue PTO, your time off wi ll be 
monitored on a log sheet. 
11. If a team member does not have benefits or accrue  PTO, decides  to call in, it will be 
deducted from your total amount of time off on your log sheet, like those who accrue PTO. 
12. Vacation days/PTO may be requested up to the number of days off you earn from the years 
of     service provided or by the amount of PTO hours you’ve accrued in your bank.  
 
Example:   
 
• Full time employees who worked 3 years, earns 16 days a year.   
 
• Part time employees .6 FTE who worked 6-15 years are allowed 13 days off per year, 
which is 60%.  
 
• Part time employees who do not accrue PTO will be given the same time off as part   
 time employees who accrue PTO.   
 
13. Additional Surgical Services staff requests (PTO, no call, etc.) will be requested on "Request 
    Time Off" form by the first Friday of the current schedule. Time Off request forms are to be  
     completed and e-mailed to the employee’s manager, the surgical administrative assistant and 
    a copy placed in the PTO book. 
 
14. The calendar will begin September 1st every year for requests the following year. 
15. Vacation weeks may be traded between mutual parties.  
 
 
 
Reference:   
Standards, Recommended Practices, and Guidelines, 2007 Edition     
 
 
 
Revised/Reviewed:   
3/3/97; 08/98; 08/99; 09/00; 8/02 ; 09/03, 11/04,3/2005,1/2006, 1/2007revised to include ASC , 1/2008, 1/2009 
Revised, excluded section on how to clean an OR room and special on call staffing., 1/2010; 1/2011;1/2012;1/2013 
new revisions made to personnel schedule, increased PACU coverage to 1700); 1/2014.  
Revised to include new PACU PTO requests. Revised 8/2014; 1/2015 no changes; 9/2016 changes made for surgical 
services utilizing the vacation calendar. 7/2017; 1/2018 added notify House Supervisor if staff will be longer than 30 
minutes reporting to work for emergency call out. 7/2018 Reviewed 8/2019, 7/2020, 9/2021, 1/2022 (SOP) 
 