 
a:\schedule.or3 
 
Our Lady of the Lake Ascension  
 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:  
SURGICAL SERVICES 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
February, 1986 
 
 
 
SUBJECT: 
Standard Operating Process 
Surgery Schedule: Scheduling of Surgical Procedures 
 
Page 1 of 3  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Purpose:   
To provide consistent guidelines for the scheduling of surgical procedures  and to  ensure effective, efficient 
scheduling of daily elective, ambulatory and emergency surgical procedures. 
 
Applies To:   
Surgical Services, Nursing Services, Physicians, and Anesthesia 
 
Policy:   
  Scheduling hours for elective cases shall be Monday through Friday, 6:00 AM to 4:30 PM through the Surgical 
Services Office. Emergent cases for the next working day may be scheduled after hours with the House Supervisor.  
Emergencies and weekend surgical cases shall  be arranged with the House Supervisor  and the Surgery 
Administrator on call. The House Supervisor  will schedule the emergency cases in  the EPIC depot.  During 
scheduled hours, emergency procedures will take precedence over  regular scheduled cases.  If OR time is not 
available for an “add on” emergency case, a scheduled case can be "bumped" by the surgeon to provide an available 
OR suite.  In the event of "bumped" cases, the surgeon “bumping” the scheduled case is responsible for discussing 
the emergence of the situation with the surgeon being delayed. 
 
Responsibility:  
Surgical Services, Nursing Supervisor, Anesthesia Staff, Physicians, Surgeons 
 
Procedure:   
1. Posting procedures:  The following information must be obtained and entered into the EPIC Depot.  To be 
scheduled in an efficient manner the information should be obtained in the following order: 
a. Date requested 
b. Time 
c.      Surgical procedure and type of admit (IP, OP, 23hr) 
d.  Cases are posted with diagnosis code 
d. Patient's last name 
e. Patient's first name 
f. home phone # 
g. DOB 
h. Surgeon's name 
i. Anesthesia type  
j. Diagnosis  
k. Type of insurance 
2. After scheduling a procedure, repeat the patient’s name, date, day and time requested to confirm these points 
with the person scheduling. 
 Subject: Scheduling of Surgical Procedures 
Page: 2 
 
 
 
 
a:\schedule.or3 
3. Other departments shall be notified as soon as possible in advance of the procedures requiring their service. 
 
4. Scheduling for the Ambulatory Surgical Center (ASC) will follow the same procedure. 
 
5.           Schedules are distributed to the following departments (When adding or canceling a case after the schedule 
is distributed, inform them):  
a. Surgical administrator  
b. House Supervisor  
c. Anesthesiologist 
d. Admissions 
e.  Radiology  
 
6. At the end of booking hours, the scheduling secretary will print the department's schedule and distribute to 
applicable departments.  
 
7. If the surgeon has multiple cases scheduled, arrange so as to have him/her follow himself/herself if possible 
unless surgeon indicates otherwise. 
 
8. When scheduling an emergency / add on  case during the day, verify  availability with the Surgical 
Administrator and Anesthesiologist. 
 
9. Scheduling Emergency Procedures after hours and weekends: 
a. The Surgery procedure is scheduled with the House Supervisor and the surgery On Call team will be 
notified. 
b. Surgeons wishing to schedule cases for the next weekday will call the House Supervisor to confirm 
time, patient, procedure and anesthesia and the  house supervisor will notify the on-call Surgical 
Administrator to arrange for weekday cases.  On weekends, the House S upervisor will notify the 
surgical on call team.   
c.        No elective procedures are scheduled for Saturday or Sunday, emergencies only.  
d. Surgeons wishing to schedule a case for a day other than the next regularly scheduled work day must 
do so during the regular booking hours if at all possible. 
e. “Add on” or emergency procedures will not be scheduled day of or after hours at the Ambulatory 
Surgical Center. 
f. On scheduled holidays, Saturday and Sunday, emergency cases will be added on in hour increments, 
with the first case being at 7am. All other cases will be “to follow,” unless a case needs to be 
bumped.  
g. The call team is given 30 minutes to arrive and 30 minutes to set up  for an  emergency case. 
Therefore, an hour notice must be given. 
h. If an emergency case is added on during working hours, but does not start by 3pm, it will follow the 
last case of the day. 
i. If the emergent/urgent cases is running into another physician’s scheduled case, the OR circulator 
will give that physician a courtesy call to inform of delay.    
Reference:   
Smith-Griggers, Judith M., RN, MS., Department of Surgical Services Operating Room Policy and Procedure 
Guideline Manual, p.43-46 
 
Revised/Reviewed:   Subject: Scheduling of Surgical Procedures 
Page: 3 
 
 
 
 
a:\schedule.or3 
3/13/97; 08/98; 08/99; 08/00; 8/02 ; 09/03 , 11/04 , 3/2005,1/2006, (Revised1/2007 to include the Ambulatory 
Surgical Center), 1/2008, Revised: 1/2009 removed equipment restrictions on scheduling.  1/2010; 1/2011; 1/2012; 
(1/2013 revision made to scheduling hours for elective cases) 1/2014 scheduling time revised 
1/2015-no changes; 4/2016no changes 7/2017, 1/2018 EPIC Update; 7/2018, 7/2019, 7/2020; 8/2021, 1/2022 (SOP) 