 1 
Our Lady of the Lake Ascension  
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
 
Cardiovascular Lab 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
        10/19/17                                                                    
 
NUMBER:                                                             
CVLPC 1-100 
 
SUBJECT:  Flow of Care for the CVL patient:  Admission to 
Cardiovascular Lab 
 
 
 
PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
APPROVED BY:  Yvonne Pellerin, 
VP of Patient Care Services, CNO 
 
 
I.  Purpose:  To provide guidelines for admission of a patient to the Cardiovascular lab 
 
II.  Responsibility:  Cardiovascular lab staff 
 
III.   Procedure: 
1. The patient is greeted upon arrival and the identification is verified by asking the 
patient to state their name and date of birth.  This is compared to their ID band on 
their wrist.   
2. A standing weight is obtained, and height is taken verbally.  Both are 
documented.  A bed weight will be taken if the patient is unable to stand. 
3. The level of fall risk may be assessed at this time based on whether the patient has 
any gait assist devices or is able to ambulate to their room without assistance.  
Referencing the Hester Davis Fall Risk Assessment tool, for a score of 11 or 
greater the care plan will reflect Risk of Injury and a yellow armband will be 
placed on the patient. F:\Public\Policy & Procedure Manuals\Patient Care 
Manual\Master Copy\2.  Assessment\2.080 Falls Prevention Policy.doc Standard 
precautions include that the bed will be in a low position with side rails up x 2 
unless nursing care requires otherwise.  The bed will remain locked at all times 
except during transport.  The room will be kept free of clutter and will be well lit.  
The patient will be assisted with toileting needs and the family will be enlisted to 
help keep the patient safe from falls. 
4. The patient/family is escorted to the assigned room and oriented to the bathroom, 
emergency call light, bed/TV controls and nurse call light. 
5. Give instructions to remove all clothing and put a gown on open side in the back. 
A patient belongings bag is provided.   For some procedure’s underwear may be 
left on. 
6. The chart check should include: 
a. History and physical signed by physician (within 30 days). If no H&P, 
notify the physician and case will not proceed until one is complete. 
b. Appropriate lab work such as CBC, BMP, EKG, etc. (within past 30 days) 
c. Consent with the correct procedure signed by the physician and patient.  It 
should be witnessed and dated and timed. 
d. Physician’s orders relating to the procedure. 
7. Confirm the procedure and NPO status with the patient. 
8. Confirm the patient’s medication list and allergies.  The last date, time and dose 
of each medication will be recorded.  2 
9. Attach the patient to the cardiac monitor and obtain an initial set of vital signs to 
include heart rate/rhythm, blood pressure, oxygen saturation and temperature.  
Initial vital signs will be recorded. 
10. Check the physician’s orders for IV fluids (on designated side if noted) and gather 
supplies.  Explain the need for an IV site and provide simple step by step 
instructions so as not to surprise the patient.  After the IV site is obtained begin IV 
fluids as ordered. 
11. A head to toe assessment will be performed and charted. 
12. Explain to the patient and family what to expect before during and after the 
procedure as well as the flow of the day.  Allow time for questions to be asked. 
13. Before leaving the room, check that the call light is within reach and side rails are 
up x 2 and return the bed to low position if it has been moved for nursing care. 
14. Complete the pre-op checklist. 
15. Administer the pre-op medication if ordered. 
16. When cardiovascular staff arrive to take the patient relay any pertinent 
information such as allergies, irregular vital signs, lab work out of parameters and 
note the pulses of the selected site. 
 
 
References:  OLOL-Ascension Fall Prevention Policy/ Patient Care Manual 
                      Number STELPC2.080 
 
Review: 8/1/18; 4/2018-Name Change only; 
 
 
      