 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
Surgical Services 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
October 2016 
 
 
 
SUBJECT:   
Standard Operating Process  
Fast Tracking Policy 
 
PAGE 1 OF 1 
 
 
        
 
 
I. PURPOSE: To establish a procedure for safe and efficient care of a patient who 
already meets Phase I level of care discharge criteria following administration of 
an anesthetic agent. 
  
II. APPLIES TO: Surgical Services 
   
III. POLICY: All patients who have been evaluated by anesthesiologist and meet 
Phase I level of care discharge criteria prior to leaving the procedure room should 
be directly admitted into a Fast Track recovery. 
 
IV. PROCEDURE 
1. An appropriate assessment should be conducted in the procedure/operation 
room at the end of the procedure with collaboration by the anesthesia care 
provider and surgeon. Patient selection may include the type of anesthetic the 
patient received (MAC, regional, local, short acting analgesic, etc.). 
2. The criteria for discharge from the procedure/operation room should include 
LOC (awake, easily aroused), hemodynamically stable (baseline vital signs), 
appropriate gas exchange (maintaining oxygen saturation on 2LNC or room 
air), limited pain and nausea/vomiting, and stable wound site if applicable (no 
active bleeding). 
3. Once all of the above have been determined, the patient should then be 
transported by the anesthesia care provider and circulator to the Fast Track 
recovery area.  
4. A bedside handoff should be given to the receiving PACU nurse and should 
include but not limited to the following: 
a. Operative procedure with findings 
b. Type of anesthesia administered with any additional medications given 
during the procedure with any adverse drug events  
c. The patient’s general condition, any pertinent medical history, and the 
course of recovery. Fast track recovery should begin upon transfer 
unless otherwise stated by anesthesiologist and/or surgeon. 
d. Patient vital signs should be assessed and confirmed with both the 
anesthesia care provider and receiving nurse. Pre-operative baseline 
and trends during procedure should be noted. Continuous monitoring 
of the patient is not required.  2 
5. A minimal admission and discharge blood pressure, heart rate, and oxygen 
saturation should be obtained. An Aldrete Score should be completed. No 
specific recovery time is required. 
6. Endoscopic procedures the patient should: 
a. Meet general discharge criteria (see Phase II policy). 
b. Lower-colonoscopy-have soft, pain free abdomen, no covert bleeding 
c. Upper-EGD-be able to swallow, relief from epigastric pain  
7. Pediatric patients may be evaluated for a Fast Track discharge once all criteria 
have been met. Refer to “Perianesthesia Care of the Pediatric Patient” policy. 
8. Discharge instructions should be given as ordered by the physician (refer to 
Phase II policy). 
 
V. EXCEPTION: 
1. If the patient does not meet Phase I discharge criteria after the procedure, the 
physician should be contacted as needed. The patient should be held in the 
unit and considered a Phase I recovery (see Discharge Criteria from PACU 
policy) and/or prepared for possible transfer. 
 
VI. REVISION:  
Origination: 10/17/2016 D. LaCombe, RN   1/2022 (SOP) 
 
 
VII. REVIEW: 
I. (7/1/2017); 7/2018; 7/2019, 7/2020, 7/2021 
 
 