 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Positioning of the Surgical Patient Policy Reference #: SOP024 
Supersedes #: 1985 
Date of Origination: 10/19/1987 Review Date: 08/15/2023 
Revision Date: 08/15/2023 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide direction for facilitating access to the surgery site, while maintaining proper body 
alignment, preventing skin injury, and preserving the patient's privacy and dignity. 
 
POLICY: 
Proper positioning technique shall be practiced in caring for patients during surgery. 
Moving Guidelines:  
A. Patient should be attended by a team member at all times. 
B. Use proper body mechanics or assistive devices when moving or lifting the patient. 
1. If the patient can move his or her self, two team members should be available; 
one by the stretcher and the other by the operating room bed. 
2. If patient is unable to move his or herself, have adequate numbers of personnel 
for the move.  
a. Two team members plus anesthesia for patients under 48.5lbs 
b. Three team members plus anesthesia 48.5-73lbs 
c. Over 73lbs, use 3-4 team members plus anesthesia with applicable 
moving/positioning aids. 
3. Use patient moving/positioning aids when necessary. 
4. Use a lateral transfer device or slider board for patients with spinal injury or 
suspected instability. 
5. Maintain patient’s body alignment. 
C. Prior to any transfer or positioning, secure drains, tubes, catheters to avoid dislodging 
during movement.  
D. Ensure both patient bed and OR bed are locked. 
E. Lift the patient; avoid dragging the patient along a surface and creating shearing forces on 
the patient’s tissues. 
F. Ensure that all persons involved in the transfer or positioning are working in unison and 
under the direction and collaboration with surgeon and anesthesia provider. 
 
Positioning Guidelines: 
A. The registered nurse should anticipate the positioning equipment needed for the specific 
operative or invasive procedure. 
1. Review the surgery schedule and surgeon preference card before the patient’s 
arrival. 
2. Check the availability of special equipment.  2 
3. Inspect all positioning equipment to ensure proper functioning and check 
maintenance schedules.  Remove and replace as needed.  
4. Ensure the bed meets the patient’s specific weight and height requirements. 
B. The registered nurse should asses and identify unique patient considerations that require 
additional precautions for procedure-specific devices or positioning (i.e. pressure ulcer risk 
factors, nutritional deficits, nerve impairments, vascular disease, diabetes, age, obesity, 
prosthetics, etc.) 
C. Maintaining patients’ privacy and dignity at all times.  
1. Keep doors closed. 
2. Limit traffic in to and out of the room. 
3. Expose only those areas needed to provide care. 
D. Use gel positioning products whenever possible to ensure maximum pressure reduction. 
E. Use all positioning products and devices according to manufacturer instructions. 
F. Apply safety restraints as needed to maintain patient on the operative bed. 
G. Avoid all skin and metal contact. 
H. Pad all bony prominences. 
I. Position breasts and male genitalia in a manner that frees them from torsion or pressure. 
J. When tucking the patient’s arms at their sides, the draw sheet should extend above the 
elbows and should be tucked between the patient and the procedure bed’s mattress. 
K. Asses for and avoid stretching or pressure on nerves. (Examples:) 
1. Palms should be facing up when arms are on armboards at an angle on 90degrees 
or less. 
2. Prevent extremities from dropping below table level. 
3. Use a well padded perineal post placed in the perineum between the genitalia 
and the leg when using a fracture table. 
4. Position legs simultaneously when placing or removing patient from lithotomy 
position 
L. Whenever repositioning of the procedure bed occurs intraoperatively, the patient position 
should be reassessed and that reassessment documented. 
M. Reassess and document extremity pulses after surgical positioning.  
 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
SUPINE POSITION 
1. Patient on OR bed lying on back: 
2. Head should be padded and in line with body 
3. Arms should be out to the sides on arm board or tucked at sides 
a. Arm boards 
 -the arm board shall be level with the mattress of the bed 
 -arms abducted no more than 90 degrees 
 - palms facing up 
 - arms may be secured with tape/strap, assuring that circulation is not 
compromised. 
b. Tucked  
-ulnar nerve gel protectors placed under elbows.   3 
-palms facing thighs, wrist neutral 
- the draw sheet should extend above the elbows and should be 
tucked between the patient and the procedure bed’s mattress. 
4. Safety strap should be securely placed above knees and legs are in proper alignment.  
5. Knees should be flexed 5-10 degrees with a soft pillow.  
6. Heels should be elevated and pressure redistributed using heel protectors or gel.  
7. Ensure feet are not hyperflexed from items such as heavy blankets or mayo stand. 
 
B. TRENDELENBURG POSITION  
 Trendelenburg is a variation of the supine or lithotomy positions, where the head is tilted 
downward and feet are up. See each section for specific positioning requirements. 
 
1. If supine, position with knees over the lowest break in the table. 
2. The degree of trendelenburg should be as little as possible and for as short of time as 
possible 
3. If permitted, the patient should be temporarily repositioned out of trendelenburg 
position for short intervals.  
4. Knees should be flexed by lowering the foot section of the table. 
5. Use convoluted foam, viscoelastic gel, or vaccum-packed devices to prevent patient 
from sliding. 
6.          Shoulder braces are not recommended for extreme Trendelenburg position. If used, 
the point of contact should be at the acromioclavicular joints and braces are to be 
padded. 
 
C. REVERSE TRENDELENBURG POSITION  
Reverse Trendelenburg is a variation of the supine or lithotomy positions where the head is 
tilted up and feet are down. See each section for specific positioning requirements. 
 
1. A padded foot board should be used and feet assessed after positioning.  
 
D. LATERAL POSITION 
 Variations: Please comment 6 for Kidney and Pegboard 
 
1.Patient should be on side with body centered on the table. 
2. Head should be neutral with spine and on a pillow or positioning device. The dependent 
ear should be assessed and monitored. 
3. The axillary roll should be placed on the dependent thorax distal to the axillary fold 
(seventh to ninth rib). Do not place the axillary roll in the axilla. Check for distal 
pulse after axillary roll placement. 
4. The arm can be on arm board, held by surgeon, or suspended by a sling. 
 a. Arm boards: 
1. The lower arm is placed on an arm board that is padded and at the same level 
as OR bed mattress. The forearm and wrist are in neutral position with palm 
facing up. 
2. The upper am should be positioned on the same plane as the shoulder.  
3. Forearm and wrist are in neutral positions with palm facing down.    4 
 b. Surgeon or sling 
1. arm should be abducted no more than 90 degrees.   
5.  Spine should be aligned.  
6.  Variations of lateral position:  
a. Pillow:     
1.   Position vac pac bean bag with “U” towards head of bed and cover with  
sheet.  
2. Patient should be on side, and positioning pillow brought up surrounding 
the body him.   
3. Suction should be applied to positioning device upon direction and 
approval of the physician 
b. Kidney:  
1. position lumbar over the middle break in the table (and/or the kidney 
rest)  
2. Kidney rest should be raised, and table flexed. 
 c. Peg board 
1. Position pegboard on bedframe, secure to bed using clamps 
2. Cover with gel pad and sheet 
3. Position patient on side, pull gel pad against patient and place pegs in 
pegboard where needed.  Use additional gel padding against patient as 
needed. 
7.  If kidney braces are used, longer brace is positioned anterior against iliac crest and 
shorter brace is positioned posterior against the lumbar. 
8. Dependent leg should be flexed at hip and knee with the knee, ankle and foot 
padded. The upper leg should be straight with pillow between legs. 
9. Safety strap should be applied across hip. 
 
E. PRONE POSITION  
Variations: Please see comment 9 for Jackknife 
  
1. Patients head, neck and spine should be neutral and midline with the head on a head 
positioner. Team members should assess regularly. 
2. Interventions should be made by team to avoid direct pressure on eyes. 
3. Two appropriately sized gel rolls should be placed from clavicle to iliac crest. 
4. Arms should be on arm boards, tucked, or secured at sides: 
a. Arm boards: 
i. Arms secured on padded arm boards, lower than chest with palms down. 
ii. Arms abducted less than 90 degrees with elbows flexed.  
iii. Wrist and arms are in neutral alignment. 
b. Tucked: 
i. Arms neutral and palms facing thighs without hyperextending the elbows 
 ii.  Draw sheet positioned from mid upper arm and extends to finger tips, 
ii. Draw sheet goes up between patient’s body and arm. Then tuck between 
the patient and OR bed mattress.   
  5 
5. Breast, abdomen, and genitals should be assessed and positioned free from torsion or 
pressure. 
6.  Gel or gel pads should be placed under each knee. 
7. Toes should be elevated by placing pillows under shins with feet over the edge of 
pillow hanging freely. 
8. Secure safety strap above knees. 
9. Variations: 
a. Prone 
- if permitted, the patient should be in 5-10 degrees of reverse 
trendelenburg 
b. Jack knife 
- Flex bed as needed, tilt until patient's back is parallel to the floor. 
10. Pedal pulses should be assessed after positioning. 
11. A gurney or stretcher should be readily available to reposition the patient in the supine 
position.  
 
F. SEMI-FOWLER'S, SITTING, BEACHCHAIR POSITION 
1. Patient should be placed on bed in supine position. 
2.  Head is midline, neutral, and elevated a little as possible. 
3.. Arm positioning:  
a. Non-operative arm(s):  
- should be flexed across patients body and secured 
- if neither arm is being operated on, the wrist should be neutral, 
ulna padded, elbows prevented from hyperflexion, and arms 
secured. 
b. Operative arm  
-may be held by surgeon, or supported by a positioning device 
 4.  The patient’s buttock’s should be padded.  
3. Knees should be flexed 30 degrees. 
4.  Heel protectors should be in place. 
4. Lower extremities should be in proper alignment with pillow under knees. 
 5. The abdominal pannus should not rest on the patients thighs 
6. The safety strap should be placed across the patient’s thighs more than 2” above the 
knees. 
 
G. LITHOTOMY POSITION 
Lithotomy can be modified using the, trendelenburg, and reverse trendelenburg positions 
 
1. Hands and fingers should be protected when the foot of the bed is raised or lowered. 
2. The patient should be in the lithotomy position for the shortest period of time 
possible. If permitted, reposition at established intervals.  Moisture proof pad may 
be placed over lower end of table. 
3. Patient should be placed on OR bed in supine position. 
4. Arms should be out to the sides on arm board, tucked at sides, or extended across 
body. 
  6 
a. Arm boards 
i.  the arm board shall be level with the mattress of the bed 
ii.   arms abducted no more than 90 degrees 
       iii.  palms facing up 
iv. Arms may be secured with tape/strap, assuring that circulation is not    
compromised.  
b. Tucked  
      i.  ulnar nerve gel protectors placed under elbows.     
ii. palms facing thighs, wrist neutral 
iii. the draw sheet should extend above the elbows and should be tucked 
between the patient and the procedure bed’s mattress 
 
4. Buttocks should be even with the end of the bed.  
5.  Ensure sacrum remains supported on the bed pad. 
6. Following anesthesia induction, knees should be lifted and flexed, both at same time 
to prevent back strain for the patient. 
7.  Hips should be positioned to prevent excessive flexion, rotation, or abduction. 
8. Leg holders should be at an even height and if permitted, the heels should be lower 
than the heart. 
9.  Legs should be supported by largest padded surface area of leg holder and secured 
with heels seated. 
10.  The safety strap should not be placed over chest or abdomen. 
11. Pedal pulses should be assessed before and after positioning. 
12. When taking the patient out of lithotomy position, the legs should be lowered slowly 
and simultaneously by a minimum of two people. 
 
 
M. POSITIONING OF SURGICAL PATIENT ON FRACTURE TABLE 
1. Place fracture table in operating room with foot piece on.  Have all accessories in 
Room. 
2.  Wrap foot(or feet) with specialist padding.  Place foot in boot(s) and secure 
3. Place patient on fracture table in supine position. 
4 place and secure padded perineal post. Ensure when moving or placing that genitals 
are free from torsion or pressure.  
5.  If both legs are in boots, secure both. If only one leg in boot, place unaffected leg in 
stirrup.  Stirrup should be covered with a gel pad.  
6. Place arm on nonoperative side on armboard, with ulnar pad in place.  Bring arm on 
operative side across chest, cover with sheet or blanket, and tape in place to secure 
it. Ensure the ulnar nerve is free from pressure. 
7. Remove foot pedal from fracture table. 
8. After procedure, replace foot piece at end of table.  Carefully remove operative leg 
from boot, and nonoperative leg from stirrup and place them on the bed. 
 
REFERENCES: 
AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practice, 2023 
  7 
 
 
 
 