 1 
 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Prevention of Retained Surgical Items Policy Reference #: SOP007 
Supersedes #: 09/20/91; 09/96 
Date of Origination: 10/19/1987 Review Date: 09/01/2024 
Revision Date: 8/9/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide a consistent multidisciplinary team approach for preventing retained surgical items 
(RSI) during operative and invasive procedures. 
 
POLICY: 
1. Distractions, noise and interruptions should be minimized during the surgical count. 
2. Sponges, sharps and miscellaneous items should be counted on all procedures and recorded 
on the count board. 
3. Instruments should be counted on all procedures where the depth and location of the 
procedural site poses a risk that an instrument may be concealed within a wound or major 
body cavity. 
4. Counts are performed during the following: 
a. Before the procedure to establish a baseline for the surgical team (i.e. initial count) 
b. When new items are added to the field 
c. Before closure of a cavity within a cavity 
d. When wound closure begins 
e. At skin closure or at the end of the procedure when counted items are no longer in 
use (i.e. final count) 
f. At the time of permanent relief of either the RN circulator or scrub person. 
i. The oncoming permanent relief count will be done concurrently by the relief 
RN circulator and relief scrub person, visualized and done audibly. 
g. When the RN circulator or scrub person is relieved and they anticipate the case may 
end before they return. 
h. Any time a discrepancy is suspected.  
5. Counts and events that would require counts (relief of RN or scrub person) should not occur 
during critical phases of the procedure, including:     
a. Time outs 
b. Critical times during the procedure 
c. Confirming and opening of implants 
d. Induction of and the patient’s emergence from anesthesia 
e. Care and handling of specimens 
6. Surgeon will be notified and will acknowledge final count results.  2 
7. All counts and its documentation in the intraoperative nursing record is the responsibility of 
the RN circulator. 
8. Count Discrepancies 
a. The RN circulator should inform the surgeon immediately. 
b. The RN circulator should visually inspect the area surrounding the surgical field. 
c. The scrub person should visually inspect the area surrounding the sterile field 
d. The surgeon should suspend closure of the wound if the patient’s condition permits 
e. The surgeon should perform a wound examination 
9. Non-recovered Item/Incorrect Count 
a. Notify the department manager or designee immediately 
b. Call x-ray and notify that a stat x-ray is needed for an incorrect count.  
i. Radiology technician to enter the stat order 
c. Clear the wound by one of the following methods: 
i. obtain an intraoperative flat plate x-ray before final closure of the wound (if 
a flat plate is not possible, c-arm may be utilized) 
ii. Only if item missing is a suture smaller than 10mm (as indicated on 
packaging) then the surgeon can opt to explore the wound with the aide of a 
“high magnification device” instead of an x ray. High magnification devices 
are items that enhance normal vision such as: loops, microscope, or 
endoscope.  
d. Notify the radiologist for the suspected item in question 
e. X-ray results shall be read by a radiologist and disclosed directly to the surgeon 
before the final closure and patient leaving the operating room. 
f. Document the x-ray results or surgeons clearing of the small suture in the 
intraoperative record 
g. If item(s) other than retained packing are intentionally left in the wound, note in 
chart about physician disclosure (See Section B) 
h. Complete a patient safety event 
 
10. If the patient’s condition does not permit a count to be performed (i.e. trauma), the surgeon 
should be notified and an intraoperative x-ray should be done at the end of the procedure if 
possible.  A patient safety event should be completed and documented in the intraoperative 
record. 
 
B. Patient Disclosure 
a. Surgeon is responsible for determining the risks and benefits of leaving an item in 
the wound. 
b. The surgeon should provide the following information to the patient or responsible 
person as soon as possible after the procedure.  
i. risks and benefits of leaving the device fragment in the wound; 
ii. material composition of the fragment (if known); 
iii. size of the fragment (if known); 
iv. location of the fragment; 
v.  potential mechanisms for injury (eg, migration, infection); and 
vi.  procedures or treatments that should be avoided, such as MRI examinations 
in the case of metallic fragments  3 
 
 
C. Soft Count 
a. To be counted before the procedure concurrently by the RN circulator and scrub 
person, visualized and done audibly. 
b. Raytec sponges will be counted initially before tapes are broken and a second time 
after the tapes are removed so that each is visualized individually.  Each pack will 
be opened individually to ensure there are only 10 sponges per package and that 
each sponge has a radiopaque indicator.  If more or less than 10, remove the entire 
pack from the room. 
c. Lap sponges will be counted initially before tapes are broken and a second time after 
the tapes are removed so that each is visualized individually.  Each pack will be 
opened individually to ensure there are only 5 laps per package and that each lap 
string is intact.  If more or less than 5, remove the entire pack from the room. 
d. If radiopaque towels are used, they should be counted in the same manner as 
sponges. 
e. If the surgeon announces to the OR Team that a radiopaque sponge has been placed 
in a cavity, the item will be notated on the count board and resolved before or during 
the closing count if not intended to be used for therapeutic packing.   
f. Raytec sponges, lap sponges and radiopaque towels must be left in the original 
configuration and should not be cut or altered in any way.      
g. Used sponges will be contained or confined. Soiled sponges removed from the 
sterile field will be handled utilizing standard precautions. 
h. Soiled items removed from the field will be placed in the kick bucket.  They may be 
placed in clear plastic bags if grouped per packaging (i.e 10 raytec/bag, 5 laps/bag).   
i. Before placing sponges or laps in a bag, the items should be visualized by the 
anesthesia provider and counted by the RN circulator and scrub person.   
j. Linen and waste containers are not to be removed from the operating room until all 
counts are complete, resolved, and the patient has left the room. 
k. The dressing sponge is placed on the field after the final count is done and correct.   
 
D. Sharps Count 
a. To be counted before a procedure concurrently by the RN circulator and scrub 
person, visualized and done audibly.  
b. All suture needles, regardless of size, will be counted for all surgical procedures.  
c. Internal suture packaging should be retained on the field to assist with verification. 
d. Used sharps on the sterile field should be kept in a puncture-resistant container. 
 
E. Instrument Count 
a. To be counted before a procedure concurrently by the RN circulator and scrub 
person, visualized and done audibly. 
b.  All instrument sets should have an instrument count sheet.  Instrument count sheets 
will be used to record instruments during the initial count.  
c. Instrument sets opened onto the sterile field will be counted in their entirety. 
d. Single instruments should be accounted for as they are added to the field and 
documented on the tally sheet  4 
e. Instruments with multiple parts that can be disassembled will be counted as separate 
pieces and not as a total of parts (i.e. balfour, including wing nut, tailpiece, 4 blades) 
f. For Thoracic & CAB case, small items, bulldogs, mark needles, etc., will be counted 
when the body cavity is being closed and again when the skin is closed. 
g. Instruments that must be removed from the room during the procedure will be 
accounted for on the count sheet or count board by the RN circulator. 
h. Instruments broken during a procedure will be accounted for in their entirety. 
i. In the following procedures a c-arm sweep over the body cavity will be done in 
place of an instrument count.  The surgeon will verify from the x-ray that there are 
no retained objects.  This will be documented in the count section of the nurses 
notes.spon 
i. anterior lumbar interbody fusion 
ii. posterior lumbar interbody fusion 
 
F. Miscellaneous Items 
a. Other items opened on the sterile field which require counting include: 
i. Bovie tips and cleaners 
ii. Ligaclip, hemoclip racks 
iii. Cottonoids, dissectors, suture reels 
iv. Vessel loops, suture boots, bulldogs, microclips 
v. Umbilical tape, cotton balls, rubber bands 
vi. Tonsil sponges, nu-gauze strips or cotton strips 
vii. Throat packs, mouth guard, weck spears 
 
G. Retained Packing 
a. Only radiopaque items such as sponges and laps provided in the procedural packs or 
sterile core may be utilized for therapeutic packing. 
b. The number and type of sponges retained as packing will be documented in the 
intraoperative nursing record. 
c. The number and type of packing used must be confirmed by the surgeon and 
documented in the intraoperative nursing record as a correct count. 
i. If the number and type of packing is not known with certainty, the count 
should be recorded in the intraoperative nursing record as incorrect. 
d. A green label will be placed on the patients chart indicating the type and number of 
sponges, laps and /or towels used, along with the first initial and last name of the 
surgical team.  If the quantity is unknown, the circulator will list “Qty-Unknown” on 
the green label.   
e. A Patient Safety Event Report will be completed indicating that packing remained in 
the wound. 
i. The MD may choose other types of packing (ie., iodoform, kerlix) for small 
or extremity wounds.  Generally, this type of packing does not require safety 
event reporting. Documentation of the location and the type of packing must 
be entered into the intra-op count text area.   
f. The chart will be flagged with a “Retained Packing” surglabel when a surgeon elects 
to pack with radiopaque sponges, laps or towels.  The label will be removed when 
the packing is removed.  5 
g. In the event the patient returns to the OR and all the retained items are not removed 
the initial green sticker will be replaced with a new green sticker indicating the 
number and type of items remaining.  
h. If additional packing is placed in patient and no items are removed, an additional 
green sticker will be placed on the chart indicating the new retained items.  Another 
Patient Safety Event Report will be completed. 
 
H. Retained Packing Removal 
a. Upon return to surgery for removal of packed sponges, laps or towels the circulator 
will document the type and number of sponges removed from the patient. 
b. The removed sponges will be isolated and not included in the procedure count.  The 
packed sponges will be considered foreign bodies and counted separate from the 
initial count of the case.  The circulator will document the number and items 
removed in the procedure text area of the clinical record. 
c. Documentation of retained items will be included under the final count verification 
d. Documentation of removed items will be included in the specimen section as foreign 
body.  Documentation should include the quantity and type removed. 
e. The procedure count will be documented as correct after the routine sponge count 
has been accounted for. 
f. An x-ray will be performed before closing begins to confirm that all retained items 
were removed.  Upon confirmation by the Radiologist that all retained items have 
been removed, wound closure can proceed. 
g. The retained packing label will be removed from the chart back and a Patient Safety 
Event Report will be completed identifying the packing items removed, and the 
results of the x-ray from the radiologist. 
 
ATTENTION 
RETAINED PACKING 
Date____/ ____/ _____ 
 
Surgical Team _____________________________ 
 
  
____________________________________________________________
_ 
 
 
  6 
 
References: 
AORN Perioperative Standards and Recommended Practices, 2024 Edition. 
 
Approved 2024 by: Dr. Phillip Allen Associate Chief Medical Officer, Dr Conners Department 
Chairperson Surgical Chiefs Committee, and Rebecca Al-Marhoun Senior Director Surgical 
Services 
 
 
 