 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Obstetrical Delivery – Care of Mother 
and Infant 
Policy Reference #: SOP020 
Supersedes #: 04/05/88; 01/91 
Date of Origination: 04/05/1988 Review Date: 06/27/2024 
Revision Date: 05/24/2010 
 
PURPOSE: 
To guide the surgical staff in assisting in the care of the mother, and the care and delivery of the 
newborn. 
 
Key Components: 
A. Identify the OB physician who will perform delivery and verify privileges with medical 
staff.  
B. Coordinate with Woman’s Hospital for transport of infant after delivery.  Call 927-1300 
and ask for administrative supervisor, Labor & Delivery charge nurse is 231-4463.  
Give them ample time to assemble their team. 
C. Team from Woman’s Hospital will provide a delivery kit with essential items. 
D. Notify Admissions of delivery to obtain Ambulatory admit bracelet for baby  
E. Notify HIM to coordinate birth certificate preparation 
F. Notify Respiratory for support after birth. 
 
Equipment/Supplies needed:  please pull a Cesarean section GYN preference card 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A. Care of the Mother – Vaginal Delivery 
1. Perform initial assessment and document 
a. Patient’s blood pressure 
b. Pulse, respirations & temp 
c. Stage of pregnancy (weeks-months) 
d. Fetal heart tones every 15-30 minutes 
2. Assess  patient’s labor and document: 
a. How long she has been in labor, duration? 
b. How frequent and intense are contractions? 
c. Status of membranes…ruptured vs. intact? 
d. Is patient bleeding 
3. When patient is completely dilated, check patient’s blood pressure, pulse, 
respirations and the infants’ fetal heart tones every 5-15 minutes and document. 
4. Place patient in the lithotomy position on the table with feet in stirrups.  Offer 
support and encouragement and explain what you are going to do and how she can 
help.  2 
5. Encourage patient to pant during her contractions to allow for a slow, gentle 
delivery.  Prevent efforts to delay delivery. 
6. If time permits, wash perineum with povidone-iodine. If allergic to povidone-iodine 
use sterile gloves and drape perineum. 
7. Check patient’s vital signs with exception of temperature every 5-10 minutes.  
Check fetal heart tones at same intervals and document both.  This will be done by 
the anesthetist if available.  If not, will be done by RN and appropriately 
documented. 
8. Have mother’s Rh status, blood count, blood group and Coombs evaluated per 
physician order. 
9. Document in infant’s chart exact time of birth (that is the time when the baby’s 
entire body has been delivered). 
10. Immediately after delivery, ascertain height of uterine fundus (in relation to 
fingerbreadths above, at or below the umbilicus) and its consistency and document.  
Draw cord blood before delivery of placenta. 
11. Document delivery of placenta and time.  Document time the placenta was 
delivered, if it was intact and down to Histology for tissue exam. 
12. After placenta separation, lower the mother’s legs from stirrups and apply peripad to 
perineum. Keep mother warm and massage fundus periodically to stimulate firming 
and decrease bleeding. 
13. Continue to observe mother for vaginal bleeding and shock (check vital signs every 
15 minutes for 1-2 hours during recovery time) and check uterine fundus every 15 
minutes after delivery.  Fundus should feel firm to touch after massage and bleeding 
should be minimal.  Continue to massage until fundus is firm and bleeding is 
minimal.  Frequently bleeding and clots will be seen at the beginning of fundal 
massage, but should lighten in severity as fundus firms.  If bleeding continues notify 
MD for Pitocin drip (1000ml NS with 20 units Pitocin IV premixed usually a few 
100 ml’s are run in to treat excessive bleeding) or MD may order Methergine IM 
injection or Cytotec rectally. 
14. If infant is stillborn, document in mother’s record:  Time of delivery and that infant 
was stillborn.  The specimen will be labeled “stillborn female/male of mother’s 
name and ID” 
15. If the infant is stillborn and is twenty weeks of gestation or more, a stillborn 
certificate must be filled out.  All copies of this certificate are sent to HIM. 
 
B. Lab Tests 
1. Routine lab tests done – always verify against physician order 
a. Infant’s blood type & RH factor 
b. CBC, VDRL 
c. Coombs direct bilirubin & indirect bilirubin 
2. Cord Blood (DRAWN BEFORE DELIVERY of PLACENTA) 
a. Using a needle, aspirate from umbilical vein, or place cord down into 
glass tube and release Kelly/clamp to fill tube. 
b. Milk blood out of the cord, and then re-clamp the cord.  3 
c. The blood is put into a plain large red top and purple top tube from lab.  
Woman’s staff may collect some for banking purposes.  Ask physician 
(OB) what he wants to do with cord blood and placenta. 
3. Placenta 
a. Put placenta in closeable container (which is available from Histology) 
b. Label with mother’s name, number, date, and specimen source 
c. Send to Lab for routine tissue exam with a cytology slip 
 
C. Care of Infant 
1. Immediately after delivery, aspirate mucus gently from nose and mouth.  Blot infant 
dry and wrap in warm sterile blanket and place in heated incubator.  Place infant in 
modified trendelenburg on side.  Use suction catheters or bulb syringe to aspirate 
mucus. 
2. Evaluate and document infant’s status through an initial assessment using the Apgar 
scoring system (see figure 1).  Evaluate again at five minute intervals and document 
on the Infant’s Medical Record. 
3. Check cord frequently for excessive bleeding and document. 
4. Instill ophthalmic solution into both eyes as ordered per physician and document. 
5. Administer Aqua Mephyton 1.0 mg IM infant or ordered per physician and 
document dosage and location. 
6. Continue to evaluate status of infant at frequent intervals, usually 5-15 minutes and 
document on infant’s chart. 
7. If infant and mother are transferred to another hospital, document on chart that 
report was called to that hospital and to who you spoke to and what information was 
sent with patients. 
8. If mother has choice of pediatrician, notify him/her of delivery and document time 
physician notified. 
 
APGAR Scoring: 
 
SCORE 1 (1 minute after birth) 
SCORE 2 (5 minutes after birth) 
 
Sign 0 1 2 
Heart Rate Absent Slow – Below 100 Above 100 
Respiratory Effort Absent Slow – Irregular Good Crying 
Muscle Tone Flaccid Some Flexion of Extremities Active Motion 
Color Pale blue Body Pink, Blue Extremities Completely Pink 
Reflex Irritability None Grimace Vigorous CM 
 
D. Identification, Admission Processes 
1. Separate the charts to make a new record for infant. 
2. Infants’ footprint and mother’s thumbprint should be placed on record. 
3. ID bracelets placed on both the mother and infant and each chart should bear both 
chart and number.  4 
4. If the mother and the infant are admitted to OLOLRMC, the mother will be admitted 
to a surgical floor, and the infant will be admitted to PICU or Children’s Center.  
The top sheet of record is sent with patients to floor, with the infant’s record 
including the newborn nursery record.   HIM will be notified to complete birth 
certificate. 
5. If mother and infant are transferred to another facility, transfer policy should be 
followed.  The original birth certificate will also be sent.  A copy of the birth 
certificate will be made and sent to HIM.  Call facility and give report and document 
on chart. 
 
E. Stillborn or fetal death after delivery 
1. Notify pastoral care to address spiritual needs 
2. Offer baptism of fetus/infant 
a. Done by priest or minister of choice 
b. May be done by RN or MD if time does not allow for priest/minister to 
arrive.  Use the words “ I baptize thee in the name of the Father, the Son 
and the Holy Ghost”.  While saying these words, pour a small amount of 
water on infant’s head.  Note this on the record. 
3. I.D. infant and medical record criteria 
a. If stillborn 
1. Place I.D. bracelet that reads “stillborn female/male of 
mother’s name” (i.e. stillborn male or Jane Doe)… 
2. Document in mother’s record time of delivery and that infant 
was stillborn. 
3. If >20 weeks, a stillborn certificate must be filled out and all 
copies are sent to HIM. 
b. If live birth then death… 
1. Must have new medical record separate from mother 
2. Inform Louisiana Organ Procurement Agency 
3. Inform Coroner’s office 
4. Bathe and offer patient/family time with infant 
5. Obtain footprints and give patient/family keepsake if desires 
6. Burial requirement 
a. MUST be buried or cremated 
1. > 20 weeks gestation 
2. Weighs 350grams or more 
3. Born with heart rate, respiratory action or voluntary 
movement of muscles 
b. NO burial or cremation required 
1. < 20 weeks gestation 
2. Weighs less than 350 grams 
3. Born without a heart rate 
4. Fetus is sent to the lab as product of conception for a routine 
tissue exam. 
5. Parent may still choose to bury the fetus 