OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Surgical Services 
 Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: 
Intraoperative Chemotherapy (Cytotoxic 
Agents) Handling Delivery and Disposal 
Specifically Gliadel Carmustine Wafers 
Policy Reference #: SOP052 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: August 2009 Review Date: 06/10/2024 
Revision Date: 11/10/2017 
 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide pertinent information regarding the safe intraoperative handling, delivery and 
disposal of cytotoxic gliadel wafers. 
 
POLICY: 
A. Preparation 
1. Gliadel wafers has to be ordered from company/supplier by MD. Prior to 
scheduling the case.  They will be stored in the freezer in the main pharmacy.  
The OR satellite pharmacy must be notified of the gliadel wafer surgical case 
so the wafers can be retrieved from main pharmacy. 
2. The circulating nurse needs to record the time the wafers were removed from 
the freezer.  The unopened foil pouches may be kept at room temperature for a 
maximum of six hours and should remain unopened until ready to implant. 
3. Retrieve hazardous medication label from OR Pharmacy. 
4. Request via fax yellow chemotherapy waste container from central at          
ext. 5-8284 and bring to OR room. 
5. All personnel must wear double gloves and reinforced gowns when handling 
this cytoxic agent. 
6. Surgical instruments specifically dedicated to the handling of the wafers 
should be used for wafer implantation. 
7. Scrub personnel should set up a separate sterile single mayo stand with 
disposable mayo cover, sterile towel and plastic basin.  Instruments on this 
isolated mayo must be limited to one long smooth pick up and one mayo 
scissor. 
B. Handling and Implantation 
1. The scrub person, surgeon, assistant, and circulating nurse must wear a 
reinforced surgical gown that has a barrier protection on the gown front and 
sleeves.  Double gloving is also required when in contact with the glidel 
wafers. 
2. The outer unsterile pouch is opened carefully by the circulator to avoid 
breakage of the wafers in the inner pouch.  The scrub then removes the inner 
pouch by grabbing hold of the crimped edge and pulling upward using the 
dedicated smooth forcep.   3. The scrub opens the inner pouch by gently holding the crimped edge and 
cutting in a curved fashion around the wafer.  The wafer is gently removed 
with the dedicated smooth forcep, and placed on Mayo in the disposable 
plastic basin. 
4. After the wafers are implanted into the tumor resection cavity, all personnel 
are to remove outer gloves and dispose of them in the yellow chemotherapy 
waste container. 
C. Disposal: 
1. All disposable items that come in contact with the gliadel wafers, and unused 
wafers and wafer packaging are to be discarded in a yellow chemotherapy 
waste bin and sealed.  These items would include outer gloves, disposable 
instruments, entire dedicated Mayo disposables, and any gowns that were 
touched by gliadel wafers.  The bin(s) need to be placed in the OR specimen 
room for chemotherapy waste disposal pick up. 
2. The instruments used for implantation of cytoxic agent should be disposed of 
in the yellow chemotherapy waste bin. 
3. If suction is used after wafers are implanted as disposable suction tip should 
be used and disposed of in the yellow chemotherapy waster bin with other 
waste.  Suction canister should be isolated and a solidifier used in this 
container and it should be disposed of in the yellow chemotherapy waste bin. 
D. Note: 
1. Clinical pharmacology note: 
Data has demonstrated patients still have wafer remnants present > 230 days 
post implantation. 
2. If repeat neurosurgery is indicated, any wafer or wafer remnant should be 
handled as a potentially cytoxic agent. 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
Clinical Issues Intraoperative Chemotherapy 
AORN December 2007 
 
Gliadel Wafer Package Insert, Aventis Pharmaceuticals. 
 
 