OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD)  
Guidelines for Suspected CJD Cases in 
Operating Room 
Policy Reference #: SOP040 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 04/25/2002 Review Date:  08/19/2024 
Revision Date: 08/12/2020 
 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for the management of suspected Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) 
biopsy cases. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
1. CJD is a prion transmissible neurodegenerative disease with a very low incidence of 
occurrence.  In most cases the cause of the disease is unknown. Prions present unique 
infection prevention and control challenges. Prions are proteinaceous, infectious 
agents containing no DNA or RNA and may be transmitted iatrogenically by direct 
inoculation. Prions cause transmissible spongiform encephalopathies including 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). Prions are resistant to traditional chemical and 
physical decontamination methods. Sterilized instruments have been implicated in 
intracranial transplantation or inoculation with CJD.  Equipment having direct contact 
with high-infectivity tissue will require special handling to reduce the potential risk of 
transmission. 
 
2. High-infectivity tissue: 
• Central nervous system tissue 
o Brain  
o Dura mater 
o Spinal cord 
o Pituitary 
• Optic nerve, retina 
 
3. Medium-infectivity tissue: 
• Corneal tissue  
• Cerebrospinal fluid 
• Lymph node 
• Spleen 
• Pituitary gland 
• Thymus 
• Appendix  
• Blood  
• Skeletal muscle Olfactory cilia 
and pathways 
• Tonsils  
• Placenta 
• Lungs 
• Liver 
• Kidney  
4. Low- or no-infectivity tissue: 
 
• Bone marrow 
• Heart muscle 
• Thyroid 
• Adrenal 
• Skin 
• Peripheral nerves 
• Adipose tissue 
• Intestines 
• Prostate 
• Testes 
• Semen  
• Urine 
• Serous fluid 
• Feces 
• Gingiva 
• Saliva 
• Sweat 
• Tears 
• Vaginal secretions 
• Milk  
• Tears  
• Nasal mucus 
• Sputum 
 
MATERIALS: 
1. Disposable gowns, drapes, and table covers 
2. Personal protective equipment (PPE).   
3. Disposable instrument kit item #67650 (Subdural Evacuating Port System) to 
minimize the use of reusable instrumentation.   
4. 1 Molar sodium hydroxide (NaOH, lye) obtain from the Lab.  
5. 1 part bleach (sodium hypochlorite) undiluted  
6. Nitrile gloves (order from central supply).   
7. “Restricted Entrance” signage,  
8. Cleaning supplies, to include several rigid biohazardous containers that will be 
brought into the Operating Room prior to procedure. 
 
POLICY: 
Whenever possible, performing neurosurgical procedures on patients with suspected CJD 
will be avoided.  All suspected CJD cases that are scheduled for biopsy will be managed 
according to the following guidelines which are intended to reduce the risk of 
contamination of the surgical instruments and possible exposures to prion diseases.  
Instrument tracking of any non-disposable surgical instruments used shall be utilized. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. Surgery Scheduling: 
 
Brain or other biopsy procedures for possible CJD shall be posted during normal 
working hours only.  If the diagnosis is unknown or suggestive of CJD, the scheduler 
will notify the Nurse Manager, and the following guidelines will be implemented. 
 
 
B. Pre-Operatively (Room, Supply & Equipment Preparation): 
 1. The Nurse Manager will notify all units potentially involved of possible CJD 
case, including:  Sterile Processing, Nursing Units, SMAU/T, PACU, House 
Supervisor, Environmental Services, Environmental Safety, Plant Services, 
Pharmacy, Infection Control, Pathology, etc. 
2. Call Plant Services for durable cardboard boxes. 
3. Remove all extraneous equipment (as possible) from the room and increase the 
distance from the operating field for items that cannot be relocated. 
4. Bring only necessary equipment, supplies, or medications into the Operating 
Room suite. 
5. Cover the Operating Room table with a disposable impervious cover. 
6. Cover all surfaces (including respiratory and anesthetic equipment) and Operating 
Room table with impervious sheets, drapes and/or Mayo covers. 
7. Cover electrical cords with impervious plastic sleeves. 
8. Staff Attire:  Anesthesia provider, Surgeon, Scrub Nurse, and primary Circulating 
Nurse will wear hats, impervious gowns, double gloves, masks, face shields, 
safety goggles and knee-high impervious shoe covers.  The “outside” secondary 
Circulating Nurse will wear standard personal protective equipment. 
9. Post signage on doors stating, “Restricted Entrance”. 
 
 
C. Intra-Operatively: 
1. Restrict traffic in the suite to only those team members assigned to the case. 
2. Power tools will not be used.   
3. Use disposable instrument kit item #67650 (Subdural Evacuating Port System) 
avoid using reusable instrumentation if possible. 
4. Avoid the use of instrumentation that requires ETO or cold sterilization, i.e. 
image guided and stereotaxic equipment.   
5. No flashing of intraoperatively contaminated instruments will be done. 
6. Use hands-free instrument transfer technique when passing sharps or instruments. 
7. Clean spills with 1 normal sodium hydroxide (lye), full strength bleach solution, 
as they occur (ensure 30 to 60 minute exposure of product). Solutions should be 
no older than 24 hours. 
8. Specimens will be placed on a piece of formalin moistened telfa, folded to create 
a sandwich, placed in a specimen cup labeled w/biohazard signage and noted as 
possible CJD agent.  The labeled specimen cup should be double bagged in 
specimen bags.  Notify Pathology and include appropriate requisitions with the 
specimen for analysis.  Once the specimen has been obtained, the surgeon will 
change to new sterile gloves prior to completing the procedure. 
9. A second circulator will be available outside the room during the case and the 
infection control coordinator may be contacted as necessary. The second 
circulator will personally transport specimens to pathology personnel with 
specimen requisition sheet from EPIC and test request form from PGL.   
 
D. Post-Operatively:  
Instrument Handling: 1. Reusable instruments will be sprayed with an enzymatic cleaner, placed in 
original container, red bagged and labeled as instruments and biohazard.  See 
Table 1 for further instrument handling criteria 
 
 
 
Table 1 
Care of Instruments Exposed to the Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease 
Prion 
High-infectivity 
tissue Item/device 
 
Cleanable 
Heat/moisture 
stable 
 
Disposition 
Critical/semicritical 
instruments 
If easily 
cleanable 
If yes 1) Keep instruments moist until cleaning begins 
2) Thoroughly clean with detergent germicide. 
3) Decontaminate using one of the following methods. 
• Autoclave at 134° C (272° F) in prevacuum 
sterilizer for 18 minutes. 
• Autoclave at 134°C (272° F) in gravity sterilizer 
for 60 minutes. 
• Immerse in 1 Normal sodium hydroxide for 60 
minutes at room temperature followed by 
thorough rinsing and steam sterilization at one 
of the 2 above listed parameters. 
4) Thoroughly clean, wrap, and sterilize by conventional 
methods. 
  If no Discard 
 If difficult to 
clean 
If yes 1) Discard or decontaminate initially using one of the 
following methods. 
• Autoclave at 134° C (272° F) in prevacuum 
sterilizer for 18 minutes. 
• Autoclave at 121° C (250° F) in gravity 
sterilizer for 60 minutes. 
• Immerse in 1 Normal sodium hydroxide for 60 
minutes at room temperature followed by steam 
sterilization at 121° C (250° F) in gravity 
sterilizer for 30 minutes. 
2) Thoroughly clean, wrap, and sterilize by conventional 
methods. 
 If non-
cleanable  
n/a Discard 
Noncritical instruments If cleanable n/a 1) Clean according to routine procedures. 
2) Disinfect with full strength sodium hypochlorite or 1 
Normal sodium hydroxide using the solution least 
damaging to the item. 
3) Continue processing according to routine procedures. 
 If non- 
cleanable 
n/a Discard 
Environmental Surfaces n/a n/a 1)   Remove the gross tissue from the surface.  
2)  Clean the area with a detergent solution. 
3)  Apply the disinfectant solution for a contact time of  
     30 minutes to one hour. (either sodium       hypo-chlorite or sodium  
     hydroxide (1N NaOH), depending on surface  
     compatibility) 
4)   Use an absorbent material to soak up the solution.  
5)  Discard the cleaning material in an appropriate waste  
      container.  
6)  Rinse the treated surface thoroughly with water. 
Medium-, low-, or 
no-infectivity 
tissue/item/ device 
 
 
Cleanable 
 
Heat/moisture 
stable 
 
 
Disposition 
Critical/semicritical/ 
instruments 
 
Cleanable 
 
n/a 
Clean, disinfect, and sterilize according to routine 
procedures. 
Noncritical Noncleanable  Discard 
Environmental Surfaces n/a n/a 1) Remove unnecessary equipment from the OR prior to 
the start of the case.  Cover surfaces with disposable, 
impermeable material. 
2) Dispose of material according to facility policy after 
use. 
3) Disinfect surface with Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration recommended agent for 
decontamination of blood-contaminated surfaces (e.g., 
1:10 or 1: 100 dilution of sodium hypochlorite). 
NOTES 
1. M S Favero, W W Bond, "Chemical disinfection of medical and surgical materials," in Disinfection, sterilization, and 
Preservation, fifth ed, (Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001) 910-913; W A Rutala, D J Weber,” 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: Recommendations for disinfection and sterilization," Healthcare Epidemiology 32 (May 
1,2001) 1348-1 356; "WHO infection control guidelines for transmissible spongiform encephalopathies,"  World Health 
Organization, http://www.who.int/emc-documents/tse/whocdscsroph2003c.html (accessed 20 Nov 2001). 
2. E H Spaulding, "Chemical disinfection of medical and surgical materials," in Disinfection, Sterilization, and 
Preservation, ed C A Lawrence, S S Block (Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1968) 51 7-531. 
 
 
Body Fluids/Liquid Waste:   
 
1.  Notify manager of Environmental Safety to obtain correct fiberboard boxes and 
materials prior to the start of the case. 
2.  Body fluids and liquids should be collected and solidified prior to packaging.   
3.  Package the waste using two red bags as required by state and federal regulations.  
4.  Place the red bags into a fiberboard box with the required state and federal regulations 
5.  The top of the inner package liner must be hand tied by gathering and twisting the 
neck of the liner and using either a hand knot or zip tie (or equivalent per the 
manufacturer’s specification to secure the liner, making sure the inner contents will not 
leak out when inverted.  
6.  The top and bottom of the box must be closed and taped with a two-inch wide 
pressure sensitive tape or equivalent. 
7.  Ensure the box is labeled “incinerate only”.  No other marking should be made on the 
outer box, other than those required by State or federal regulations.  
 
 
Other disposable supplies:   1. All trash, drapes, Mayo cover, gowns, gloves, face shields, disposable sharps, etc. 
used for the suspected case will be considered bio-hazardous and placed in 
appropriate fiberboard boxes, obtained from manager of Environmental Safety 
2. Package the waste using two red bags as required by state and federal regulations.  
3. Place the red bags into a fiberboard box with the required state and federal 
regulations 
4. The top of the inner package liner must be hand tied by gathering and twisting the 
neck of the liner and using either a hand knot or zip tie (or equivalent per the 
manufacturer’s specification to secure the liner, making sure the inner contents 
will not leak out when inverted.  
5. The top and bottom of the box must be closed and taped with a two-inch wide 
pressure sensitive tape or equivalent. 
6. These containers will then be transported to Plant Services to be secured (locked) 
until a diagnosis of CJD is obtained. If a CJD diagnosis is obtained these 
containers will be incinerated by Stericycle Waste Management. Ensure the box is 
labeled ‘incinerate only’.  No other marking should be made on the outer box.  
The patient’s OR records should contain documentation of adherence to OLOL 
policy and procedure for CJD interventions.  
7. Standard Precautions will be used in the post-op care of the patient’s wound. 
 
E. Environmental Cleaning: 
See Table 1.  
 
F. Exposures: 
 
Appropriate counseling will include the fact that no case of human CJD is know to have 
occurred through occupational accident or injury.  The following actions are 
recommended: 
1. Contamination of unbroken skin with internal body fluids or tissues:  wash 
with detergent and abundant quantities of warm water (avoid scrubbing), 
rinse, and dry.  Brief exposure (1 minute, of 0.1N NaOH) can be considered 
for maximum safety.  
2. Needle sticks or lacerations:  gently encourage bleeding; wash (avoid 
scrubbing) with warm soapy water, rinse, dry and cover with a waterproof 
dressing.  Further treatment (e.g., sutures) will be appropriate to the type of 
injury.  Report the injury to your manager as a significant exposure.  
3. Splashes into the eye or mouth: irrigate with either saline (eye) or tap water 
(mouth); report to manager as a significant exposure.  
4. Health and safety guidelines mandate reporting of injuries and records will be 
kept for no less than 20 years post employment.  
 
REFERENCES: 
 
Stericycle, Inc. Policy Manual; Policy SH 024 Prion Policy, effective 03/18/2015 
 WHO Infection Control Guidelines for Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies: Report 
of a WHO Consultation, Geneva, Switzerland, 23-26 March 1999. 
  
AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practices,  2024 
• Care of Surgical Instruments 
• Environmental Cleaning 
• High-Level Disinfection 
 