 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Bone Flap (Autologous)  
OR Preparation for Freezing 
Policy Reference #: SOP049 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 03/17/2006 Review Date: 01/3/2025 
Revision Date: 06/20/2023 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To delineate the procedure for retrieving autologous bone flap which must be prepared, processed, 
and preserved in a manner that minimizes microbial growth and optimizes the condition of the 
bone flap for transplantation. The bone flap will be stored in the CranioLoc System double peel 
pouch.  This system allows for aseptic presentation of the cranial bone flap.  The pouch is a high 
barrier film which resists tears and punctures in order to protect its contents.  This system also 
protects its contents for storage from 125 degrees to -80 degrees Celsius.  . 
 
PRODECURE: 
 
1. Aerobic and anaerobic tissue cultures of the bone flap should be collected before packaging. 
2. After cultures have been collected, soak bone flap in antibiotic solution. 
3. Clean excess membrane off of bone flap prior to putting bone flap into sterile CranioLoc 
bag. 
4. Dry excess moisture off of bone flap.  
5. The surgical tech will label the inner peel pouch with the patient’s name, date of birth, date  
          and time retrieved, and the words “bone flap – autologous – keep sterile.” 
6. Place bone flap into smaller of the 2 CranioLoc peel pouches.  If bone flap does not fit into  
          smaller bag; open CranioLoc Plus peel pouch onto sterile field. 
7. The non stick aseptic seal sleeve is place over the open end of the small peel pouch. 
8. The circulator then plugs in the CranioLoc sealer and sets both the heating and cooling 
knobs  
           to “4.” 
9. The non stick sleeved end is placed into the CranioLoc sealer by the surgical tech in an  
          aseptic manner. 
10. The circulator seals the sleeve while the surgical tech is aseptically holding the peel pouch. 
11. After sealing, the circulator discards the sleeve. 
12. The surgical tech should visually inspect the integrity of the seal. 
13.  The sealed inner pouch is placed into the larger peel pouch. 
14. Once again, the surgical tech aseptically holds the peel pouch, while the circulator seals the   
           pouch.  No sleeve is required for the second peel pouch. 
15. After sealing is complete, the surgical tech hands off the aseptically packaged bone flap to     
          the circulator.   
16. The circulator inspects the integrity of the outer peel pouch seal.    2 
17. The circulator places patient’s label to the outer pouch with date and time retrieved, and the  
          words “bone flap – autologous – keep sterile – to be frozen.”   
18. The circulator then puts the packaged bone flap inside clear, unsterile specimen bag and 
seals it. 
19. The circulator charts the autologous bone flap into the specimen sections in the EMR per 
specimen policy. If using downtime protocols, then follow those outlined in specimen 
policy.  
20. The printed requisition will accompany the bone flap to Blood/Tissue Bank.  It needs to be 
signed by the circulator and receiving lab technician.   
21. Circulator documents signatures into the EMR using a nursing note.   
         
 
REFERENCES: 
AORN Standards and Recommended Practices 2024 
 