 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 5 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Surgical Services Section: Operating Room 
Title: 
TEE probes handling, reprocessing, and 
documentation (transesophageal 
Echocardiography) 
Policy Reference #: SOP055 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 12/19/2020 Last Date Reviewed: 1/10/2025 
Last Date Revised: 1/22/2021 
 
PURPOSE: To define the process for pre-cleaning, transport, leakage testing, manual cleaning, high 
level disinfection, and storage of TEE probes.  
 
POLICY 
Cleaning and decontamination should begin immediately after use. All TEE probes will be cleaned, 
transported, reprocessed, and stored according to these policies. 
 
Definitions  
 TEE: Transesophageal Echocardiography   
HLD: High level Disinfection (such as Cidex OPA or Rapicide)  
 LLD Low Level Disinfection  (such as Sani Cloth AF3 grey top wipes)  
 PPE: Personal Protective Equipment  
 IFU: Instructions For Use 
AER: Automated Endoscope Reprocessor (such as the ASTRA or Medivator)  
EMR: Electronic Medical Record  
 
PROCEDURE 
 
A. Transport: All clean TEE probes are to be checked out and retrieved from their storage 
cabinet or other storage location meeting manufacturers recommendations. All dirty TEE 
probes are to be returned to the processing room immediately after use and point of use 
cleaning has been performed.   
 
1. TEE probes will be transported in a bag lined (clear) transport container. Clean TEE 
probes will be concealed with a green (“CLEAN”) cover. Dirty TEE probes will be 
concealed with a red (“DIRTY/BIOHAZARD) cover. All transport containers will 
utilize hard plastic lid. 
2. Perform hand hygiene and apply clean gloves prior to touching TEE probe. Try to 
avoid excessive handling of the flexible shaft (See Example B)  
3. Place the scope in the transport container so that it does not bend, kink, have heavier 
parts over sensitive parts, or otherwise damage the probe 
4. Ensure no part of the patient contact areas (HLD) touch the non-patient contact areas 
(LLD).  
5. Always transport the container level 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 5 
B. Personal Protective Equipment: All personnel cleaning scopes must wear PPE 
(personal protective equipment). Gloves, liquid-resistant gown/face mask, eye protection, 
shoe covers, head covers, and a surgical mask if risk of splash or aerosols is present. 
Jewelry and wristwatches should not be worn in decontamination area.  Before leaving 
the decontamination area, PPE should be removed taking care not to contaminate skin or 
clothing followed by thorough hand washing.  
 
C. Point of use cleaning: Immediately after use, all TEE probes should be thoroughly 
cleaned to remove all organic matter (blood and tissue) and other residue. Inspect visually 
for damage. 
1. Point of use cleaning by following manufacturer’s IFU for model used. 
2. Use an approved cleaning solution rated for the TEE probe and follow IFU on 
package. 
 
D. Electrical Leakage testing: The leak test detects damage to the interior or exterior of the 
TEE probe and is done before immersion of the TEE probe in reprocessing solutions to 
minimize damage to parts of the TEE probe not designed for fluid exposure. Leakage 
testing the TEE probe will following manufacturer's IFU’s. 
1. Automatic washer that can perform the leakage test during high level disinfection 
will be done so per the manufacturers IFU.   
2. Manual leakage testing will be conducted per the manufacturers IFU prior to high 
level disinfection (See Example C).  
 
E. Manual cleaning: The most important step in removing the microbial burden from an 
TEE probe is manual cleaning. Retained debris may inactivate or interfere with the 
capability of the active ingredient of the chemical solution to effectively kill and/or 
inactivate microorganisms. 
1. Prepare: 
a. Fill a sink or basin with clean tap water with the measured volume or to 
the designated line for the desired enzymatic to water ratio 
b. Measure or use device to dose appropriate amount of enzymatic to achieve 
the required enzymatic to water ratio 
c. Ensure proper temperature is maintained throughout process.  
2. Wash all debris from the exterior of the TEE probe by wiping and/or soaking the 
instrument with the approved sponge or other designated applicator.  
 
NOTE: Pay special attention to not submerge or apply cleaner to parts of the 
scope not approved to be submerged or cleaned with the selected cleaner. See 
manufactured IFU and approved cleaners list for full listing of items and locations 
of use (See example B.  
 
Rinse:  Thoroughly rinse the TEE probe with clean water to remove residual debris and 
detergent. 
 
NOTE: Remember only certain components of the TEE probes are allowed to get 
wet (See example B)  Policy Reference Number 
Page 3 of 5 
  
Wipe: Wipe all other areas with approved disinfectant cloth per the IFU. Also wipe an 
residual water from rinsing off with a lint-free towel. 
 
NOTE: not all hand wipes are compatible with TEE probe parts (see example A) 
 
F. High Level Disinfection  
 
Automated high level disinfection: This is the preferred method. Varying types of AERs 
are utilized, consult manufactures IFU and High Level Disinfectant IFU for that system 
 
Manual high level disinfection: This method will be utilized when AER (automated 
endoscope reprocessor) unavailable due to breakdown or maintenance by Biomed dept. 
Refer to specific manufacturers IFU for different TEE probe models and for high level 
disinfectant being used. 
1. Select a basin with a lid, large enough to hold probe without damage 
2. Prepare, test, and monitor (temperature) per high level disinfectant IFU. 
3. Immerse only the parts of the TEE probe that can be submerged. Cover with lid. 
4. Allow dwell time to achieve HLD per IFU. 
5. Remove TEE probe from disinfectant and rinse and wipe thoroughly.  
6. Prepare for storage by drying with soft, clean, lint-free towel. 
7. Record in log. 
   
G. Storage of TEE Probes:  Prior to storage all probes should be inspected for cleanliness, 
dry, and structural integrity.  
1. Must have a scope tag that clearly indicates the serial number and expiration date. 
Expiration date is 7 days from reprocessing date. 
2. Reprocessed after use, transport without patient use, or every seven days (per 
specified date on tag), whichever comes first 
3. Must be stored in an area that is clean, well ventilated and dust free. 
4. Hung vertically 
5. Cabinet will be wiped down (doors, floors, walls) with approved clean per IFU  
once per week if cleaning frequency not state on IFU 
   
H. Logging and documentation: TEE probes must be tracked to the patient with the 
appropriate forms, logs, and EMR documentation.  
1. When obtaining a TEE probe a “scope tracking form” should be used 
2. When using a TEE probe on the patient, the serial number must be recorded in 
EMR 
3. Each cleaning will have a log that can track the cleaning and inspection process.  
4. Any scope failing to meet standards will follow policies and procedures for 
damaged equipment.  
 
REFERENCE: 
 
Philips Ultrasound care and cleaning manual  Policy Reference Number 
Page 4 of 5 
https://www.usa.philips.com/c-dam/b2bhc/master/whitepapers/ultrasound-care-and-cleaning/disinfectant-tables-
manuals/dt-us.pdf 
IAC guidelines: https://www.csmedicalllc.com/tee-complete-care 
EXAMPLE A 
X7-2t (compatibility row 5) 
S7-3t (Compatibility row 4) 
X8-2t  (compatibility row 5)  
 
 
  Policy Reference Number 
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
 
 
EXAMPLE B 
Highlighted area is only area allowed to get wet 
 
 
EXAMPLE C 
Manual leakage testing performed in a basin 
 
 
 
 