 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Patient Care 
Operating Room 
Title: 
LSU Health Baton Rouge  
Perkins Surgical Center 
Tissue Procurement, Storage, Disposition 
and Recall/Adverse Events 
Policy Reference #: SOP030 
Supersedes #: EKL Policy#14-01-047  
1/14/10 
Date of Origination: 1/14/10 Review Date: 11/15/2024 
Revision Date: 8/28/2017 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for tissue procurement, storage, disposition and recall/adverse events at LSU 
Health Baton Rouge- Perkins Surgical Center. 
 
DEFINITIONS:  
Tissue specimens may include but are not limited to: bone, cornea, skin, heart valves/conduits, 
tendons, fascia, Dura mater, veins, arteries, cartilage, synthetic tissue (artificially prepared, human 
and non-human based), and other cellular and tissue-based transplant or implant products. 
 
POLICY: 
• The Tissue Bank Medical Director of OLOL is ultimately responsible for oversight of the 
tissue program.  
* Note: Due to the location of the facility, OLOL Tissue Bank does not procure, store or  
   track tissue in this facility.  LSU Health Baton Rouge Perkins Surgical Center has  
   responsibility over its individual/unique processes for tissue handling.  
• All policies and processes at this facility are reviewed and approved for use by the OLOL 
Tissue Bank Medical Director and other appropriate personnel.   
•  The Operating Room will receive and maintain documentation regarding tissue 
procurement, receipt of tissue and logging of implanted tissue in their area 
• All contracts for tissue shall require the supplier to notify FMOL of all tissue recalls.  
• Transplanting surgeons are responsible for reporting to the facility any recipient infection 
where there is likelihood or suspicion that the infection originated from a contaminated 
tissue allograft. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
I.  PROCUREMENT 
    The Operating Room shall have qualified staff assigned to perform the following duties:  2 
1.  Utilize UDI Tracker application to annually validate that source facilities that supply 
tissues are licensed by state agencies and/or registered as a tissue establishment with the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
2.  Order, transport, handle, store tissue according to the source facilities’ or manufacturers’  
     written directions. 
3.  Log in all incoming tissue to the Operating Room UDI Tracker, all required elements 
(including but not limited to date of receipt, description of tissue, and person completing 
log). 
4.  Verify and document at receipt that package integrity is met and transport was controlled 
and acceptable. 
 a. UDI Tracker tissue tracking application 
5.  Quarantine any tissue that does not meet requirements for transportation and notify  
     source vendor and/or manufacturer. 
 
II. STORAGE 
1.  The Operating Room shall maintain records documenting the source facility, the original  
numeric or alphanumeric donor code and/or lot identification, all recipients or other final     
dispositions of each tissue, and expiration dates.  
a. UDI Tracker tissue tracking application 
2.  Document room temperature daily and maintain continuous temperature monitoring for  
     storage freezers to show that all tissue is stored at required temperatures.   
Trane provides 24 hour temperature monitoring of ambient storage 
locations. Tissue freezer has 24 hour recording paper tracking with 
back-up alarms on unit. 
a. Storage equipment must have functional alarms and emergency back-up  
     (Except for ambient storage cabinets). 
b. Main Types of Tissue Storage are: 
 i. Ambient- room temperature (for example, freeze dried bone) 
  Acceptable for use until tissue expiration date given by  
manufacturer 
    ii. Frozen- -40° C to -90° C freezer 
Acceptable for use until tissue expiration date given by  
manufacturer 
3.  If temperature variations are found all tissue in that storage equipment will be  
     quarantined until a thorough investigation is performed and documented.  
  a. Obtain assistance from OLOL Tissue Bank supervisor or Senior Tech for  
     variance approval if manufacturer deems tissue acceptable for use.   
 
 
III. DISPOSITION 
1.  At the time of issuance for patient care, the documentation includes medical record   3 
     number, nurse signing out, surgeon implanting and date of surgery. 
  a. UDI Tracker tissue tracking application. 
2.  Documentation shall be made in the recipient’s medical record of tissue use, including  
     documentation of the unique identifier of the tissue. 
  a. Peri-Operative Nursing Record- Operating Room Implant Record 
       
3.  The Operating Room shall ensure the tissue information cards are completed and  
     returned to the manufacturer as required. 
4.  The Operating Room maintains a detailed log containing information that allows for  
      tracing of any tissue from its origination source to the patient and vice versa. 
a. UDI Tracker tissue tracking application.  
 
IV. RECALL/ADVERSE EVENTS 
 1.  When discovered, the Operating Room shall promptly report cases of recall or post- 
      implant adverse events to: OLOL Tissue Bank, who will follow the Tissue Bank’s  
      Tissue Allograft Look-back policy and processes.  (TIS-5) 
  a.  Any notification involved in recall or post-implant adverse event shall  
     include all pertinent information including but not limited to: the patients  
     name, medical record number, date of implantation, and the suspected    
     disease process or infecting organism, or description of other adverse  
     event. 
 2.  Any additional stored organs/tissues from donors that are recalled or found to be  
     contaminated with infectious agents should be retrieved and quarantined immediately.  
     The tissue should be returned for credit (or destroyed) as directed by the  
     vendor/manufacturer.   
 
 
REFERENCES: 
1.  AABB 
2.  AAOS (American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons) 
3.  American Society of Hematology 
4.  FDA (Food and Drug Administration): Guidance for Industry: Mandatory Reporting of  
         Adverse Reactions Related to Human cells, Tissues and Cellular Tissue-Based Products 
         Human Tissue Act 2004 
5.  JCAHO Tissue Standards 
 
 
   
 
 
 