OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: 
 
Administration 
 
Title: Block Management Policy Reference #: SOS045 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination:  Review Date: 04/22/2024 
Revision Date: 06/08/2021 
 
 
PURPOSE:   
This policy outlines the process for block scheduling and operational oversight to monitor 
activity that provides for patient safety and overall operating room (OR) efficiency. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
Block Time: a designated time period allocated to a physician, physician group, or 
service line. 
 
Block Utilization: dividing block time used into block time available. 
 
Block Time Used: patient in room minutes plus average turnover time. 
 
Automatic Release: the time at which a block designated for a specific physician or group 
of physicians or service line is made available to all surgeons to schedule in to. 
            
POLICY: 
A. 65% utilization is the minimum to maintain a block 
B. Utilization will be measured in minutes 
C. Monitoring of utilization will be evaluated monthly by the Peri-Operative 
Governance Committee. 
D. Physicians and/or physicians’ offices shall provide notification to OR 
Management at DL.Lake.ORBlockRelease 
<DL.Lake.ORBlockRelease@fmolhs.org>  as far in advance as possible 
when allocated block time will not be used due to vacation plans, professional 
meetings, etc…prior to automated release to avoid impact to utilization. 
E. Cases may be posted in other available rooms after the designated block has 
been filled. 
F. Utilization credit for a multi-procedure/physician cases will be based on the 
physician who books the case in their block.  Other physicians will need to 
release their block time. 
G. The following blocks may not be released until 0700 the “day of”, Except for 
Open Heart which releases 5pm the day Prior.    
MOR TOR HVOR 
LSU General Neuro Trauma Open Heart 
 Ortho Trauma Hybrid Room 
 
H. The trauma block in MOR will not be released. 
I. Block privilege may be modified if an OR requires repairs or maintenance.  
Advance notice will be given as soon as possible to minimize impact to 
scheduling. 
J. Block time is managed and authorized by the Peri-Operative Governance 
Committee. 
 
 