 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Asepsis, Basic Surgical Principles Policy Reference #: SOS001 
Supersedes #: 1985; 07/89; 10/90 
Date of Origination: 05/04/1987 Review Date: 03/11/2024 
Revision Date: 01/02/2018 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define aseptic practices designed to prevent contamination of the patient's wound. 
 
POLICY: 
Principles of surgical asepsis should be practiced by all persons entering the Perioperative Services 
Department. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
Basic principles of aseptic technique include but not limited to the following: 
 
1. All materials in contact with the wound and used within the sterile field must be sterile. 
Sterile items must also be checked for package integrity, expiration date (if present), and the 
appropriate change in sterility process monitors if present. 
 
2. Gowns of the operating team are considered sterile in front from chest to the level of the 
sterile field.  The sleeves are considered sterile to 2 inches above the elbow.  Areas of the 
gown that are considered unsterile are the neckline, shoulders, under the arms, and back. 
Gowns should be of adequate size to close completely in the back and a sleeve length 
adequate to prevent cuff exposure outside of the glove. Scrub personnel should avoid 
changing levels, i.e., sitting versus standing. 
 
3. Only the top surface of a draped table is considered sterile.  Any item that extends beyond 
this boundary is considered contaminated and cannot be brought back into the sterile field. 
If contaminated, an item must be lifted clear of the operative field without contacting the 
sterile surface and dropped with minimal handling to an unsterile area. 
 
4. After a sterile package or container is opened, the edges are considered unsterile.  A one-
inch safety margin is considered standard on most wrappers.  The sterile boundary of  a 
barrier material used to drape a table is the table edge. Once the sterile cap of a bottle has 
been removed, it cannot be replaced aseptically; therefore, the cap should not be replaced on 
the bottle.  Dispense/pour the entire contents of a bottle.  If the entire contents are not 
dispensed/poured, then the remaining fluid in the bottle should be discarded. 
  2 
5. Motions of the surgical team are from sterile to sterile areas and from unsterile to unsterile 
areas.  Scrubbed personnel should remain close to the sterile field.  All members of the 
surgical team must understand which areas are considered sterile and unsterile.  All must 
maintain a continual awareness of these areas.  Scrub personnel must guard their sterile 
fields to prevent any unsterile item from contaminating the field.  Unsterile staff must not 
touch or reach over the sterile field, or pass between sterile fields. Conversations in close 
proximity to a sterile field should be kept to a minimum to reduce the spread of droplets. 
When staff open a wrapped package the fold farthest from the body is opened first and the 
corner nearest the body last.  The corners are secured to prevent contamination.  Motions 
should be kept to a minimum.  Do not shake linen or trash. 
 
6. Pouring a solution in the sterile field is achieved by not reaching over the field, the 
container should be placed near the edge of the sterile surface, avoid splashing.  When 
moisture soaks through a sterile barrier, strike-through occurs and the item is contaminated.  
Effective barrier materials are essential. 
 
7. Items of doubtful sterility must be considered unsterile.  Items are either sterile or unsterile.  
Any item with a permeable wrapper that falls on the floor or into another area of 
questionable cleanliness must be considered unsterile. 
 
8. Sterile setups are to be prepared as close to the scheduled time of use as possible. Sterile 
fields should never be left unattended, if so, they should be considered unsterile. 
 
9. The patient is the center of the sterile field.  Additional sterile areas are grouped around the 
patient.  If scrub persons must change positions, they move face to face or back to back to 
each other, while maintaining a safe distance between each other.  An unsterile person 
approach sterile areas facing them, keeping sterile areas in view during movement, 
maintaining approximately a one-foot or more distance from the field, and never reaches 
over the sterile field. 
 
10. The number and movement of persons involved in a surgical procedure should be kept to a 
minimum. 
 
11. Once positioned, sterile drapes are never moved or shifted. 
 
12. No food or drinks are to be taken into the semi-restricted or restricted areas. 
 
13. Masks should be removed when leaving the department. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES: 
AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practice, 2024 
 
 