OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Scrub Sink Cleaning  Policy Reference #: SOS060 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 09/22/2022 Review Date: 9/22/24 
Revision Date:  
 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide information for the cleaning and disinfection of scrub sinks in the operating 
room and procedural areas 
 
POLICY: 
Scrub sinks shall be cleaned and disinfected daily. Additionally Quarterly cleanings will 
be performed on the faucets.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
All items will be cleaned per the IFU. If an IFU is not available, the following processed 
will be used as a substitute.  
 
1) All products used will be compatible with the materials in the scrub sinks (i.e. 
stainless steel, brass, chrome, and rubber washers/o-rings)  
2) Team will use appropriate PPE based on splash hazard and safety data sheet of the 
disinfectant used.  
 
Daily 
1) Remove any items on shelves and sink that would hinder cleaning.  
2) Wipe off any dust, debris or residues found on the sink with a microfiber cloth 
soaked in a disinfectant solution. Work from top to bottom and change cloth 
as needed. Use a separate cloth for the faucet.  
3) Ensure to wipe all surfaces and items on the sink (i.e. attached soap and 
antiseptic dispenser housing, hoses, and foot pedals).  
4) Remove drain cover if present. Remove any debris, clean area and replace 
cover.  
5) Use a separate cloth to wipe the faucet and clean this item last. 
6) Mats are to be cleaned daily.  
7) Inspect all dispensers to ensure products have adequate supply and are not 
past expiration date. 
8) Spot clean sinks and mats as needed throughout the day.  
9) Report any issues with sinks to Plant Services. (i.e. no running water, pedals, 
or kick panels broken, leaks, etc.)  
   
Quarterly 
 
1) Faucet head is to be removed and disassembled to allow for visualization and 
internal cleaning of all parts.  
2) Faucet head is soaked with an approved disinfectant for recommended time 
provided by the product instructions.  
3) Faucet head is brushed with a soft bristle brush.  
4) Inside of goose neck assembly is brushed until clean with a brush of proper 
diameter and an approved disinfectant. Allow proper disinfectant time.  
5) All items are rinsed/flushed for 30secnods with water.  
6) Disinfectant is changed out regularly and if debris is found.  
7) All bushes will be inspected after each use. If any debris is noted on the brush or 
bristles are worn, it will be disposed an a new one used for subsequent faucet 
cleanings.  
8)  Records will be retained per facility policy and reported to Infection Control  
 
 
REFERENCES: 
Steris faucet cleaning recommendations  
 