 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Environment 
 
Title: Room Clean-up, Operating Room Policy Reference #: SOS024 
Supersedes #: 1985; 09/02/91 
Date of Origination: 01/25/1988 Review Date: 12/3/2024 
Revision Date: 12/20/2022 
 
PURPOSE: 
To define process for post-operative operating room clean-up. 
 
DEFINITIONS: 
The following definitions should be used to determine what constitutes regulated waste and, 
therefore, should be contained in the proper receptacle for disposal.. 
 
A. Regulated waste is a waste capable of producing an infectious disease, deemed hazardous, 
or controlled and or otherwise regulated by a governing authority.  For a waste to be 
considered infectious it must contain pathogens with sufficient virulence and quantity so 
that exposure to the waste by susceptible host may result in an infectious disease. 
B. Biohazardous waste The following are recognized as regulated biohazardous waste:   
 Liquid or semi-liquid blood or blood products; semen; vaginal secretions; cerebrospinal, 
synovial, pleural, pericardial, peritoneal, or amniotic fluid; any body fluid visibly  
contaminated with blood; contaminated items which are saturated and would release any of 
the above materials if compressed, must be disposed of in a red biohazard bag. 
 
C. Sharps may be defined as needles, syringes, scalpels, scalpel blades, staplers, etc. Sharps 
must be discarded in the designated sharps container.  
D.  Controlled Waste is waste regulated by the facility or agencies such as DEA on items such 
as pharmaceuticals that are declared to be a controlled substance. 
E. Hazardous waste is waste that is deeded to be harmful to individuals or the environment. 
This can be from pharmaceuticals, chemical products, or other items determined by the 
facility or an agency such as the USP or EPA.  
 
POLICY: 
Every patient is a potential source of a communicable disease which may not be identified before, 
during, or after the peri-operative period.  All cases should be treated using Standard Precautions.  
When cleaning spills of blood or other potentially infectious or hazardous material, use gloves, 
safety glasses or face shields and other personal protective equipment as appropriate to the task.  
Whenever EPA registered hospital approved disinfectants are used, exposure time shall adhere to 
the manufacturer recommendation.  
An EPA-registered, hypochlorite-based (bleach-based) disinfectant shall be used to clean a patient 
area when the patient on contact plus precautions. such as Clostridium difficile (C difficile). For 
patients with suspected Creutzfeldt - Jakob disease (CJD) see OR Policy SOP040 Guidelines for  2 
Suspected CJD Cases in Operating Room. For patients on airborne precautions, such as 
tuberculosis, refer to Infection Control policy # IC2011 Tuberculosis Infection Control Plan for 
specific OR cleaning processes. The concept of cleaning from “clean to dirty” shall be utilized 
during all room and equipment decontamination procedures. Daily terminal cleaning is performed 
by the Housekeeping Department. 
 
In addition to hazardous items, oxygen cylinders should be inspected and secured at each point in 
the operative period.  
 
PROCEDURE: 
The following procedures should be followed: 
 
1. PRE-OPERATIVE PERIOD 
a. The operating room should be inspected prior to start of case to ensure appropriate 
cleaning after previous case. 
b. If any trash collected during pre-case remains in the room, it should be placed in 
appropriate trash bag.  
c. Prior to the first case each morning all horizontal surfaces should be wiped down 
with an EPA registered hospital-approved disinfectant. 
 
2. INTRA-OPERATIVE PERIOD 
a.  Linen and waste containers are not to be removed from the operating room until all 
counts are complete, resolved, and the patient has left the room.  
b. Staff on the unsterile team using an EPA registered hospital-approved disinfectant 
solution, cleaning cloth, or pre-moistened wipe, should immediately clean up 
organic debris.  The room should be kept tidy; all soiled articles should be contained 
in proper containers.  Traffic is kept to a minimum during the case. 
c.   Hand washing or hand disinfection should be carried out following patient contact or 
contact with soiled articles. 
d. The outside of specimen containers passed from the field should be disinfected with 
an EPA registered hospital-approved disinfectant prior to labeling if there has been 
any possibility of contaminating the outside of the receptacle. 
e. Surgical attire is inspected frequently to ensure contaminants are not being spread 
unknowingly. If soiled, these should be changed as soon as possible. 
 
3. END OF PROCEDURE 
a. When cleaning spills of blood or other potentially infectious or hazardous material, 
use gloves, safety glasses or face shields and other personal protective equipment as 
appropriate to the task. 
b. Drapes should be rolled into small bundles and placed into appropriate hamper (blue for 
linen products, clear for disposable trash, and red/biohazard for bloody disposable 
products).  Remaining irrigation fluids should not be poured on to linen/cloth drapes.. 
c. Surgical gowns and gloves should be removed inside-out and placed in the appropriate 
hamper. Shoe covers and mask should be changed if soiled or as needed. 
d. Separate and return all instruments to their original sets. 
• Open all box locks both clean and dirty  3 
• Re-rack all racked instruments and flush any cannulated instrument/suction used 
during the case. 
• For non-racked instruments separate clean from dirty, place in basin or on a 
towel on top of the other instruments in the basket. 
• Spray enzymatic solution over all the instruments. 
• Return any implants to their assigned container and secure the lid. 
• Return any scopes or delicate instruments in their assigned container and secure 
the lid. 
e. Anything which should not be immersed (i.e. power drills, saws, etc.) should be wiped 
clean with an EPA registered hospital-approved disinfectant and placed back into original 
container. 
f. Solutions remaining on the back table should be contained in the suction system. 
g. All cables should be wiped. 
h. Needles, knife blades and any other sharps should be contained in a magnetic needle book 
and discarded in sharps container. 
i. Mayo stand covers and back table covers should be rolled up with all remaining disposable 
articles and discarded in the appropriate trash container. 
j. Disposable items contaminated with blood and/or tissue that would release in a liquid or 
semi-liquid state if compressed or items with caked blood/body fluids should be disposed of 
in red biohazardous-labeled bags. 
k. Instruments should be placed on the case cart for transport to SPD. 
l. Suction containers should have solidifier added, all ports closed off prior to placement on the 
case cart, 
and transported  to the decontamination area Place the suction containers in the red 
biohazardous receptacle. 
m. Reusable anesthesia equipment should be bagged for transport and removed from the room by 
an Anesthesia Tech to be cleaned and processed in the Anesthesia workroom.  Disposable items 
are discarded in the appropriate trash bag. 
n.  Kick bucket liners are discarded into the appropriate trash bag as dictated by the amount of 
liquid bioburden present. 
o. Sharps disposal box, if 3/4 full, is closed properly and placed on the case cart or carried to the 
Decontam Elevator to be sent to SPD. 
p. The operating table, overhead light and horizontal surfaces should be cleaned with an EPA 
registered hospital-approved disinfectant.  Any other pieces of furniture or equipment that have 
been soiled should also be wiped clean with an EPA registered hospital-approved disinfectant. 
q. Gloves worn during cleaning should be disposed of prior to sealing and placing the last trash 
bag on case cart.  After sealing, trash and linen bags should be placed on the case cart for 
transport. 
r. The cart containing all contaminated articles is removed from the OR. The cart should be 
covered with a cart cover during hallway transport. Anesthesia equipment should be returned to 
the Anesthesia Room and the case cart should be sent to SPD via the Decontam dumbwaiter 
with remaining instruments, trash, and linen. 
s. The floor should be mopped with an EPA registered hospital-approved disinfectant solution 
after all contaminated articles have been removed.  The mop head should not be redipped in the 
mop bucket.  Another clean mop head should be used if necessary. It is only necessary to clean 
a 3-ft. to 4-ft. perimeter around the surgical field when it is visibly soiled or potentially soiled.  4 
The area cleaned should be extended as necessary to adjacent visibly soiled areas. The OR bed 
should be moved each time to check for any items that may me concealed under the bed. Signs 
should be readily available to indicate floor is wet. 
t. The room should be prepared for the next case after all contaminated articles are removed: 
1) Receptacle liners should be placed in empty suction containers. 
2) Kick buckets liners should be replaced. 
3) Fresh trash and linen bags should be placed in hampers. 
4) Sharps disposal box should be replaced if appropriate. 
5) The OR bed should be made and the floor lock engaged.  
6) The room should be inspected to insure that it is ready for the next case. 
u. The overall sequence for post procedure cleaning should be as follows: 
1) Gather any necessary supplies such as disinfectant wipes, mop, and wet floor signs 
2) Perform hand hygiene and put on gloves 
3) Remove any gross contamination 
4) Change gloves, perform hand hygiene, re-glove once the foam has dried. 
5) Wipe all used and contaminated surfaces (from high to low and clean to dirty) in the 
procedure area, such as the bed, back table, mayo stand, lights, walls, etc.  
6) Wipe all “high touch” areas such as computers, phones, and door knobs. 
7) Move table outside contaminated area 
8) Mop from clean to dirty, starting 3-4 feet around contaminated area. It is not necessary 
to clean entire floor. 
9) Remove gloves, perform hand hygiene. 
10) Re-make the bed; return to center of room and lock bed. 
11) Visually inspect room. Repeat process for any items that were not captured in initial 
cleaning. 
12) If there is another case,  
a. bring case cart into room 
b. lay out items on bed, back table 
c. Open sterile items (if required) for the next case. 
13) Perform hand hygiene upon leaving the room. 
 
v. Daily Terminal Cleaning 
1) Housekeeping Department should perform terminal cleaning on a daily basis during the 
3-11 shift. 
2) Housekeeping should perform duties according to procedures established by 
Housekeeping Service and Infection Control offices. 
 
REFERENCES: 
Infection Control Policy IC/III/5/0388, "Infectious Medical Waste, (Regulated Waste) Management 
of." 
AORN: Standards and Recommended Practices for Perioperative Nursing 2024 
Crothal: Housekeeping Operations Manual 
 
 
 