 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Operating Room 
Title: Laser Safety Policy Reference #: SOS019 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination:  Review Date: 05/09/2024 
Revision Date: 12/16/2021 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish guidelines for safe laser use by physicians and personnel in providing intraoperative 
patient care during laser surgeries and procedures and maintaining and supporting a safe operating 
room environment. 
 
POLICY: 
All physicians and intraoperative personnel involved in the use of lasers will maintain proper 
training by attending educational sessions that include safety precautions and hazards, maintain 
current credentialing, and follow procedures as outlined in the policy. 
 
PROCEDURE:  
Patient Safety 
1. Eye protection 
a. All patients under general anesthesia will have their eyes protected with a sterile water-
based ophthalmic lubricant, taped closed, and covered with laser-appropriate moist eye 
pads/towels. 
b. All awake patients will be provided with laser-appropriate glasses or goggles. 
2. Airway 
a. The anesthesia care provider, depending on the site to be lasered, will use a laser shield 
endotracheal tube.  It is recommended that the cuff be fitted with methylene blue and 
saline solution. 
i. The surgeon will protect the cuffed end of the endotracheal tube from the laser 
beam whenever the endotracheal tube is in close proximity to the site to be 
lasered.  The cuff will be protected by wet cottonoid patties that will be kept wet 
throughout the surgical procedure.  A count of these patties will be maintained 
and documented.  
ii. FiO2 level and ability to purge O2 from airway prior to firing laser will be 
discussed and followed per anesthesia fire safety policy.   
3. Fire  
a. A fire safety assessment will be completed. 
b. Prep agents will not be allowed to pool and will be fully dry prior to draping or firing 
the laser.  2 
c. Wet cloth towels, wet gauze, or wet cottonoids will be used to drape the site to be 
lasered and the surrounding tissues that could potentially be exposed to a direct or 
reflected laser beam. 
d. A basin or pitcher of sterile normal saline or sterile water will be on the back table for 
all surgeries or procedures involving laser usage.  Two unopened bottles of sterile saline 
or water will be available in the room. 
4. Check the site post procedure for any laser induced injury. 
5. Documentation of laser usage will be recorded in a laser section of the circulating record and 
will include:  
a. the type of laser used 
b. The ID or serial number of the laser 
c. wattage, power,  
d. length of time the laser was in use  
e. all safety precautions that were employed (patient eye protection, fire safety, etc). 
 
Personnel Safety 
1. A laser-trained staff member will be available, if applicable, for all laser surgeries and 
procedures.  This staff member will have the responsibility and authority to ensure that safety 
parameters are followed in accordance with laser policy. 
a. The laser will be attended when the laser is in use to prevent unauthorized and/or 
accidental activation of the laser. 
b. The laser should be test fired as indicated per manufacturer’s recommendation. 
c. The laser should be maintained on “standby” mode at all times that the laser is not 
actively in use to prevent accidental firing which could cause injury. 
d.  The operator manual specific for each laser is available for immediate reference by all 
personnel operating the laser. 
 
2. All personnel in the room will wear laser-appropriate eye protection.  Laser wavelength-
specific glasses or goggles with peripheral guard attachments will be worn by all persons in the 
laser treatment room while the laser is activated. 
3. Laser warning signs will be posted on all entrances to the laser room, as well as a pair of laser-
appropriate glasses or goggles attached to the outside of each entrance for persons who must 
enter the laser room while the laser is being activated.  However, traffic in and out of the laser 
utilization area should be restricted to a minimum during usage. 
4. Prior to laser use, the windows to the laser treatment area will be covered with an opaque 
covering, except for the CO2 laser. 
5. The laser key is only to be in the laser when the laser is in use.  The key will be kept in a 
separate location from the laser unit to ensure that only appropriate personnel have access to the 
use and activation of the laser. 
6. Only the physician performing the laser surgery or procedure is to have access to the laser foot 
pedal.  The laser foot pedal should be the only foot pedal available to the physician during laser 
usage to avoid accidental firing or activation of other equipment that could result in injury.  The 
physician will be responsible for selecting the laser power and wattage for each procedure. 
7. Instrumentation which may be easily struck by the laser beam shall be ebonized or matte-
finished to minimize the reflection of the beam.  If instruments are not laser-finished, they 
should be covered with moist gauze if they are in close proximity to the laser beam.  3 
8. Proper respiratory protection should be utilized. 
a) smoke evacuator should be used during all laser procedures that generate a visible 
smoke or plume as a result of tissue vaporization  
b)  Respiratory protection should be second line of defense. 
• First choice is fit-tested N95 respirator and should be used on all known 
transmissible disease cases (i.e. HPV or condyloma).  
• Second choice is a high filtration surgical mask (99%) 
9. All personnel will know the location of the fire extinguisher readily available to each operating 
room. 
10. If or when technical difficulties arise with the laser unit that cannot be handled by the physician 
or surgery personnel, the Biomedical department or laser service representative will be notified. 
 
 
 
 
 
Laser Injuries 
1. Should any injury occur to a patient during a laser surgery or procedure, appropriate and 
immediate treatment should be implemented followed by a safety event report.  The Charge 
Nurse Manager/Supervisor shall be notified so that appropriate action can be taken regarding 
that laser. 
2. Should any injury occur to an employee during a laser surgery or procedure, appropriate and 
immediate treatment should be implemented followed by a safety event report.  The Charge 
Nurse Manager/Supervisor will also be notified. 
 
AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practice, 2024 
 
 