                                                                                                                              NMA- 026  
Page 1 of 2 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Surgical Services Section: Medication 
Administration 
Title: Nerve Block  
Policy 
Reference #: SOS048 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 08/17/2020 Last Review 
Date:  07/26/2024 
Last Revision Date: 08/17/2020 
 
     
 
Purpose and Goal: 
To ensure that nerve blocks are used in an effective, safe, secure, controlled manner and 
monitored by the nurse. 
 
Policy: 
Medications for the management of pain may be administered via a nerve block.  This 
technique permits administration of analgesics through an indwelling perineural catheter 
or a single perineural injection.  The Registered nurse may serve as a “third hand” as 
defined by the Louisiana State Board of Nursing Declaratory Statement. 
 
Definitions  
Single Perineural Injection Nerve Block (SINB) is administered through a single dose 
injection through a catheter in or near a nerve near the surgical site. 
 
Third Hand – the role of RNs assisting with procedures described within this statement in 
which both of the anesthesia providers hands are otherwise engaged in carrying out 
complex aspects of the procedure.  These complex aspects of the procedure carried out by 
the anesthesia provider are otherwise outside of the scope of practice of the RN.” (LSBN, 
2016) 
 
Applies To: 
Registered nurses who have documentation on file at their facility for nerve block 
therapy.  
 
Procedure 
A. All supplies are to be gathered before the procedure. Proper PPE and hand 
hygiene will be used as required based on contact precautions.  
B. SINB is administered through a single dose injection by the physician.  When 
necessary the RN, acting as the “third hand”, can administer the medication under 
the direct supervision of the physician.                                                                                                                               NMA- 026  
Page 2 of 2 
 
C. The Registered Nurse must monitor for signs and symptoms of emergent situation 
toxicity for a minimum of 30 minutes post procedure. 
i. Symptoms of anesthetic toxicity can include muscle 
twitching, convulsions, unconsciousness, coma, respiratory 
depression, cardiac arrhythmias, or cardiac arrest. 
ii. Anesthesia should be immediately notified in the event of 
an emergent situation of local anesthetic toxicity 
D. The Registered Nurse will enter all appropriate documentation in the medical 
record. 
 
 
References: 
Mosby Online Skills: Peripheral Nerve Block Excerpted and adapted from Weigand DL, 
 editor: AACN procedure manual for critical care, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2010, 
 Saunders. 
LSBN. Declaratory Statement on the Registered Nurse Assisting with Peripheral Nerve Blocks, 
Adopted April 14, 2016. 
 
 