 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter:  Environment  
Title: Environmental Controls and Monitoring 
Policy Reference #: SOS010 
Supersedes #: 
10/19/87; 11/90 
SPS015 05/30/2018 
SOS007 06/12/2018 
Date of Origination: 10/19/1987 Review Date: 07/18/2024 
Revision Date:  08/07/2024 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
A. To provide a policy for effective management of the heating, ventilation and air conditioning 
systems (HVAC) in an effort to remove contaminants from the air and control air flow patterns 
in designated perioperative areas at minimum requirements of the U.S. Public Health Service 
and National Fire Protection Association. 
B. To monitor anesthesia waste gas levels and room air exchange rates in anesthetizing locations 
and post anesthesia care areas. 
 
POLICY: 
Temperature, humidity, and air flow should be monitored daily. Variations from intended set points 
(based on recommendations and Procedure section B subsection c) will be recorded using a log or 
documented via the HVAC system.  Air exchanges rates and anesthesia waste gas levels will be 
monitored and recorded quarterly and annually respectively by a contracted vendor company. The 
recommended ranges are as follows: 
 
Area Temperature Humidity Pressure Air Exchanges  
(per hour) 
PERIOPERATIVE     
Operating Rooms  68-75°F 30-60% Positive 20 
CVL/EP Rooms 68-75°F 30-60% Positive 20 
Procedure rooms  70-75 30-60 Positive 20 
ENDOSCOPY     
Procedure Rooms 68-73 30-60 NR 6 
Bronchoscopy Rooms 68-73 30-60 Negative 12 
Scope Storage room Max 75 Max 60 N/A N/A 
Cleaning Room NR NR Negative 10 
STERILE PROCESSING     
Clean Workroom 68-73 Max 60 Positive 4 
Decontamination Room 60-73°F NR (Not 
Required) 
Negative 6 
Sterile Storage Room Max 75 Max 60 Positive 4   2 
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A. Temperature  
a. Wall thermostats are located in the perioperative areas 
b. Thermostats should be set based on recommended parameters 
c. Thermostats can be adjusted as needed dependent on patient or case specifics as 
requested by the physician or anesthesiologist. The reason for the variance will be 
logged. Ability to monitor and maintain normothermia from the requested 
adjustment must be assessed by the requestor and remain within HVAC alarm 
parameters.  
d. Temperature will be monitored depending on the HVAC system capabilities, unit 
specific requirements, and daily checks.  
 
B. Humidity 
a. Humidity will be monitored depending on the HVAC system capabilities, unit 
specific requirements, and daily checks. 
 
C. Air Pressure 
a. Air pressure will be monitored depending on the HVAC system capabilities, unit 
specific requirements, and daily checks. 
b. A minimum pressure differential shall be maintained at a value of at least +/-0.01 in. 
wc (2.5 Pa) relative to the required pressure default setting for the area. 
 
 
D. Daily Checks 
a. The temperature, humidity and pressure parameters will be checked daily and 
logged by the Facilities Office via Tracer Summit Control Monitor System in the 
Plant Services Control Room. Areas that do not have Tracer Summit Monitor 
System reports will perform a daily check and log the results.  
b. Additionally, each area will monitor temperature and humidity daily. These areas 
will maintain logs to report errors at the respective desks with work orders submitted 
and follow up as applicable.  
c. In addition to daily checks, Operating Rooms & Procedural areas will observe 
temperature, humidity, and pressure requirements (as required) before and during a 
procedure. 
 
 
 
E. Alarms/Discrepancies 
a. Temperature alarms will be set at the recommended parameters.  
 
b. If an HVAC system alarms and does not correct itself within 60 minutes, the 
following should occur:  3 
i. The department will be notified via TRANE if they are monitored. 
Otherwise, the department will alert Plant Services. 
ii. Activity should be assessed in the area where the alarm/discrepancy is noted 
iii. If the alarm remains outside parameters  beyond 60 minutes, Plant Services 
will notify the unit of time frame for systems to return within parameters. 
iv. Inability to return to normal parameters or give a suitable time frame to 
return to normal parameters within 60min constitutes an HVAC failure.  
 
F. Failure of the HVAC system 
a. Surgeries in progress should be completed. Other departments should assess 
operations.  
b. A designated perioperative decision team (PDT) will assemble and have the 
following representation:  
i. Senior Divisional Director of Perioperative Services, or designee 
ii. Regulatory Manager of Perioperative Services, or designee 
iii. Director of unit involved, or designee 
iv. Director of Infection Prevention, or designee 
v. Director of Facilities Maintenance, or designee. 
c. After review of the situation by the PDT, a decision will be made regarding a 
surgical plan for urgent and emergency cases. 
d. OR representatives will notify MD and/or MD offices of the need to reschedule 
cases.  
e. The PDT will convene to respond to humidity control events and assess the 
following:  
i. Severity and consistency of the RH deviation 
ii. Infection risk to patients of the scheduled procedures 
iii. Level of clinical staff, patient and support family members’ comfort 
iv. Confidence of a facility engineer in a timely resolution 
v. Occupied or unoccupied status of the perioperative space 
 
G. The following possible responses to humidity control events will be followed as per the 
ASHRAE recommendations 
facility engineer will report relative humidity values of rooms in question and the status of 
the sensor calibration 
Out of Range:  
RH is up to 5% 
below lower 
limit 
(28.5% to 30%) 
RH is more 
than 5% 
below the 
lower limit 
(below 
28.5%) 
RH is up to 5% 
above upper 
limit 
(60 to 63%) 
RH is more 
than 5% above 
the upper limit 
(over 63%) 
Less than 2 
hours 
Proceed as 
scheduled  
Proceed as 
scheduled 
Proceed unless 
both temp & 
humidity are out 
of range or 
condensation in 
packaging.  
Proceed unless 
both temp & 
humidity are out 
of range or 
condensation in 
packaging. 
2 to 6 hours Take corrective 
action to bring 
RH up. Proceed 
Take 
corrective 
action to 
Take corrective 
action, but may 
proceed cases 
Take corrective 
action and 
convene PDT.  4 
as scheduled bring RH up 
and convene 
PDT.  
unless both temp 
& humidity are 
out of range or 
condensation in 
packaging. 
Monitor temp & 
humidity and 
condensation in 
OR. See note for 
10% or greater at 
8hrs 
6 – 12 hours Take corrective 
action to bring 
RH up. Proceed 
as scheduled 
PDT to 
convene & 
consider 
halting cases 
until 
repaired 
Take corrective 
action to bring RH 
down, but may 
proceed cases 
unless both temp 
& humidity are 
out of range or 
condensation in 
packaging. 
PDT should 
consider halting 
cases until 
repaired. 
12 hours or 
more  
PDT to convene 
at 12hrs.  
Move/cancel 
cases after 24hrs 
PDT to 
convene to 
move/cancel 
cases 
PDT to convene 
to move/cancel 
cases after 24hrs 
PDT to convene 
to move/cancel 
cases 
If the RH is more than 10% above the upper RH limit for more than 8 hours, it is 
very likely that the mechanical system needs repair. The PD Team should consider 
halting operations until the issue is resolved. 
 
H. Air Exchanges  
a. The contracted vendor company will perform testing on an effective preventative 
maintenance schedule  
b. The testing will include the perioperative areas 
c. The process will include air exchanges per hours and air pressure readings 
d. If discrepancies are detected that fall below the recommended standard, Plant 
Services should be notified 
e. Discrepancies should be reported and corrective action documented on file in Plant 
Services and reported to Surgical Services Administration 
f. Final reports are distributed to Plant Services and Surgical Services Administration 
 
I. Anesthesia Waste Gas 
a. The contracted vendor company will perform testing 
b. The testing will include all anesthetizing locations 
c. Biomed will accompany the company representative during inspection, if needed 
d. The process will include inspection of anesthesia machines and gas scavenger 
systems 
e. Any leaks or defects discovered will be reported to BIOMED, Anesthesia and 
Surgical Administration 
f. After necessary repairs are completed, any areas with an NO2 > 25ppm or 
halogenated gas > 2ppm will be re-inspected. 
g.  If waste gas levels remain above acceptable level, the matter will be referred to the 
Chief of Anesthesia Service, Medical Directory of Surgery, Risk Manager and Div 
Director Surgical Administration 
h. Final reports are distributed to BIOMED and Surgical Services Administration 
  5 
J. Filters  
a. In operating rooms designated for orthopedic procedures, transplants, neurosurgery, 
or dedicated burn unit procedures, HEPA filters shall be provided. 
b. filters and filter frames should be visually inspected for pressure drop and for bypass 
monthly 
 
References: 
 
ANSI/ASHRAE/ASHE Standard 170-2013  
 
Humidity Control Events in Perioperative Care Areas, ASHRAE 2019 
 
 
 