  
Page 1 of 4 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Surgical Services Section: Operating Room 
Title: Surgical Smoke Evacuation Policy Reference #: SOS020 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 03/14/2022 Last Date Reviewed: 09/27/2024 
Last Date Revised: 09/27/2023 
 
 
PURPOSE:  To outline proper evacuation of smoke within the operating room and procedural areas.  
 
General 
 
1) Prior to a surgical procedure the perioperative team should anticipate and review the type and 
amount of surgical smoke. The review should consider eliminating the hazard (avoiding smoke 
generating devices), substituting the hazard (by using alternative devices), or engineering 
controls (smoke evacuation). The highest level of control available should be used. The review 
process should be reassessed as needed throughout the procedure.   
a. Type of device 
b. Effective smoke evacuation and filtration  
 
2) Surgical smoke devices should be tested before use. 
 
3) All surgical smoke generated by energy devices (ESU, lasers, ultrasonic scalpel, etc.) should be 
filtered. The type of filter should be selected based on the hazard assessment and type of 
procedure. Unless indicated by the manufacturer, filters (such as in line filters) should be 
discarded after each procedure.  
a. ULPA filters should be placed between the wall and the suction cannister. 
 
4) Smoke should always be evacuated or filtered when smoke is being generated. This includes 
prior to deflating laparoscopic or robotic procedures.   
 
5) Surgical smoke evacuation or suction tip should be positioned as close to the surgical site 
without interfering with it. This is typically about 2” away from the site.  
 
6) Surgical smoke filters should be treated as biohazardous waste.  
 
7) Complications with surgical smoke or surgical smoke evacuation/filtration devices should be 
reported (safety event, work order, manager, exposure control plan, etc.).   
 
Defining Surgical Smoke 
 
No Smoke  
1) Procedures where no smoke is anticipated and no energy generating devices are being used.   
Page 2 of 4 
Examples: Cataract extraction, myringotomy, Exam under anesthesia. 
 
2) No filtration needed. 
 
Small amount of smoke 
1) Surgeries where the amount of smoke from energy generating devices is not in large quantity 
and HPV is not suspected or confirmed.  
Examples: hand surgery, craniotomy, tonsillectomy, oral surgery, breast biopsy, minimally 
invasive procedures)  
 
2) Smoke evacuation system required, surgical vacuum with in-line smoke evaluation filter 
(ULPA) required. 
 
3) Smoke evacuation system required, and device is based on the procedure. 
a. Portable smoke evacuator with suction device or integrated smoke evacuating energy 
generating device 
b. Laparoscopic/Robotic system 
 
 
Large amounts of smoke 
1) Surgeries where large quantities of smoke from energy generating devices and/or HPV is 
suspected or confirmed.  
Examples: liver resection, mastectomy, spinal fusion, condyloma ablation, joint replacement, 
transurethral resection of prostate  
 
2) Smoke evacuation system required, surgical vacuum with in-line smoke evaluation filter 
(ULPA) required. 
 
3) Smoke evacuation system required, and device is based on the procedure. 
a. Wide diameter open tubing preferable as applicable. 
b. Portable smoke evacuator with suction device or integrated smoke evacuating energy 
generating device.  
c. Laparoscopic/Robotic system 
 
Documentation  
1) Documentation of smoke evacuation should include the unique ID of any electronic 
evacuation device. This is typically listed under equipment when charting.   
 
Respiratory Protection 
 
1) Respiratory protections is the second line of defense and should not be a replacement for smoke 
evacuation and filtration. Surgical masks are not considered respiratory protection.   
2) Wear respiratory protections such as N-95 when HPV is suspected or confirmed.  
 
 
 
Disposal   
Page 3 of 4 
1) Personal Protective Equipment will be worn when handling and disposing of used surgical 
smoke filters. 
2) Surgical smoke filters will be disposed in biohazardous waste.  
References: 
AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practice, 2024 
 
 
Appendix A 
Examples of procedures which require an in-line filter or suction evacuator using a suction device or an 
integrated smoke evacuating energy generating device: 
1. Temporal Artery Biopsy 
2. Surgery of the hand 
3. Vocal Cord polyp removal 
4. Tonsillectomies 
5. Laparoscopies 
6. Surgery of the ear 
7. Dermatological surgery 
8. Nasal procedures 
9. Thoracoscopy 
10. Spinal Surgeries 
11. Breast Biopsies 
Appendix B 
Examples of procedures where Wide diameter open tubing should be used: 
1. Abdominal surgery on friable tissue 
2. Breast reduction surgery 
3. Large extremity surgeries 
4. Vaporization of condyloma 
 
 
 
 
   
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
 