 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Safety/Environment 
Operating Room 
Title: Surgical Hand Antisepsis Policy Reference #: SOS030 
Supersedes #: 1985; 9/24/91 
Date of Origination: 10/19/1987 Review Date: 01/22/2025 
Revision Date: 01/22/2020 
  
 
PURPOSE: 
To establish a procedure for the surgical hand scrub                             
 
POLICY: 
A surgical hand scrub shall be performed by health care personnel before donning sterile gloves for 
surgical or other invasive procedures.  The preferred method of surgical hand scrub antisepsis shall 
be the waterless brushless method, utilizing a US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved 
surgical hand hygiene product. A mechanical scrub process is acceptable but not preferred.  
PROCEDURE: 
1. Prior to beginning the surgical hand antisepsis: 
a. Hands should be free from dermatitis, infections, exudative lesions, and non-intact 
skin. Report skin conditions to your supervisor.  
b. All jewelry (rings, watches bracelets, etc) should be removed. 
c. Fingernails should be free of all nail polish, trimmed short, and without the presence 
of artificial nails.  Cuticles should be in good condition.  There should be no cuts or 
skin problems. 
d. Surgical attire and required PPE should be donned, adjusted, and secure in place 
prior to performing hand antisepsis. 
     
2.           The product used should be chosen based on. 
 The antimicrobial soap or detergent: 
a. patient allergies 
b. efficacy 
c. personal preference 
 
3. When choosing an antimicrobial sponge for a mechanical scrub, the order of preference shall 
be: 
 
I. Surgical Hand Rub 
a. Avagaurd is the preferred scrub method 
II. Surgical Hand Scrub  
a. First Choice… CHG (chlorhexadine gluconate) 
b. Second Choice… Povidone Iodine  2 
c. Third Choice… PCMX/Ultradex product (for those with previous skin reactions to other 
agents) 
 
4. Technique: 
 
I. For Avagard surgical hand rub (brushless and waterless product): 
a. A full mechanical scrub is not recommended prior to Avagard use. 
b. Clean under well-trimmed nails with nail pick.  Dry hands after nail cleaning. 
c. Dispense one pump (2ml) into the palm of one hand. Dip fingertips of the opposite hand 
into the hand prep and work under the fingernails.  Spread remaining hand prep over the 
hand and up to just above the elbow. 
d. Dispense one pump (2ml) into the opposite hand and repeat step c. 
e. Dispense one final pump (2ml) into either hand, and reapply to all aspects of both hands 
and wrists, allow to air dry. 
f. Special note:  Ensure hands are dry prior to starting this process. 
 
II. The procedure to accomplish the surgical hand scrub should be the same for all staff.  The 
procedure includes the following steps: 
b. Wash hands and forearms if visibly soiled with soap and running water immediately 
before beginning the surgical scrub.  
c. Clean the subungual areas of both hands under running water using a disposable nail 
cleaner.  
d. Rinse hands and forearms under running water.  
e. Dispense the approved antimicrobial scrub agent according to the manufacturer’s 
written directions.  
f. Apply the antimicrobial agent to wet hands and forearms using a soft, nonabrasive 
sponge. From this point forward hand should always be above elbows and never 
touch surrounding items (shirt, sink, etc) 
g. A three- or five-minute scrub should be timed to allow adequate product contact 
with skin, according to the manufacturer’s written directions.  
h. Visualize each finger, hand, and arm as having four sides. The scrub process should 
progress in a sequential fashion from fingertips tips to elblow. Scrub all four sides 
effectively, keeping the hand elevated. Repeat this process for opposite fingers, 
hand, and arm.  
i. Avoid splashing surgical attire.  
j. Discard sponges, if used, in appropriate containers.  
k. Hands and arms should be rinsed under running water in one direction from 
fingertips to elbows as often as needed.  
l. Remember to hold hands higher than elbows and away from surgical attire. 
m. The same anatomical scrub method should be used for every surgical hand scrub 
performed. 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practice 2025  
3M Avagard Manufacturer’s Instructions for Use 