 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Safety/Environment 
Operating Room 
Title: Traffic Patterns, Operating Rooms Policy Reference #: SOS031 
Supersedes #: 01/19/88 
Date of Origination: 01/19/1988 Review Date: 01/09/2025 
Revision Date: 02/03/2020 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide a policy for traffic patterns within the Operating Rooms (OR) 
 
POLICY: 
All personnel entering the surgical suite shall follow a delineated traffic pattern.  Movement of 
patients to, through and from the surgical suite shall be along the most direct route that prevents 
cross contamination and shields patient from potentially upsetting sights and sounds.  Traffic 
patterns for clean and sterile supplies and equipment should be separated from patterns of soiled 
equipment by space or time. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
The following are practices for accomplishing traffic patterns in several categories: 
1. Perioperative Services Staff: 
a. Unrestricted Areas - within this zone street clothes are permitted.   
b. Semi-restricted Areas - surgical attire required, as defined by policy SOS002. These 
are typically areas where surgical equipment is stored or immediately outside of an 
operating room. Signage or “red lines” will delineate these areas.  
c. Restricted Areas Surgical attire with addition of a mask (and beard cover if 
required). This area will include the cores as well as all operating rooms with an 
open sterile field. 
d. Movement of personnel in and out of and the number of people in an operating room 
while a sterile field is present shall be kept to an absolute minimum. 
e. Doors to operating rooms are closed except, when personnel enters or exits. 
f. Once a sterile set-up is open and during a case all traffic will enter the room from 
the core. Exceptions are the patient, scrubbed personnel (if scrub sinks are outside 
the core), equipment that cannot fit through core door (i.e. c-arm), and dirty items.  
g. Life threatening emergencies or fires may necessitate use of outside doors during 
operative procedures or when sterile set-up has been opened. 
2. Sterile Processing Staff: 
a.         Unrestricted Areas - within this zone street clothes are permitted.   
b.         Semi-restricted Areas - surgical attire required, as defined by policy SOS002. 
Signage or “red lines” will delineate these areas. A beard cover shall be worn in 
while prepping and packing instrumentation and supplies in the clean area.   
 
  2 
REFERENCES:    
AORN:  Standards, Recommended Practices, and Guidelines 2025 
 