 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Administration 
Title: Surgical Media Data Retention Policy 
- Network based Archive solution 
Policy Reference #: SSA009 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 10/1/2018 Review Date: 08/8/2024 
Revision Date: 10/1/2018 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To provide a policy for retention of images captured via Integration devices in the Operating 
Rooms & Clinics within the facility and/or initially stored on a Network based Archive solution. 
 
POLICY: 
Media recorded in conjunction with surgical procedures and examinations are stored for multiple 
purposes, including retention as part of the patient Legal Medical Record (LMR), research, and 
teaching. Images are to be stored in compliance with HIPAA regulations and Our Lady Of the Lake 
Hospital (OLOL) Legal Department requirements. It is the policy of Our Lady Of the Lake that 
Department of Surgery media has a standardized storage process.  
 
DEFINITIONS:  
 
Still Image: Photograph, fixed or non-moving visual information; common file type is .jpg.  
 
Video Image: Moving visual images or pictures including those with Regular resolution (</= 720 
dpi format, usually 480 or 720) and HD resolution (> 720 dpi, usually 1028 or 4K); common file 
type is .mpg.  
 
Clinical Media: media files (still images or videos) that are considered part of the Legal Medical 
Record (LMR). When possible, these files are ideally stored in PACS, Epic, or stored with a link to 
Epic.  
 
Research Media: media files with patient identifiers or re-identification key on file or its metadata.  
 
Teaching Media with Patient Identifiers: media files with patient identifiers on file or its metadata; 
image does not contain written patient information and is also not so unique as to be identifiable. 
These videos are managed the same as Research Media.  
 
Teaching Media without Patient Identifiers: media files with NO patient identifiers on file or its 
metadata; image does not contain written patient information and is also not so unique as to be 
identifiable.  
  2 
Re-identification key: a listing containing numbers and/or letters that tie a Still Image or Video 
Image directly to a patient record.  
 
Naming convention: random number preferred; cannot use patient identifiers  
 
Storage of key: on OLOL owned device/storage (does not leave institution) separate from the 
media. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
A. Management of Clinical Media  
1. Management of Clinical Media, Still Images  
i. Clinically relevant Still Images from devices (or stored on on network based 
arhchive) should be managed as Clinical Media.  
ii. Identifiable Still Images should not be saved for research purposes only 
unless part of an approved research study. Still Images that may be needed 
later for research purposes should be included in the LMR.  
iii. Completely de-identified images can be saved for teaching purposes and 
stored in the same manner as teaching videos (Section B).  
iv. Still Images of patients captured via handheld devices. (These conditions are 
in addition to the OLOL Patient Photography Policy) 
1. Personal phone use is not allowed unless using an approved 
application that sends the images directly to the medical record. 
2. Images containing PHI: Photography consent is required except for 
metadata the camera automatically records with each file (date shot). 
GPS locator is to be disabled on handheld image capture devices.  
v. To be included in the LMR, Still Images from image capture devices (e.g. 
endoscopic camera), both from clinic and OR, are be transferred to short 
term storage (e.g. Stream Connect server) after a procedure, such as during 
the debriefing, and then uploaded for clinical use into Epic, or other storage 
device or server. Note: the availability of hardware and software solutions 
may impact image management.  
vi. The clinician will decide which images are clinically relevant and those 
images are transferred from the image capture device (e.g. endoscopic 
camera) to short term storage (e.g. StreamConnect server). Those files are 
then ideally auto-transferred to Patient Record when ready.  
vii. Until long term storage on EPIC or other long term OLOL server/storage 
system is available, clinically relevant Still Images will remain on Network 
Archive if transferred there from OR devices.  
 
2. Management of Clinical Media Including Videos  
i. Clinically relevant videos of less than 150 MB will be included in the LMR 
from image capture devices. Videos are transferred to short term storage 
after a procedure (e.g. during a debriefing) and can then be uploaded for 
clinical use into Epic, or other storage device or server. (See B.3.iii) Note:  3 
the availability of hardware and software solutions may impact image 
management.  
ii. Inclusion of videos > 150MB in the LMR is strongly discouraged. 
Clinically relevant segments of longer videos can be included after editing to 
one or more shorter videos that contain clinically relevant information.  
iii. The clinician will decide which short videos (<150 MB) are clinically 
relevant (e.g. exam findings) and those videos are transferred from the image 
capture device to short term storage (e.g. StreamConnect server); the 
clinician, at a later time, chooses the videos on StreamConnect that are saved 
to Patient Record.  
 
3. Retention Schedules for Clinical Media  
i. On image capture devices: Oldest files are deleted as space is needed, at a 
given capacity that maximizes performance.  
ii. Short term storage (e.g. StreamConnect server): 12 months from date of 
creation 
iii. Long term storage: Per Health Information Management (HIM) policy for 
components of the LMR.  
 
B. Management of Teaching Media without Patient Identifiers  
1. Still Images and Video Images  
i. Still Images and Video Images for teaching purposes should be transferred 
from short term storage without attached identifiers and saved to personal or 
departmental storage. USB devices can be used to save fully de-identified 
files. De-identified images do not contain the patient’s full facial or 
comparable image. Additionally, the file (including file properties) does not 
contain any direct patient identifiers, including name, medical record 
number, re-identification key, and/or element of date (birth, admission, 
procedure, etc.).  
 
2. Retention Schedules for Management of Teaching Media without Patient 
Identifiers 
i. On image capture devices: Automatically (oldest files are deleted as space is 
needed, at a given capacity that maximizes performance).  
ii. Short term storage (e.g. StreamConnect server): N/A – deleted in set time 
frame as per clinical media policy (12 Months from date of creation). 
iii. Long term storage: Limited only by departmental decisions regarding 
teaching utility, and availability and integrity of storage devices.  
 
C. Management of Research Videos and Teaching Media Containing Patient Identifiers 
or Keys  
1. Files with OLOL Patient Identifiers  
i. Files with OLOL Patient Identifiers must be saved long term on an OLOL-
owned, HIPPA compliant OLOL server/storage solution; the Department or 
Service requesting video retention bears the cost of server storage.  
  4 
2. Files Containing Identifier Key  
i. Files without OLOL patient identifiers but containing an identifier key that 
can be traced back to the patient via a key can be saved on USB or 
Departmental devices under the following conditions:  
ii. To minimize inadvertent loss of Protected Health Information (PHI), videos 
saved for research or teaching purposes should be transferred from short 
term storage to long term storage without attached OLOL patient identifiers 
and saved with an identifying “key” that is saved separate from the video 
file and separate from Epic. The “key” can be used at a later time if “re-
identification” is needed. 
 
3. Physical Storage Requirements  
i. Videos captured for purposes preparatory to research may not be removed 
from OLOL (the videos must remain on OLOL’s secured network or 
devices).  
ii. Videos captured pursuant to an approved protocol must be stored in a 
manner consistent with the approved protocol.  
iii. The department or service must have a policy and procedure for collecting 
and managing research and teaching videos. There must be an identified 
OLOL administrator responsible for video management. Video retention 
must be addressed in the policy and procedures and consistent with this 
policy.  
iv. Videos should be indexed and allow for expectations of video availability 
in the event they are requested for a legal proceeding.  
 
4. Retention Schedules for Research Media and Teaching Media with Identifiers  
i. On image capture devices: N/A – deleted on a space needed basis as per 
clinical media policy.  
ii. Short term storage (e.g. StreamConnect server): deleted in set time frame as 
per clinical media policy (365 days). Implementation of this policy will not 
begin until final approval of the policy. 
iii. Long term storage: Files on the OLOL server – files can be retained as long 
as Department purchased space is available: unanticipated technical and 
financial situations may impact length of storage of files saved for research 
and teaching. 
iv. USB Devices: Only OLOL’s owned and secured USB devices may be used 
to store videos, unless alternate storage is provided for by an approved IRB 
protocol.  
 
D. Preservation of Evidence  
1. If any individual knows or reasonably should know that there is a substantial 
chance that a claim will be filed, and that media retained under this policy may be 
material and relevant to the claim, he/she must:  
2. Contact Risk Management immediately, so that they can advise on what evidence 
should be secured and how to secure it.  
3. Preserve and store all media associated with the potential claimant. 