 pg. 1 
 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:  
SURGICAL SERVICES 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE:  
March, 1997 
 
NUMBER: 
STELSUR215 
 
SUBJECT: 
Surgical Case Preparation and End of Procedure Cleaning 
 
Page 1 of 5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Purpose:   
1. To ensure appropriate case preparation 
2. To minimize case set-up- time 
3. To provide a safe environment for the surgical patient 
4. To provide the greatest efficiency  
5. To improve Operating Room staff productivity 
6. To provide guidelines for end of procedure and end of shift cleaning 
 
Applies To:   
 All Surgical Services Personnel 
 
Policy:  
Case Preparation, set-up, end of procedure cleaning and turnover shall be performed according to the guidelines in 
the procedure section of this policy. 
 
Procedure: 
  Case Carts 
1. Case preparation begins the previous day by preparing case carts and supplies. 
2. Case carts are assembled in materials management department using physician preference lists.  If a supply 
is not in stock, notify the Manager to see if another item may be substituted as needed.  If an item is unable 
to be obtained, the surgeon is notified. 
3. Place completed case cart s in the OR supply room .  Each cart will have plasti c covering placed over 
supplies. 
4. Pharmacy items needed for the procedure may not be pulled until the day of the case. 
 
Case Set-Up 
1. Damp dust all horizontal surfaces in the OR (e.g., furniture, surgical lights, booms, equipment) before the 
first scheduled surgical or other invasive procedure of the day.   
2.         Before each surgical procedure, the surgical team shall assess the perioperative environment (temp. and 
Humidity), and check equipment for cleanliness. 
3. Inspect equipment for any visible dust or soiling; damp dust all equipment before transferring it into the OR. 
   
4.  Place OR furniture according to laterality of the procedure. 
5. The surgical team will verify supplies, instrumentation, medications, and patient readiness for surgery before 
opening the supplies.  The Circulator will make sure all equipment and implants needed for case are present and in 
working condition. Patient safety alert alarms should be tested, and parameters checked upon initial set up or use of 
equipment.  The alarms should be “on” and loud enough to be heard above competing environmental noise.   pg. 2 
6. The surgical technologist shall scrub in ample time prior to the beginning of the procedure to set up sterile 
instruments, supplies and medications for irrigation and count with the circulating nurse prior to the entrance 
of the patient to the surgical suite. 
7. The circulator RN and the surgical tech will verify the sterility of all instruments and supplies opened onto 
the surgical field. Indicators will be checked with both the RN and Surgical tech and completion of a sterility 
verification will be added as part of the initial surgical count listed on the count board.   
8. If a surgery start time is delayed after the room is prepared, DO NOT ENTER signs shall be placed, and the 
room monitored until the case is ready to begin. 
9. When preparing the OR for a patient under isolation precautions 
• Place appropriate signage on the door: contact, special contact + enteric, droplet, and airborne 
• Strip the pt. bed of linens after transfer to OR bed, wipe bed down with cavi wipes before placing 
outside of door (use bleach wipes if C.Dif) 
 
Case Turnover 
1. When the surgical incision is closed: 
 a. The wound shall be covered, and dressing applied prior to the removal of the sterile drapes. 
 b. The stretcher/ bed  should not enter the room until the operative site is covered with a       
dressing. 
 c. Scrub personnel may break scrub after the dressing is in place except on vascular procedures. 
 The scrub person may then disassemble instruments and remain in the OR until the patient is 
transferred.  NOTE:  On vascular procedures the scrub person will stay sterile and maintain 
sterility of set up until the patient leaves the room. 
 d. Contaminated instruments and supplies shall be transported in an enclosed, biohazard labeled 
cart to the decontamination room by the surgical or SPD tech (following guidelines in Policy 
STELSPD120), then return to the OR for case clean-up/case turnover.   
 e. The circulator shall accompany anesthesia to Post Anesthesia Care Unit (PACU) and give a 
report according to the Policy and Procedure "Report to Post Anesthesia Care Unit (PACU)". 
2.   Complete Patient Care Documentation.   
3 The circulator shall care for the surgical specimen according to the Policy and Procedure for "Specimen  
Handling, Surgical Services.  
4. The RN circulator should check her/his next assigned patient (for “to follow” cases) and return to the OR as 
quickly as possible to assist the team with operating room turnover and cleaning. 
5. Once the procedure is completed, the case cart is returned to supply room and any items, supplies, or 
instruments not used are credited per supply return procedure or returned to the shelf. 
6. The surgical team verifies that all equipment/furni ture are cleaned and disinfected, see end of procedure 
cleaning below. 
7.    The following case will then be opened and prepared according to "Case Set Up". 
 
End of Procedure Cleaning 
 
1. Operating rooms should be cleaned after each surgical or invasive procedure using the hospital approved 
disinfectant cleaner, cleaning from areas of cleanest to heaviest soiled or top to bottom technique. 
 All surfaces of equipment and furniture and any item that has been in patient contact are wiped and 
allowed to dry the appropriate amount of time for disinfection.    Follow manufacturer’s instructions for 
cleaning electronic equipment and monitor screens.  Reestablish clean environment after the patient is 
transferred from the OR. 
o Clean and disinfect reusable noncritical, nonporous surfaces (eg, mattress covers, pneumatic 
tourniquet cuffs, blood pressure cuffs) according to the manufacturer’s written instructions for use 
after each patient use. 
o Discard single-use items after each patient use. 
2. Clean any soiled surface and frequently touched area of a high-touch object in the OR after each patient 
 use.  pg. 3 
3. Clean operating and procedure rooms after each patient has left the area. 
o  Do not begin environmental cleaning, including trash and contaminated laundry removal, until 
the patient has left the area. 
o  Remove trash and used linen from the room. 
o  Clean and disinfect items used during patient care after each patient use, including 
• anesthesia carts and equipment (eg, IV poles, IV pumps), 
• anesthesia machines, 
• patient monitors, 
• OR beds, 
• reusable table straps, 
• OR bed attachments (eg, arm boards, stirrups, head rests), 
• positioning devices (eg, viscoelastic polymer rolls, vacuum pack positioning devices), 
• patient transfer devices (eg, roll boards), 
• overhead procedure lights, 
• tables and Mayo stands,  
• mobile and fixed equipment (eg, suction regulators, medical gas regulators, imaging viewers, 
viewing monitors, radiology equipment, electrosurgical units, microscopes, robots, lasers). 
• Clean and disinfect patient transport vehicles, including the straps, handles, side rails, and 
attachments, after each patient use. 
 
4. Clean and disinfect floors and walls of operating and procedure rooms after each surgical or invasive 
procedure if soiled or potentially soiled (eg, by splash, splatter, or spray).The rooms should be mopped after 
each procedure with disposable  mop heads and hospital approved floor cleaner.  Mop heads should not be 
dipped into or returned to the bucket after use. 
5. Regulated medical waste  and liquids should  be separated a nd disposed of appropriately. ( policy 
#STELSUR532Biohazard Waste Disposal)  
6. All surgical procedures should be considered infectious, universal precautions utilized.   
7. The following procedures are identified as contaminated or dirty-infected procedures, and are isolation cases 
involving airborne diseases, or patients suspect of MDRO’s (Multi Drug Resistant Organism) such as:  
o ○ MRSA, 
o ○ VRE, 
o ○ Vancomycin-intermediate Enterococcus spp,  
o ○ Vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus,  
o ○ Vancomycin-intermediate Staphylococcus aureus,  
o ○ Carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriacae, 
o ○ Multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter spp,  
o ○ Extended spectrum beta-lactamase-producing organisms, and 
o ○ Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase- producing organisms 
 
8. Appropriate and thorough cleaning should be strictly re-enforced following infectious cases with known 
drug resistant pathogens and when cleaning after patients in contact isolation.   Utilize enhanced environmental 
cleaning, contact precautions, and utilize PPE consisting of isolation gowns, gloves, masks with face shields, or 
eye protection when cleaning.    
9. A hypochlorite-based disinfectant should be used to clean a patient room when a diagnosis or suspected case 
of Clostridium difficile is present. Contact + enteric precautions should be utilized. 
 
 
Enhanced Environmental Cleaning 
1. Implement enhanced environmental cleaning procedures following the care of patients who are infected 
or colonized with multidrug-resistant organisms (MDROs). 
• In addition to standard precautions, wear gowns, gloves, masks, and eye protection when 
performing enhanced environmental cleaning procedures.  pg. 4 
• Clean and disinfect all high-touch objects, in addition to objects cleaned as part of routine 
cleaning, after the patient leaves the OR  
• INCLUDE:  
• storage cabinets, supply carts, and furniture. 
• light switches; 
• door handles and push plates; 
• telephones and mobile communication devices; 
• computer accessories (eg, keyboard, mouse, touchscreen); 
• chairs, stools, and step stools; and 
• trash and linen receptacles. 
• Clean and disinfect floors and walls of operating and procedure rooms after each surgical or invasive 
procedure if soiled or potentially soiled (eg, by splash, splatter, spray, contact with items possibly 
contaminated with MDROs). 
 
2. Airborne Precautions: Personnel performing the procedure as well as performing environmental cleaning 
and disinfection in the room of a patient who has an airborne disease or is under airborne disease precautions 
(i.e., rubeola, varicella, tuberculosis), must use a properly fit-tested N95 mask until complete air exchange 
has taken place in that room. Access to the room should be restricted until  99.9% air exchange has been 
completed. Any personnel entering the room before the complete air exchange must wear the N95 mask.  
See timetable Listed below for minutes needed for complete air exchanges, or 99.9% air removal efficiency. 
(Based on AORN recommendations for Environmental Cleaning 2013 Edition, page 249.)   
                         Main Surgery                                                  ASC 
            
     Room 
      
     ACH 
Air exchanges per 
           hour 
         
Minutes  
For Restricted 
Access 
            
     Room 
      
     ACH 
Air exchanges per 
           hour 
         
Minutes  
for Restricted 
Access 
             1 15          28             1 15 28 
             2 15          28             2 15 28 
             3 15          28             3 15 28 
             4 15          28      Endo 1 
neg 
pressure 
room 
24.3 17 
             5 15          28     Endo 2 
neg 
pressure 
room 
18.9 23 
       Endo         6          69    
 
3. Special cleaning and decontam procedures should be used after surgical procedures involving high risk 
tissues (brain, spinal cord, and eye) where CJD/prion disease is suspect. Remove any unnecessary furniture 
and equipment from the procedure room.   Use only disposable items and disposable surgical instruments; 
cover all wo rk areas with impervious covers,and quarantine the area and any items used until AORN 
recommendations and guidelines for cleaning , and infection control specialist  can be consulted , and 
recommendations followed. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reference:   
Standards, Recommended Practices, and Guidelines, AORN, 2003 Edition  pg. 5 
Standards, Recommended Practices, and Guidelines, AORN, 2013 Edition 
Standards, Recommended Practices, and Guidelines, AORN, 2017 Edition 
Air exchange table retrieved from: http://www.md.ucl.ac.be/didac/hosp/architec/renouvel.minutes.pdf 
 
Revised:   
3/17/97, 8/1/00, 10/28/03, 10/2013: added section on end of procedure  cleaning; airborne precautions; 7/2017 
revision to add enhanced cleaning for MDRO; 10/04/2017 revision of air exchange table for negative press. / Endo 
rooms, added section on enhanced cleaning. 4/10/2018 added #7, 8&9 under case set up section.  7/2018 revised 
instrument transport to enclosed biohazard labeled cart.   
 
Reviewed: 11/04, 2/2005, 1/2006, 1/2007, 1/2008, 1/2009; 1/2010, 1/2011; 1/2012; 1/2013; 1/2014; 1/2015;  
2/2016; 1/2017; 7/2017; 10/2017, 7/2018; 7/2019; 9/2021; 9/2022; 9/2023; 9/2024; 1/2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 