 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
2/2013 
 
NUMBER: 
STELSUR320 
 
SUBJECT:   
Biological Tissue Implants 
 
PAGE 1 OF 5 
 
 
        
 
 
I. PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines and to define the process of acquisition, receipt, storage, issuance, 
implanting, tracking, and investigation of adverse reactions to transplanted biological 
tissue.  Transplanted tissue includes, but is not limited to: bone, bone putty, muscle, 
tendon, ligaments, fascia, connective tissue, veins, cornea and skin.  Applies to allograft 
and xenograft implantables.   
  
 
II. POLICY 
Biological tissue implants will comply with regulatory standards for receipt, validation of 
package and transport method, storage, issuance to point of use, implantation, and 
tracking. Tissue implants from this facility may not be transported to another facility for 
use with out an FDA licensure for tissue banking. St. Elizabeth Hospital utilizes the UDI 
Champion Tracking System to document tissue tracking and utilization.   
 
Definitions: 
Allograft: An allograft is a bone, ligament, cartilage, tendon, tissue or section of 
skin that is transplanted from one person (donor) to another (recipient). 
Xenograft: A surgical graft of tissue from one species to an unlike species (or genus or 
family). Such as bovine or porcine 
 
III. PROCEDURE 
 
A. Acquisition     
                                                                                                              
1. Before any purchase order for tissue implants are placed, the Surgical 
Services Department will confirm that the tissue supplier is registered 
with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a tissue bank 
establishment and maintain a state license. 
(www.fda.gov/cber/tissue/tissregdata.htm) 
2. The tissue manufacturer must supply written directions/ information 
on company letter head stating the shipping and handling process of 
the biological product.  
a. How it will be shipped 
b. The temperature maintained during shipping,  
c. Storage and handling of the product upon receipt  2 
3. All products will be shipped directly from the vendor to the materials 
department for receipt.  No biological tissue will be accepted from a 
sales representative.                  
 
 
B. Receipt of Implants 
 
1. All FDA traceable biological implants will be tracked and logged 
upon receipt into the facility by the Material Management Department 
utilizing the UDI Champion Tracking System. Tracking information 
is to include: 
 a. tissue type 
 b. serial or tracking number 
            c. PO order number 
d. manufacturer 
 e. date/time received in materials department 
            f. packaging mode:  freeze dried, dry ice, cool pack, ambient room 
temp 
            g. integrity of the package is intact,  
                                    h. materials signature for delivery 
 i. delivery time and by whom to the surgery dept. 
 j. surgery personnel receiving tissue 
            k. expiration date 
2.    If requirements for receipt are not met for shipping and package 
integrity, the item will be refused and returned to the vendor.  
3.    Material Management Department will immediately notify Surgical 
Services Department of the receipt of any frozen tissue products.  Surgical 
Services designee will sign for the tissue and retrieve it from Materials 
Management for storage.  
 
C. Storage    
 
1. Our Lady of the Lake Ascension Surgical Services will maintain a 
freezer for frozen allograft tissue storage of musculoskeletal tissue in 
the surgery department. Guidelines will follow the American 
Association of Tissue Banks (AATB) standards and the source facility 
for tissue storage. 
 
a. Frozen Allograft musculoskeletal, osteoarticular or skin tissue: 
should be stored at - 40 F (- 40 C) or colder for long term 
storage.  (Expiration of 5 years.) When stored at -20 to -39F it 
is considered short term storage, (not more than six months on 
LifeNetHealth © frozen tissues.  Check each source facility’s 
recommendations on temperatures and expirations and   modify 
the expiration dates accordingly.   This requires daily 
monitoring  3 
 
2.  Freezer specifications include: 
a. Emergency power source 
b. Alarms for set limits out of acceptable temperature range; 
(alarms are active in the Emergency Care Unit and will sound 
in an area where an individual is present / staffed at all times to 
initiate corrective action). Surgery Administration is to be 
immediately notified when temperature is outside of range and 
alarms are set off. 
c. Temperature is checked daily for temperature range and 
documented 
d. Annual Calibration checks                                              
 
2. Surgical Services is responsible for logging the tissue receipt and 
placement into the freezer.    
3. Tracking forms, thawing instructions and tissue identification shall 
remain with the tissue. 
4. Expiration dates are monitored by the Tracking System 
 
5. . Other biological tissues that may be implanted are:  
a. Lyophilized or dehydrated musculoskeletal tissue:  should be 
stored at ambient/room temperatures or cooler (not frozen). 
b. Refrigerated musculoskeletal, osteoarticular tissue and skin 
should be aseptically stored in an isotonic solution containing 
antibiotics and stored at 33.8° F to 50 °F (1° C to 10 C) 
expiration according to manufacturer’s IFU 
 
D. Issuance 
 
1.  Physician informed consent must be obtained from the patient before 
using frozen Allograft tissue implants. 
 
2.    Frozen allograft tissue will remain in frozen storage until an order   
to thaw the implant for use is given by the surgeon.  
 
3. Frozen allograft is obtained from frozen storage  and opened  upon 
surgeon request only. Surgery personnel will  transport the tissue to the 
Operating Room for immediate use. 
 
4. Read package insert for dispensing and thawing instructions for each 
tissue graft.    
 
 
 
 
E. Implantation and Tracking Documentation  4 
 
 
1.  Upon surgeon order, the circulator RN shall  verify with the 
surgeon the type of implant, the size and location of implant before 
dispensing the tissue onto the surgical field . Manufacturer 
instructions for thawing or reconstituting and handling tissue will 
be attached to and documented in the operative record.  Record the 
lot numbers for all solutions used in preparing implants for use.   
2. The circulator RN will record all implant information in the patient 
record, along with serial numbers, sizes, implant location, 
expiration dates and any other identifying information.  Any 
registration papers, package inserts, or  tracking forms that 
accompany the implant shall be completed by the circulating nurse 
or physician and retur ned to the source facility  as requested and 
placed in the tracking records. 
3. Unused opened tissue will be disposed of as per biohazard waste 
protocol, tissue tracking will be completed.   
4. All Tissue Tracking records will be maintained for 10 years after 
the tissue is dispensed or the expiration date is reached.   
5. The UDI Champion Tracking System interfaces with EPIC 
patient documentation for surgical implants 
   
 
 
 
IV. CONTRAINDICATIONS/PRECAUTIONS 
1.   Tissue may contain traces of the processing reagents such as Bacitracin, 
Gentamicin, Polyumyxin B Sulfate, alcohol and/or surfactants.  Caution 
should be exercised if the patient has known sensitivity or is allergic to any of 
these antibiotics or reagents.  Read the package insert before use for the list 
of reagents and storage solutions. 
. 
V. Adverse Outcomes 
1. Adverse outcomes to tissue transplants include infections and rejections.  
Adverse outcomes are monitored by: 
 a.    return to surgery report 
 b.    Monitored and reported by the practitioner 
 c.     Tissue recalls via Director of Surgery 
 e.    Infection Control Nurse 
 
2.    Adverse occurrences, infections or rejections must be reported promptly to 
the source facility/vendor of the tissue. 
 
3.    In the case of a recall, the Director of Surgery upon receiving vendor 
notification will notify the implanting Surgeon and the Infection Control Nurse   
of the adverse event. The Surgeon will contact the patient with the respect to the  5 
adverse event and further treatment.  Any re-called inventory in stock will be 
sequestered.  
   
4.  In the event of freezer malfunction, the temperature range will be monitored 
and if reading warmer than -40 F the expiration dates will be reset to follow 
AATB guidelines.  In the event of complete freezer failure, the lab freezer will act 
as back up for frozen musculoskeletal tissue for short term expiration storage.  
See parameters in section C. of this policy  
 
   
 
VI. REFERENCE 
 
Reference:  
AORN Perioperative Standards and Recommended Practices, 2013 edition. Pages 205-215 
 
Life Net Health frozen allograft package insert and IFU 
 
The Joint Comission Standards for Transplant Safety  CAMH, January 2016: TS.03.01.01, 
TS.03.02.01, TS.03.03.01  
 
 
  
VI. REVIEW:    1/2014; 1/2015; 1/2016; 3/2016; 1/2017, 7/2017; 7/2018; 7/2019; 
9/2022; 9/2022; 9/2023; 9/2024; 1/2025 
  
 
 
 
 
VII. REVISIONS: Revised:  11/2013 removed from lab freezer to freezer storage in the 
surgery department with procedure and parameter guidelines.   1/2014 Revised Tissue 
Freezer protocol and quality monitoring, 3/2016 added definitions, and xenografts.  Revision 
10/04/2017 removed tissue log reference in the F drive for switch to the UDI Champion 
Tracking System.  7/2018 added #6 to section E.    
                  
 
 
 
 
 