 
         
Our Lady of the Lake Ascension  
 
Purpose:  
Provide effective management of the patient with the diagnosis of malignant 
hyperthermia (MH) Crisis, and to provide guidelines for care of patients that are MH 
susceptible. 
 
Applies:  
Physicians, Anesthesia Staff, Surgical Department Staff, House Supervisor, Supportive 
Nursing Staff, Respiratory Dept. and Laboratory, ECU and ICU departments and Cardio 
Vascular Lab or any department where triggering agents may be used.   
 
Policy:  
Malignant Hyperthermia management will be applied to all patients diagnosed with 
malignant hyperthermia, or are MH susceptible, utilizing the Malignant Hyperthermia 
Association of America (MHAUS) protocol.  
 
Responsibility:  
It is the responsibility of the anesthesiologist and treating physician to diagnose this 
condition and to direct the surgical team in the delivery of the MH protocol. 
Procedure: 
• Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal, inherited 
disorder usually associated with the administration of certain 
general anesthetics and/or the drug succinylcholine  
• The disorder is due to an acceleration of metabolism in skeletal 
muscle causing severe rhabdomyolysis.   
• While most cases of MH occur during general anesthesia, the 
one-hour period immediately following surgery (including the 
recovery room), or administration of a triggering agent, is also a 
critical time. In addition, MH can occur if trigger anesthetics 
and/or succinylcholine are used in any location, such as 
emergency rooms, dental surgeries, surgeon’s offices or 
intensive care units. 
  
I.  Preoperatively 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES  
Surgical Services Manual 
 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE 
January, 1997 
 
NUMBER 
 
STESUR350 
 
SUBJECT: 
Malignant Hyperthermia (MH) Management 
 
Page 1 of 6 
 
    2 | P a g e  
 
A. Assessment; When possible, Ask the patient, family and support persons 
about personal and past family history of Adverse Anesthesia reactions 
(unexplained fever or death during anesthesia) and any neuromuscular 
disorders. Be Aware of clinical signs and symptoms of MH.  Notify anesthesia 
personnel of any suspected history. 
 
B.  Body temperature monitoring for all patients undergoing general anesthesia 
for other than brief procedures. 
  
 C.  Capnographic monitoring for all patients undergoing general anesthesia or     
            the administration of succinylcholine   
 
D.  Dantrolene:  have dantrolene available wherever MH triggering agents are 
used.   
 
II. Signs and Symptoms 
 
A.  Assessment:  is patient exhibiting signs or symptoms of an MH crisis?  
• Severe tachycardia is usually the initial symptom  
• Increased end tidal Co2 elevation. 
• Is patient exhibiting severe masseter spasm? (Difficult to open the mouth) 
         B.  Breathing:   
•   difficulty ventilation and /or intubate due to masseter spasm  
•   Severe Body rigidity after succinylcholine administration.  
•    Body temperature increasing is usually a late symptom, occurring after   
    the syndrome has progressed. 
 
C.  Capnography:  elevation of endtidal CO2 despite proper ventilation and 
adequate gas flows with properly functioning ventilation equipment 
   Circulation:  Cardiac arrythmias, tachy/brady, hyper/hypotension. 
 
D.  Drugs:  are you using triggering agents? (Succinylcholine, potent 
halogens, desflurane, enflurane, halothane, isoflurane, methoxyflurane, 
sevoflurane, trichloroethylene, Xenon). 
 
 E.  Exposure:  Examine the patient, skin color, perfusion, temperature, urine        
          color, extremities and muscle tone. 
 
III. EMERGENCY TREATMENT OF MH CRISIS 
                       (MHAUS Crisis Hotline: 1-800-MH-HYPER) 
           (1-800-644-9737) 
Discontinue the triggering agent immediately 
 
The Anesthesiologist / Physician in charge will diagnose and announce the MH crisis 3 | P a g e  
 
and stop the triggering agent, procedure or the surgery when possible.  If the surgical 
wound closure is not possible, the wound should be packed with normal saline soaked 
towels or sponges maintaining aseptic technique. 
 
A. Call the MHAUS Crisis hotline for Assistance in treatment. 
Assemble additional OR personnel for delegation of duties: respiratory, lab, 
pharmacy, administrative notification. Ask for the MH supply cart to be delivered 
to the OR with the Dantrolene, cooled IV fluids/irrigations and ice packs, and the 
A-line and Central line set up trays and additional IV lines set up.  (Cart Location: 
 Main OR core, and at the ASC: back surgery hallway outside OR 3).  
B.  
Breathing: Hyperventilate patient with 100% oxygen per ambu, or ventilator.  
Assist anesthesia personnel in changing out the anesthesia machine and 
change the breathing circuit and soda lime cannister. Unplug or disable the 
inhalation agent vaporizers.   
 
C. Cooling:  if the patient has increased temperatures use the following 
cooling methods to reduce the temperature: 
• Insert large gauge IV catheters.   
• Change any lactated ringer’s solutions to cooled sterile normal 
saline Do not use Lactated Ringer’s solution; it may contribute to the 
patient’s acidosis. 
• If the abdomen is open, irrigate the open peritoneal cavity with 
cooled sterile saline.  
•  Monitor amount of irrigation used for I&O documentation.   
• Irrigate and lavage stomach by inserting a nasogastric tube and 
connecting to cooled NS irrigation with cysto tubing. 
• Bladder irrigation:  Insert a 3-way foley connected to cysto tubing 
and cooled saline irrigation.   
• Rectal lavage:  use a 30mL balloon foley and cysto tubing 
connected to cooled NS solution, and a closed drainage bag.  
•  Monitor I&O, document. 
•  Apply topical ice packs to surface areas: neck, axilla and groin. 
•  Avoid too rigorous cooling.  Discontinue if temp. is 38 C /100.4 F to 
avoid hypothermia or excess shivering which will increase temp. and 
metabolic demands 
               Collect lab specimens: 
• Electrolytes 
• CBC 
• ABGs;  
• Clotting studies, PT, PTT, INR, fibrin studies 
• Liver enzymes 
• BUN, Creatinine 4 | P a g e  
 
• CK levels 
• urine, Myoglobinuria 
 
D.   Begin mixing Dantrolene immediately as it is difficult to incorporate the 
        powder into a liquid solution.     
   Dosage and administration of Dantrolene 
• Give Dantrolene IV:   2.5 mg/ kg IV push stat 
for initial bolus and titrate the dose until the 
signs are controlled.  
• A maximum dose of 10 mg / kg is suggested, 
more may be given as needed.    
•  For reconstitution:  reconstitute a 20 mg, 
70mL vial with 60mL of sterile water 
(preservative free) and shake vigorously for 
several minutes. This medication is difficult 
to reconstitute. 
 
 
E.  Evaluate:  
• Electrolytes: especially K, Na, and pH 
• ABGs; SAO2, ETCO2, pH 
• Clotting studies; PT, PTT, INR, fibrin studies 
• Liver enzymes 
• BUN, Creatinine 
• Myoglobinuria   
• CK levels 
• EKG rhythm 
• Temperature 
• Urinary output  
 
IV. SECONDARY STEPS 
 
A.  Assess Acidosis:  initial and subsequent arterial or venous blood gasses.  
Determine if there is mixed metabolic and respiratory acidosis. 
 
B.  Bicarbonate administration:  1-2 mEq/ kg guided by pH, base deficit/ABG 
results. 
 5 | P a g e  
 
C.  Circulation/monitoring: consider arterial line, central venous catheter for CVP 
monitoring and drawing of subsequent lab specimens.   
 
D. Dysrhythmias generally subside with the resolution of the hyper metabolic 
phase of MH.  Dysrhythmias can be treated according to the ACLS protocol 
as directed by the anesthesia person or physician in charge.    Remember the 
impact of hyperkalemia. Treat with IV glucose/insulin (regular insulin) and 
Calcium.  Diuresis:  assure diuresis greater than 1mL/kg/hour. 
 
           E.  Electrolytes:  continue subsequent monitoring 
 
F. Follow up:  A:  ABG and venous blood gasses, B:  Body temperature (core), 
C:  end tidal CO2, CPK, Coagulation tests, D:  Diuresis (output and color) 
Electrolytes   
 
 
V.  POST-OPERATIVE, (Post –Crisis Problems) 
 
 A.  Alkalinize urine and diurese, monitor for ARF (acute myoglobin uric renal 
failure) If myoglobin urea develops, maintain urine flow at least 2 mL/kg/hr. 
 
B.  Beware hypothermia with continued cooling, hyperkalemia, hypervolemic 
overload, monitoring of filling pressures, fluid balance, electrolytes, temp, K, Ca, 
coag. studies, Hct may require re-correction. 
 
C.  Creatine Kinase (CK) levels track severity of the rhabdomyolysis:  if present, 
beware of renal failure, which may follow marked rhabdomyolysis. Compartment 
syndrome is rare but requires serial monitoring of extremities and abdominal girth 
of bladder pressures after severe insults. 
 
 D.  DIC with coagulopathy, thrombocytopenia, k hemolysis and abnormal 
bleeding may follow major crises with severe shock and / or hyperthermia. 
 
 E.  Elevated liver functions are often observed 12-36 hours post MH crisis. 
 
 F.  Follow CNS functions serially after MH crisis: magnitude of crisis may or may 
not correlate with CNS insult or injury. 
 
 G.  Good communication and follow-up is essential among medical specialists in 
the post-resuscitation and monitoring phase of the MH crisis for prevention of secondary 
crisis-related organ insults.  Care may be transferred from an anesthesia care provider 
to a pediatric or adult medical or surgical intensivist provided good information about the 
MH crisis and post-resuscitation management is maintained. 
 6 | P a g e  
 
 
VI. POST-ACUTE PHASE 
 
A.  Awareness of re-occurrence signs.  Ask relatives about any problems/ 
neuromuscular disorders. 
 
 B.  Biopsy:  suggest biopsy for evaluation (specified biopsy centers) 
 
 C.  Contact MHAUS for further information/ referral of patient for registry. 
  
 D.  Dantrolene 1 mg/kg, IV every 6 hrs. and continued for 24-48 hours after an 
episode of Malignant Hyperthermia.  Documentation:  submit forms to the national/ 
international North American MH Registry of MHAUS  www.mhreg.org  to obtain forms. 
 
 
7.  ANESTHESIA FOR MH-SUSCEPTIBLE PATIENTS 
 
A.  Anesthesia machine preparation: change circuits, disable or remove the 
vaporizers, flush the machine at a rate of 10L/min for 20 min.  Change the CO2 
absorption canisters. 
 Anesthesia:  Use local or regional anesthesia or anesthesia with non- 
triggering agents is acceptable.  Safe drugs include: barbiturates, 
benzodiazepines, opioids, non-depolarizing neuromuscular blockers and  their 
 reversal drugs and nitrous oxide. 
 B.  Body temperature monitoring 
 C.  Capnography, close monitoring for early signs of MH.  
 D.  Dantrolene available.  May discharge if no problems after minimum of 2 
hours. 
 
8.  MH CRISIS HOTLINE:  1-800-MH-HYPER (1-800-644-9737) 
      GENERAL INFO:  1-800 -98-MHAUS 
 
 
 
Reference:  
A. Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States.Video - “Malignant 
Hyperthermia: Knowing Your Role, How to Handle a Malignant Hyperthermia Crisis”.  
B. Brochure - Clinical Update 2002/2003 Managing Malignant Hyperthermia.  
(Sherburne, NY: Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States, 2003. 
C. Brochure - Preventing Malignant Hyperthermia, an Anesthesia Protocol. (Sherburne, 
     NY: Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States. 1996). 
D. OR text: Atkinson, L. J. And Fortunato, N. Operating Room Technique. MO: Mosby-  
     Yearbook, Inc. 383-386. 
E. Check Mate Classic. 1994. National Nurse Career Connection, Inc. 7 | P a g e  
 
F.  Brochure:  ABCs of Managing Malignant Hyperthermia (MHAUS 4/1/2006) 
G.  AORN 2005 Standards, Recommended Practices and Guidelines 
H. http://www.mhaus.org/healthcare-professionals/be-prepared, 2014 
 
 
 
Revised/Reviewed:    
1/97; 08/98; 08/99; 08/00; 8/02; 11/03, 11/04, 3/2005, 1/2006,  
Revised:  1/2007 to include the ABC management of MH crisis. 
Revised: March 2018 to include departments outside of surgery 
 
1/2008, 1/2009, 1/2010; 1 /2011; 1/2012, 1/2013; 1/2014; 1/2015; 3/2016; 7/2017; 7/2018; 
7/2019; 9/2021; 9/2022; 9/2023; 9/2024; 1/2025 
 
                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                            
                                                                   
Page 6 