1 
 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
 
Endoscopy 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
 
March 1985 
 
NUMBER: 
 
STELENDO125 
 
SUBJECT:  Reprocessing and Quality Assurance Plan for 
Flexible Endoscopes 
 
PAGE 1 OF 5 
 
APPROVED BY: 
 
Yvonne Pellerin, RN, MS, NE-BC, 
VP, Patient Care/CNO 
        
 
 
I. PURPOSE: 
To provide guidelines for transport, cleaning, disinfecting and storage of flexible 
endoscopes and verification of processes.   
 
II. POLICY 
All flexible endoscopes shall follow a defined cleaning and disinfection procedure 
and processes will be verified before patient use. Manufacturer’s instructions for 
cleaning, cleaning products, processes, and disinfection shall be followed.   
 
III. PROCEDURE 
 
A. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) consisting of gloves, fluid 
resistant gowns, face protection (a face shield or a mask and goggles) will 
be utilized by staff when cleaning endoscopes. 
 
B. Pre-cleaning: The scope should be pre-cleaned immediately after use by 
utilizing the prepackaged enzymatic cleaner and sponge to irrigate or 
suction through the channels and wipe the outer soiled areas. 
 
C. Transport:    
1. For any scopes used in the Surgical Services Department or outside 
of the endoscopy suite:  The clean scope is transported to the 
procedure area via the scope valet bag with the green “clean” tag 
in place or in a clear clean transport container with a lid in place.  
Once the scope is used, and bedside cleaning (point of use) has 
taken place, it is transported to the Endoscopy reprocessing room 
for cleaning and high level disinfection, in the scope valet bag 
with the red “dirty” tag in place, then placed in the leak 
proof/puncture resistant biohazard transport container.  Carts, 
containers, and work surfaces are decontaminated with a hospital 
approved cleaner. 
2.  High level disinfected processed flexible scopes transported from 
the scope processor to the storage cabinet, will be transported in 2 
 
designated clean transport containers to the storage area.  Follow 
instructions in section (I) below for storage.     
 
D.  Manufacturer’s instruction manuals and posters with recommended 
procedures cleaning and disinfecting processes are accessible in the 
Endoscopy reprocessing areas for reference.  Manufacturer 
recommendations and guidelines shall be followed for endoscope 
cleaning, leak testing, automatic endoscope reprocessor operation (AER), 
and chemical testing.  
 
E. Manual cleaning of the scope is performed following MFG. 
recommended guidelines and instructions posted in the scope reprocessing 
room.  Utilize disposable brushes to manually clean channels and a 
sponge/cloth to wipe exterior surfaces of the scope. Adaptors are then 
attached to the scope for final automatic irrigation and rinsing 
 
F. High level disinfection is performed in the automatic endoscope 
reprocessor (AER) by following manufacturer’s operating instructions for 
cleaning and disinfection of flexible scopes 
1.  Prior to daily use, maintenance and quality checks are performed 
on the AER before use.  Information to be documented in the 
logbook: 
a. Check that the AER is “ON” 
b. Filter Log 
c. Check the expiration date on the Rapicide solution on both  
                                         sides A&B                       
d. Check alcohol levels 
e. Check Printer paper 
2. Utilize chemical test strips for “Pass” or “Fail” results to monitor 
minimum effective concentrations. Verification of these results is 
documented in the designated logbook along with a “pass or fail” result 
for sheath tests. 
 
G. Process Verification:    After the processor cycle is complete, verification 
of the (AER) process is performed utilizing the printed readout. Confirm 
that all required information and cycles are completed.  Affix a patient 
label to the printout to keep with the log book.  Documented information 
includes: 
 1. Machine ID 
 2. Date 
 3. Time 
 4. Scope # 
 5. Operator 
 6. Patient label applied to the printout 
 7. Physician 
 8.  Cycles completed 3 
 
   a. flush 
   b. disinfect/temperature/count 
   c. rinse 
   d. alcohol 
   e. air 
   f. sheath test   
 
H. Process Failure: If any parameter is not met, or in the case of equipment 
failure:  
1. Scopes not meeting all cleaning/disinfection parameters will not be 
used in patient care.  
2. Repeat the testing/ cleaning/disinfecting process.  Trouble shoot 
and eliminate any human error which may have occurred. 
3.  Replace solutions if needed. 
4. Complete appropriate paperwork (i.e. Olympus Equipment Service 
Request Form), send scope out for repair 
5. Contact biomedical department to notify of equipment servicing.   
 
 
I. Storage of Endoscopes:     Upon removal from the processor, and prior to 
storage, all scopes should be checked for cleanliness, Quality parameters 
met, and structural integrity.  The scope will be tagged with the processing 
date, and the processor’s initials before being placed in a transport 
container for transport to the hanging storage cabinet 
1. Hang scopes in a vertical position in an enclosed cabinet with 
caps/water and suction valves removed to allow any remaining 
moisture to drain/dry. Hepa filter air circulation is used in cabinets 
where available.  The insertion tube portion of the scope may not 
touch the walls of the cabinet or each other. 
 2. Flexible endoscopes will be processed before use if stored unused 
 for more than seven days. 
3. Storage cabinets (including cabinet in ICU) will be cleaned and 
 disinfected with hospital approved EPA-registered disinfectant 
 when visibly soiled and on a weekly schedule. 
 
J. Chemical Monitoring:  All test strips and chemical disinfecting solutions 
will be verified before use and dated for expiration.  
1. Efficacy of the chemical test strips will be verified by logging onto 
the manufacturer’s website www.medivators.com. and printing the 
certificate of analysis for the test strip vial.  Initial and date the 
certificate and place in file.   Test strips are to be dated to expire 
120 days from opening.   
2. Disinfecting solutions are tested following Mfg. instructions.  All 
opened bottles of solutions are dated with expiration. Any expired 
solutions are discarded. AER disinfectant solutions are flushed and 
replaced every 21 days 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. AER Maintenance: 
 1. Micron filters and solution changes are performed at recommended 
intervals by trained employees.  Routine maintenance is documented in 
the designated logbook.  
 2.  Preventive Maintenance is performed and documented through the Bio-
med department. 
 
   
 
 
 
IV. REFERENCE: 
 
Standards of Infection Control in Reprocessing of Flexible Gastrointestinal Endoscopes, 
SGNA, 2012 
AORN guidelines 
 
Steris Corporation RevitalOx Label and MSDS sheet 
 
Medivators DSD Edge: Endoscopic Reprocessing System User Manual  
 
Medivators Scope Buddy Endoscopic Flushing Aid User Manual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 
 
V.  REVISIONS 
 
12/92; 05/93; 04/95; 03/98; 08/00; 8/02; 9/03, 11/04 
09/03: AORN reference changed to 2003 Edition  
3/2005 to include Automatic Reprocessor. Reference: Steris Corp. Manufacturer’s guidelines.   
1/2006, 1/2007, 1/2008, 1/2009;1/2010; 1/2011, 1/2012 
7/2012 entire policy rewritten to SGNA and Steris Corp. Guidelines 
10/8/2013 Added ICU bronchoscope process 
9/5/2014 Revisions made to chemical monitoring  and quality checks sections to accom modate changes  
for new AER equipment and solution(MMS)  
3/2015 Manufacturer’s instruction manuals and posters with recommended procedures cleaning and 
disinfecting processes are posted in the Endoscopy reprocessing areas for reference.   
9/2015 added red biohazard covered transport containers and transport process; and the tagging of 
scopes before storage 
11/2015 change in ICU process 
1/2016 revised transport system to include scope valet bag process, added PPE (face protection including 
masks/goggles or face-shield) 
October 2017 re-write of policy for clarity,  revisions to include updated AORN  and OLYMPUS 
guidelines and recommendations for re-processing 
3/2018 Updated to reflect weekly cleaning of endoscope cabinet 
1/05/2018 Removed ICU bronchoscope cleaning process, using disposables only  
7/2019 Added heap filter to storage section when available, section I. Added closed containers transport 
section c.   
 
 
                V.I.  Review 
1/2013; 1/2014; 1/2015; 3/2015; 1/2016; 10/2017, 3/2018; 7/2018; 7/2019; 9/2021; 9/2022; 9/2023; 9/2024; 
1/2025 
 
Archive post-merger 2-2020 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 
 
 