OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION   
 
POLICIES AND 
PROCEDURES: 
  
PLANT OPERATIONS 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
  
10/01 
NUMBER:   STELPLT250 
SUBJECT: Hot Work 
  
Page 1 of  4 
Reviewed/Revised: 
10/01, 09/02, 10/03, 12/04, 12/05, 12/06,11/07, 12/08, 12/09, 8/12, 
6/15, 9/16, 3/18, 10/19, 7/21 
APPROVED BY: 
 Justin Brown 
    
  
APPLIES TO: 
  
            Plant Operations 
  
POLICY: 
  
This establishes minimum requirements for performing work within the Hospital, which 
is capable of producing fires or explosions.  All such work shall be preceded by a careful 
evaluation and the issuance of hot work permit in accordance with this subsection shall 
precede all such work. 
  
SCOPE: 
  
Applies to all Plant Operations team members to maintain efficiency and to prevent any 
unnecessary fire alarm soundings or accidents. 
  
PROCEDURE:  See Responsibility 
  
RESPONSIBILITY: 
  
A.                 Permit Issuer: 
  
1. Any Plant Operation personnel may issue any non-flame hot work permits. 
Issuing personnel must notify their Supervisor/Manager. 
  
2.      Any Plant Operation personnel may  issue ordinary flame type hot work  
permits. Issuing personnel must notify their Supervisor/Manager. 
  
3 Any Plant Operation personnel  may issue special types of hot work permits 
such as hot  taps, weld ends, use of wedge lock pipe plugs, and work on 
energized electrical less than 480 volts. 
  
4 The Plant Operation Supervisor/Manager may issue hot work permits for 
work on energized electrical e quipment involving greater than 480 volts or 
cutting on red concrete which contains live circuits. 
  
  
  B.                 Special Areas: 
 
  
1. Hot work permits for new construction sites can be issued by the any Plant   
Operations personnel assigned by the Plant Operation Supervisor/Manager 
to coordinate work at the site, with Director’s approval, see attached form in 
binder. 
 
  
C.        Job-site Visit:    
  
1.      Non-flame type Hot Work Permit – Pre-work jobsite visits may be required 
for non-flame type hot work permits.   The visit may be made by either the 
permit issuer alone, or together with the permit acceptor. 
  
2.      Flame type Hot Work Permit – Pre-work jobsite visits are required.  The visit 
shall be made by either the permit issuer alone, or together with the permit 
acceptor. 
  
Worker Requirements 
  
A.                 Fire Watch Assignment: 
  
1.     The permit issuer shall determine whether a fire watch is required during 
flame type hot work.   Burning and welding on process equipment shall 
require a fire watch. 
  
2.     The S upervisor shall designate a competent individual as the fire watch, if 
required, and will assure he understands his responsibilities. 
  
3.     The permit acceptor shall ensure the proper fire watch equipment is at the 
jobsite before work begins, and the proper information has been documented. 
  
4.    The fire watch shall not be assigned other duties while hot work is in 
progress. 
  
B.                 Fire Watch Duties – The fire watch duties are: 
  
1.      Observe for leaks, spills, or other work in the area which might release 
flammables a nd shut down the hot work at the first sign of any of these 
condition’s. 
  
2.       Use fire watch equipment as specified on the permit. 
  
3.       Remain at the jobsite until relieved or the hot work is completed. 
  
4.       Check for smoldering fires after completion of the job. 
  
  
 
  
Equipment Preparation 
  
A.                 Equipment Preparation: 
  
1.       If practical, equipment on which hot work is to be performed should be 
removed from process areas. 
  
2.      All process lines shall be disconnected, blinded, plugged or blanked before 
hot work is performed on or around the equipment. 
  
3.      Equipment shall be prepared for hot work by draining, flushing, purging until 
a gas test shows less than 2% LEL (Lower Explosive Limit). 
  
4.      Special precautions (e.g. manual cleaning or water wetting) shall be taken 
where residual materials such as iron sulfide, acetylides, or polymers may 
ignite spontaneously. 
  
B.                 Pre-work Gas Testing: 
  
1.       The permit issuer shall determine if a gas test is necessary and shall assure 
the requirements of Safety Standard 301 (Gas Testing) are met. 
  
2.       Gas tests will generally be performed before flame type hot work permits are 
issued.  Open areas such as designated fabrications areas and smoking areas 
usually do not require a gas test.   
  
3.       A process representative shall be present when flame type hot work 
commences in process areas. 
  
C.                 Site Preparation: 
  
1.      All combustible materials shall be moved, if possible, a safe distance from 
the work area. 
  
2.      Combustibles, which cannot be moved away from the work area, shall be 
wet down and covered with flame resistant covers. 
  
3.       Leaks of flammables shall be stopped or other effective means used to 
prevent accidental ignition during the hot work. 
  
4.       Sewer drains/catch basins near the work area, which may be affected, shall 
be covered, have a water seal, and be wet down. 
  
5.       Boxing in the work area shall be considered if the work is above equipment 
containing hydrocarbons.  The work area shall always be boxed in when a 
nearby leak cannot be secured or when the job may affect valves, flanges, 
pumps, or other process connections. 
  
6.       The area below elevated hot work shall be barricaded. 
  
  
  
7.       The following special precautions are required around cooling towers: 
  
a.      Fire-resistant blankets shall be used to prevent sparks from falling 
through the decking into the basin. 
  
b.      Wood plastic beneath and around hot work shall be kept thoroughly wet 
down. 
  
c.     When out of service, the drier condition of the cooling tower is especially 
dangerous, and work shall be carefully planned. 
  
Work Practices 
  
  
A.     Blanket type hot work permits are discouraged.   Caution shall be exercised 
when blanket type hot work permits are issues. 
  
B.    The number of simultaneous hot work operations should be kept to a 
minimum. 
  
C.     Welding machines shall be shut down when the jobsite is vacated. 
  
D.     In confined spaces: 
  
1.     Cutting torch assemblies shall be removed from confined space when 
work is suspended for more than 20 minutes. 
  
2. Cylinders of compressed gases, except for air pa cks or resuscitation 
equipment, shall never be taken into confined spaces 
 
 
No Changes: 12/05 
8/12: deleted Responsibility B #1 permits in manholes/substations, (no longer applies) 
6/15 added copy of permit to the binder  
9/16 Minor changes made to clarify permit issuer designation and responsibilities.  
3/18 No changes 
10/19 Name Change 
7/21 No Change 
                         
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  