 
 
 
 
 g:\policy\sterile 
Sterilization Practices         page1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
  
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
Surgical Services Manual 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE 
April 1, 2010 
 
NUMBER 
STELSPD120 
 
SUBJECT: 
 
          Sterilization Guidelines, Instrument Processing,     
and Storage of Sterile Items 
 
Page  
1 of 13 
  
 
Purpose: 
The policy is written to provide guidelines and recommended practices for achieving 
decontamination, disinfection, sterilization, and storage of instrumentation, supplies, and 
equipment used in the Surgical Environment, Wound Care Department, Emergency 
Department, Sleep Study Unit, Respiratory Department, Inpatient Units and Assumption 
Hospital. 
 
Applies To: 
Sterile Processing Department, Surgical Services Department, Wound Care Department, 
Emergency Department, Sleep Study Unit, Respiratory Department, Inpatient Units, STEP 
Offices, and Assumption Hospital. 
   
 
Policy: 
  Surgical instrumentation, patient care supplies, and equipment are to be cleaned, 
decontaminated, disinfected, packaged, sterilized and stored according to guidelines (this 
includes Wound Care, ED, Sleep Study, Respiratory, and Inpatient Units, Cardiovascular 
Lab, STEP Offices, and Mary Bird Perkins instrumentation). Patient care items will be free 
of contamination at the time of use, thereby minimizing the risk of cross contamination and 
surgical wound infections.  This policy is to be followed in conjunction with Policy 
STELSPD115 Steam Sterilization Assurance and Quality Control Program.  
 
Responsibility: 
          Sterile Processing Technician, Surgical Technicians, Respiratory Technicians & Registered 
Nurses, Sleep Study Lab, Mary Bird Perkins, Wound Care Clinic, Cardiovascular Lab, STEP 
Offices and Assumption Hospital. 
 
 
 
Procedure: 
  
 Patient care items, equipment, and surgical instrumentation are to be divided into 
Spaulding categories:  
  
 
 
 
 g:\policy\sterile 
Sterilization Practices         page2 
• Critical items are those that enter the patient’s sterile tissue or the vascular 
system.  These items must be sterile upon use. 
 
 
• Non-critical Items come in contact only with intact skin. Non-critical items 
should receive intermediate-level or low-level disinfection or cleaning. 
 
 
 
I. Decontamination, Care of Instruments:  
 
 
A. Pre-Clean 
 
1. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) should be worn at all times when handling 
contaminated instrumentation:  minimum: gloves and eye protection.   
2. Decontamination of surgical instruments begins at point of use. Gross debris and 
tissue should continually be wiped from instruments throughout the procedure 
and/or upon completion with a wet cloth or sponge, to prevent bioburden from 
drying onto the instruments and lumens flushed.  
3. After use, check that all hinged instruments are in open position and disassemble all 
instrumentation as much as possible. Spray with a pre-cleaning gel. Eye Protection 
(in addition to gloves) must be worn when utilizing spray. Ensure soiled instruments 
are evenly covered with the gel and transport instruments for further processing.  
4. For enclosed, leak proof, puncture proof Transport of contaminated instruments 
within the surgery department: 
 
i. Use transport gel on instruments 
ii. Ensure instrument ratchets are unlocked, disassemble 
 instruments, and segregate sharp instruments in a puncture 
 proof container.  
 
 
 
iii. Liquids used to soak contaminated items at the point of use 
 should be discarded before transport. When disposal of the 
 solution is not feasible, it must be transported in a leak-proof 
container to the decontamination area for disposal. 
iv. Obtain a designated instrument transport cart for pick-up of 
 contaminated instruments from the OR suite.   
v. Label the cart as contaminated/ biohazard with provided labels 
and transport the enclosed cart and instruments to the 
decontamination area of the SPD department where the 
instruments and equipment are unloaded for processing.  
vi. The transport cart will be disinfected after use with germicidal 
wipes and returned to the core area and labeled “clean” ready for  
 
 
 
 g:\policy\sterile 
Sterilization Practices         page3 
use.   
 
5. For other departments or outside facilities: 
i. Keep instruments free of gross debris by wiping off instruments 
at point of use. 
ii.  After use, place instruments in the red bio-hazard transport 
containers that are leak and puncture resistant. 
iii. Spray instruments evenly with a generous coat of transport gel. 
iv. Contaminated instruments should be transported to the 
decontamination area as soon as possible after completion of the 
procedure.  If instruments cannot be transported to SPD the day of 
use, additional moisture will be added with a water dampened 
moist towel. Saline should not be used.  
v. Sign In Sheet must be completed with date, time, department, # 
of instruments and signature.  
vi. After use, transport instruments to the decontamination area of 
OLOL Ascension Hospital SPD department in a covered red 
biohazard container for processing.  
vii. The red bio-hazard transport container(s) along with the 
instrumentation, will be washed, disinfected, and sterilized. 
viii. Sterilized red bio-hazard containers and instrumentation will be 
picked up or returned to the other departments and outside 
facilities in a designated clear transport containers/bag. 
 
B. Decontamination  
 
6. All patient care Items that are reusable resources, are to be decontaminated after 
every use.  Decontamination should occur in a controlled environment using 
standard precautions. Traffic patterns should be controlled as not to cross 
contaminate the decontamination area to the clean instrument assembly/sterilization 
areas.  
7.  Wearing proper personal protective equipment; hair covering, eye protection, face 
mask/shield, impervious gown, gloves, shoe covers and standard precautions, 
check instrument set to ascertain that all hinged instruments are in the set with box 
locks in open position; open any closed box locks.  Disassemble all instrumentation 
as much as possible.  Pre-soak gross debris from instruments.  Rinse entire set-in 
clear tap water. Do not immerse powered equipment; or items that are not moisture 
proof. Follow manufacturer’s IFU cleaning and sterilization guidelines. 
8.   Using scrub brushes, cleaning solution or enzymatic cleaner and water, remove 
any remaining debris and rinse well. Utilize appropriate brushes or cleaning devices 
consistent with the instrumentation IFU. Use compressed air for flushing lumens. 
9. Run instruments through the ultrasonic cleaner where appropriate. 
10. For moisture stable and heat safe products, process instruments through the 
automated Washer/Disinfector cycle. Instruments that cannot be submerged in 
water or placed in the Washer/Disinfector such as power equipment, cords, 
cameras, specialty instruments, etc. are decontaminated by wiping the items off  
 
 
 
 g:\policy\sterile 
Sterilization Practices         page4 
with a mild detergent, enzyme, or cleaning disinfectant solution. Manufacturer’s IFU 
are to be followed.  
a. Surgical instruments and their containment devices and accessories 
should be positioned in the washer disinfector in a manner that ensures 
contact of the cleaning solution with all surfaces of the items. Items 
composed of more than one part should be disassembled according to 
the manufacturer’s IFU. Small parts should be contained. 
i. Instruments should be placed in open mesh-bottom pans. 
ii. Ports and stopcocks should be opened. 
iii. Stylets should be removed from lumened instruments. 
iv. Instrument ratchets should be in the unlocked position. 
v. Items with surfaces that will retain water should be placed on 
edges. 
vi. Electrical cords and insulated instruments should be 
segregated from sharp instruments. 
11. After disinfection, transport items to processing area for assembly, packaging, and 
sterilization preparation. 
12. Never re-process implant items if they have been used in a patient. 
13. Selection of cleansers utilized in the decontamination/Sterilization process will be 
approved by a multidisciplinary team of surgical services management, materials 
management and Infection Control.   
14. Items to be sterilized should be decontaminated before inspection, packaging, and 
sterilization 
 
 
II. Assembly for Sterilization: 
 
15. Following decontamination, instruments are brought to the processing area for 
preparation. Appropriate packaging, wrapping and canisters are selected. 
Temperature range in SPD will be 68-73 degrees and 30%-60% Humidity. This will 
be recorded in the logbook. 
 
A. Manufacturer IFU’s will be utilized for assembly and appropriate sterilization 
procedures.   
B. Individual instruments are inspected for cleanliness and damage. Damaged  
 
 
 
 g:\policy\sterile 
Sterilization Practices         page5 
instruments are removed from service for repair and replaced with 
instruments in working condition. 
C. Saturated steam under pressure should be used to sterilize heat- and 
moisture-stable items unless otherwise indicated by the device manufacturer 
D. Items should be inspected and evaluated for cleanliness; correct alignment; 
corrosion, pitting, burrs, nicks, cracks; sharpness of cutting edges; wear and 
chipping of inserts and plated surfaces; missing parts; integrity of insulation 
on insulated devices; integrity of cords and cables; clarity of lenses; integrity 
of seals and gaskets; presence of moisture; correct functioning.   
 
E.  Instrument sets are reassembled with an instrument count sheet listing all 
set contents as appropriate.   
 
F. Sets are reassembled with ratchets in the unlocked position to facilitate 
sterilization process. 
 
G. Instruments should be thoroughly dried before they are assembled in 
packaging systems in preparation for sterilization. 
 
H. An internal chemical integrator strip is placed in all packages, canisters, 
wraps and sets to be sterilized. This indicator should be placed in the 
package in  the area greatest density, where steam would be hardest to 
reach. 
 
I. An external indicator (canister locks or tape) should appear on the outside of 
all sterilized items. 
 
 
J. Initials of the person assembling the item for processing are to be included 
on all packaging/ items as well as the date, sterilizer number and load for 
tracking purposes 
 
K. Combination paper and plastic pouches should not be placed in steam 
autoclaved wrapped trays or canisters. Medical grade paper pouches are 
acceptable. 
 
L. Count sheets will be placed on the outside of sets or canisters 
 
• III. Packaging for Sterilization: Packaging systems should have US Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) clearance for performance claims for intended use; be 
suitable for the items being sterilized; include a manufacturer’s instructions for use 
(IFU); be free of toxic ingredients; be odor free; be low linting; be large enough to 
permit equal distribution of the contents; be easy to use for personnel who prepare,  
 
 
 
 g:\policy\sterile 
Sterilization Practices         page6 
transport, and/or open the package; permit secure and complete closure of items; 
permit sealing that is tamper-evident; permit identification of the contents before 
opening; allow adequate air removal; allow sterilant penetration and direct contact 
with the item(s) and surfaces; allow removal of the sterilant; be resistant to tears and 
punctures; protect contents from physical damage; maintain sterility of the contents 
until opened; permit aseptic delivery of the contents to the sterile field (e.g., minimal 
wrap memory, easy removal of lids from rigid sterilization containers); have a 
favorable cost-benefit ratio; and be free of restrictive waste-disposal regulatory 
requirement. 
• Items to be sterilized should be packaged in a manner that facilitates sterilization 
and provides for an aseptic presentation of the package contents. Packaging should 
be used according to the packaging manufacturer’s and sterilizer manufacturer’s 
written IFU. 
• When the sterilizer and the device manufacturers’ instructions cannot be reconciled, 
the device manufacturers’ instructions should be followed 
o External and internal chemical indicators should be used with each package.  
▪ A class 1 chemical indicator (ie, process indicator) should be placed on the 
outside of every package unless the internal indicator is visible through the 
package material.6 Examples of process indicators are indicator tape and 
indicator labels.  
▪ A class 5 chemical indicator (ie, integrating indicator) or class 6 chemical 
indicator (ie, emulating indicator) should be placed inside every package. 
▪  A class 3 or 4 chemical indicator may be used within a package to meet 
requirements for internal monitoring 
 
A. Wrapped Packs and Sets 
 
1. Linen packs are a maximum size of 12" x 12" x 20" and not to exceed 
12 pounds. 
 
2.  Instrument sets in trays should not exceed 25 pounds in weight. 
 
3. The pack or set is prepared to allow the steam to penetrate the center 
completely.  It must not be too tight or too loose. 
  
 
 
 
 g:\policy\sterile 
Sterilization Practices         page7 
4. The wrappers must be hospital approved and of adequate size to 
completely cover the item sterilized and to provide an aseptic field 
upon opening. The set is wrapped with one wrapper. Wrappers and 
packaging are chosen according to sterilization method used.   
 
5. All linen must be freshly laundered to allow the steam to adequately 
penetrate the fibers.  
 
6. All packages are secured on the outside with pressure sensitive 
processing tape and an interior indicator strip. Chemical indicators 
should be placed in an area within the package that presents a 
challenge for air removal and sterilant contact. 
 
7. The wrapper must be durable enough to allow for normal handling in 
storage and distribution. 
 
8. The wrapper must be an effective barrier to dust and other 
atmospheric contaminants. 
 
9. The material must not hinder the penetration of the steam. 
 
 
10. All packs should be labeled according to contents, Sterilizer #, Load #, 
date, and initials of the person assembling the item. 
 
B. Peel Pouch Techniques: Peel pouches (ie, paper-plastic, Tyvek, Mylar) 
should be used according to manufacturers’ written IFU. 
 
1. The package material must freely allow the steam to penetrate to the 
center and must not retain the moisture. 
 
2. The package must be an effective barrier to dust and other 
atmospheric contaminates. 
 
3. Procedure for packaging with a paper-plastic peel pouch: 
a. Select a pouch of the proper size for steam method. 
b. Place item inside package. 
 
c. Place appropriate type and size chemical integrator inside the 
pouch. 
d. Seal the open end of pouch with a double seal after expressing 
as much air as possible or fold over self adhesive flap ensuring 
there are no wrinkles or gaps in the seal. 
e. Supplies for OR may be double packed to facilitate easier 
handling by OR personnel. Ensure the inner pack is not double 
folded on itself to fit inside the outer wrap and make certain the  
 
 
 
 g:\policy\sterile 
Sterilization Practices         page8 
paper sides are placed together to ensure penetration of steam. 
  
f. Supplies for all other departments are single packed. 
g. All packs should be labeled according to contents, Sterilizer #, 
Load #, date, and initials of the person assembling the item. 
Writing may be done on the fold over flap or on the top tabs, 
not on the packaging. Labels or writing should be placed on the 
plastic side of the pouch.  
h.       Peel pouches should not be used within wrapped sets or 
containment devices 
 
C. Processing Instruments in Rigid Container Systems:  A rigid sterilization 
container should be used, cleaned, inspected, repaired, and maintained 
according to the manufacturer’s written IFU. 
 1. The integrity of the rigid container should be inspected after each use. 
Inspections should include that the surfaces and edges of the container and lid are 
free of dents and chips; the lid and container fit together properly and securely; the 
filter retention mechanisms and fasteners are secure and not distorted or burred; the 
latching mechanisms are functioning as they should; the handles are in working 
order; the integrity of the filter media is not compromised; the gaskets are pliable, 
securely fastened, and without breaks or cuts; and the valves are in working order. 
2. Single-use or reusable filters should be secured and in proper working order 
before sterilization. Filter plates should be examined for integrity before and after the 
sterilization process. Only intact filters should be used. If the filter is damp, dislodged, 
or has holes, tears, or punctures, the contents should be considered unsterile. 
3. Before devices are placed within rigid sterilization containers, the manufacturer’s 
IFU should be consulted to determine limitations related to density of materials, 
weight, and distribution of contents. 
4. Place appropriate integrator in the container 
 
IV. Steam Autoclave Sterilization: Manufacturers’ written instructions for operating 
steam sterilizers should be followed 
 
A. Packages to be sterilized should be labeled.  Accurate labeling provides 
identification of the package contents as well as information that enables tracking of the 
sterilizer, sterilization cycle, personnel involved in the sterilization process, and the 
patient for whom the items were used. Package labels should include:  
 
 
 
 g:\policy\sterile 
Sterilization Practices         page9 
• the sterilizer number or unique identifier if more than one sterilizer is in use 
•  the cycle or load number 
•  the date of sterilization 
•  Description of the package Identification of the assembler.  
B. Load autoclave appropriately utilizing following guidelines: 
 
1. Check each pack/set for appropriate packaging and labeling. 
2. Place all packs on edge, except heavy mesh bottom instrument trays 
or metal containers. 
3. Place larger items on lower shelves. 
4. Place packs loosely to allow steam circulation. 
5. A load record is documented and maintained on all items placed in a 
sterilization load. 
6. Rigid sterilization containers are loaded below wrapped items. 
7. Linen packs must always be loaded above instruments. 
 
B. Operate steam autoclave utilizing following guidelines: 
 
1.  When surgical items with different exposure-times are sterilized 
together, the most rigorous values should be used 
 
2. Place load in autoclave. Include test load indicator/integrator and a 
biological test if indicated (see policy: Steam Sterility Assurance and 
Quality Control). 
 
3. Check sterilizer printers for appropriate date and function, when 
applicable. 
 
4. Check timer and set appropriately.  Pre-vacuum sterilizer cycle is set 
at 270 F for 4 minutes sterilization time with 30 minutes dry time for 
wrapped items, peel pouches, and containers.   
 
5. Check jacket pressure gauge.  Jacket pressure gauge should read 28-
32 PSI. 
 
6. Close autoclave door. 
 
7. Begin cycle by pressing proper selection on panel. 
 
8. At completion of cycle, check the chamber pressure to assure the  
 
 
 
 g:\policy\sterile 
Sterilization Practices         page10 
autoclave is off, check the print out to ensure proper time, and 
temperature were achieved, slowly open door. Open the door just 
enough to silence cycle complete buzzer. Allow steam to dissipate 
and cooling to begin. 
 
9. The load is then removed from the sterilizer to be transferred to the 
sterile storage area or appropriate department after thorough cooling 
to room temperature (30 minutes to two hours). Sterilized items must 
be cooled before handling for safety purposes and to prevent strike 
through from possible condensation.  
10. Dust covers may be placed on items wrapped in paper wrappers to 
extend shelf-life. 
 
     C. Immediate Use Steam Sterilization (IUSS): The operating room will find it 
necessary to autoclave some items in the autoclaves located in the OR Core 
area.  All items will be cleaned/disinfected according to policy and have an 
indicator/integrator placed with it for the autoclaving process.  No personnel 
shall place or receive items on the sterile field without checking for the 
presence of and appropriate indicator/integrator change.    A biological with 
an indicator/integrator will be run with any implantable devices. Flash Cycles 
(3 minutes or less) will not be used. Immediate use steam sterilization should 
be used only when there is insufficient time to process by the preferred 
wrapped or container method intended for terminal sterilization. 
 
1. After cleaning and disinfection, items are placed in an appropriately 
sized sterilization container  
                                                                  
2. Arrange the items neatly in the pan, observing the usual practices and 
care of instrumentation.  Open all clamps, separate items and 
disassemble as completely as possible to allow for steam penetration. 
 
3. Do not overload trays.  Do not use linen or towels. 
 
4. Place an indicator/integrator in the pan in a position that can be easily 
viewed. 
 
5.  Exposure times and temperature settings should follow written 
instructions from manufacturers of products and sterilizers.  When 
surgical items with different exposure-times are sterilized together, the 
most rigorous values should be used. Pre-vac guidelines for 
sterilization: 4-minute sterilization cycle. 
  
6. When the autoclave completes the sterilizing cycle, check the 
chamber pressure to assure the autoclave steam pressure is down, 
check the printout to ensure proper time, and temperature were 
achieved, slowly open door.  Observe for proper indicator/integrator  
 
 
 
 g:\policy\sterile 
Sterilization Practices         page11 
change before dispensing to sterile field.   
 
7. Because drying time is not usually part of a preprogrammed IUSS 
cycle, the items processed are assumed to be wet at the conclusion of 
the cycle and will be hot when removed from the sterilizer chamber 
immediately after the cycle. 
 
8. These items are for immediate use on the surgical field and should not 
be placed in storage for future use or utilized case to case. 
 
9. Document the cycle with appropriate information on the autoclave log 
record:  Pt. label, load contents, employee initials, Implant, pass or fail 
and the physical printout. 
 
 
V.      Maintenance and Storage of Sterile Supplies: 
    
 
  A. Sterilization Dates - Expiration Dates - Length of Time an Item remains 
sterile: 
1. Items will be handled and stored to protect them from contamination, 
physical damage and loss. 
2. Shelf life of a steam processed, wrapped sterile item is event related 
or IFU recommendations.  All items remain sterile unless the integrity 
of the package/container has been compromised. The shelf life of a 
packaged sterile item should be considered event-related. Shelf life is 
dependent on packaging material, storage conditions, transport, and 
handling. An event must occur to compromise package content 
sterility. Events that may compromise the sterility of a package 
include: multiple instances of handling that leads to seal breakage or 
loss of package integrity, moisture penetration, and exposure to 
airborne contaminants 
 
 
3. Items processed in sterile supply will be labeled with the following: 
a. Description of contents 
b. Load number 
c. Date sterilized (lot #),  
d. Initials of person preparing the item 
4. Items will be checked by the user prior to use. External and internal 
indicators should show that processing has occurred. 
5. If the package has become torn, wet, or otherwise causes sterility to 
be compromised, the item will be returned to sterile supply for 
reprocessing. 
6. Sterility maintenance covers (dust covers) may be applied after 
sterilization to further extend the integrity of the packaging material.  
 
 
 
 g:\policy\sterile 
Sterilization Practices         page12 
7. If the dust cover is removed and the item not used, the dust cover can 
be reapplied after thorough inspection has been done to confirm 
sterility maintenance. 
8. The risk of contamination of a sterile item increases with handling over 
a period of time.  Therefore, items may be sent for reprocessing at the 
discretion of the user. 
9. Items of low use must always be evaluated for the actual need to keep 
that item sterile packaged or in inventory. 
 
 
 
 
B.  Storage of Sterile Supplies: 
  
1. Inventory rotation must be practiced; inspection of wrapper integrity 
and expiration dates for containers should be checked. 
 SEE policy STELSUR105 for further details regarding event 
related packaging and expirations 
2. Routine inspection of supplies in the instrument room will be 
scheduled monthly by Surgical Services personnel. 
3. Sterile storage should take place in environmentally controlled 
conditions. 
a. Temperature of storage areas should not exceed 75 F. 
b. Storage area should have at least 4 air exchanges per hour. 
c. Humidity should not exceed 70% 
d. Traffic should be controlled,  
e. Proper surgical attire 
f. Supplies should be stored at least 8-10 inches above the floor 
and 18” below Sprinkler heads (ceiling), and 2 inches   from outer 
walls. 
g.    Outside shipping containers should not be allowed in the 
sterile storage area 
h.    Unsterile and sterile items are not to be mixed and stored 
together.   
 
 
 
 
 
Reference:  
 
A.M.S.C.O. Equipment Manual, Volume II, 1990 
 
 Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation ANSI / AAMI ST46:2002 
 
 Steris Amsco Eagle 3000/Reanaissance Sterilizer Operators Manual  
 
 
 
 g:\policy\sterile 
Sterilization Practices         page13 
 
 
 Kimberly Clark Directions for Use, Sterilization Wrap 2010 
 
 
 AORN Guidelines for Perioperative Practices 2017:  
 
GUIDELINE FOR CLEANING AND CARE OF SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS; GUIDELINE FOR SELECTION AND 
USE OF PACKAGING SYSTEMS FOR STERILIZATION.  
 
Aesculap Sterile Container System Instructions for Use, June 2016 
 
Revisions  
2/2010: revised to delete obsolete information, added yr.2010 AORN Standards, Created 
 separate policy for Sterilization Quality Assurance Program.  Added more detailed 
 operation instructions. 
5/2010: revised new drying time, Section IV, B-4. 
1/2013 revised procedure for double peel pouch sterilization  
3/2015 Added Wound Care, Respiratory Blades and Mary Bird Perkins instrumentation to 
process 
11/2015 revised section I, decontamination, care of instruments to include transport gel, and 
define the process of transporting contaminated instruments, changed wording to IUSS, 
 added red biohazard containers to process 
1/2016 Temperature and Humidity ranges added to Decontamination room and SPD 
6/2/2017: revised rigid container section C; added manufacturer IFU’s throughout policy, added 
STEP offices to outside facility list. Updated to AORN 2017 Guidelines 
7/2018 Updated transport of contaminated instruments in the department to enclosed cart 
system. (MMS) 9/2024 Added Censitrac 
 
 
Review:  
 
1/2011; 1/2012; 1/2013; 1/2014; 1/2015, 3/2015; 1/2016; 7/2017; 7/2018; 7/2019; 9/2021; 9/2022; 
9/2023; 10/2024; 1/2025 
 
 
 
 