 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
Surgical Services 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
7/1/2018 
 
NUMBER: STELSUR536 
 
 
SUBJECT:  Preoperative Admission Policy 
 
 
PAGE 1 OF 1 
 
 
 
        
 
I. PURPOSE: To properly prepare patients for their upcoming procedure with 
minimal delays or cancelation of the case. 
 
II. APPLIES: Scheduling department, Pre-Admit nurses (PAT), and PAT clerks 
 
III. PROCEDURE: 
a. Scheduling the procedure: 
i. After the patient’s initial appointment with the physician, a specific 
surgery request should be placed in EPIC by the physician and 
placed in the scheduling depot. The physician should prepare and 
educate the patient on expectations of the procedure, postoperative 
care, and pain management. 
ii. The physician’s office should call the scheduling department to 
notify of the request to be added in order to determine the date and 
time of the procedure/surgery and pre-admit appointment (7-10 
business days ahead). The patient should be provided with the 
scheduling office number to reschedule if needed. The office will 
then notify the patient and give them a Pre-Admission Surgery 
Packet. 
NOTE: Pre-Admit/Surgery Department meet with each surgeon to 
develop customized packets according to procedure performed. 
The packets are then sent to the physician’s office and distributed 
to the patients with instructions to bring to the PAT appointment. 
iii. A History and Physical should be completed and a consent for the 
procedure should be signed in the office and scanned or faxed 
appropriately. The patient may be given their consent to bring to 
their appointment. 
b. Patients should report to their Pre-Admit appointment with the St. 
Elizabeth Hospital Admission Clerk. Patients are to bring their ID card, 
insurance card, list of medications, and the Pre-Admit Surgery Packet 
containing the History and Physical and consent if given by the 
physician’s office. 
i. The Registration Admissions Clerk confirms surgery date, 
demographics, and insurance information with each patient and 
obtains signatures for treatment. Advance directive information 
should be offered.  2 
c. Patients can be contacted via phone call to discuss Pre-Admissions 
instructions and verify information instead of physically attending a Pre-
Admission appointment. Exceptions include: 
i. Endoscopy procedures (ERCP procedures should attend PAT 
appointment) 
ii. Children 18 years and under 
iii. Cath Lab procedures 
iv. Pain Management cases 
v. Bronchoscopy procedures 
d. During the Pre-Admit appointment or phone call, the nurse should obtain 
and/or verify the patient’s: 
i. Vital signs 
ii. History (Medical and previous surgeries) 
iii. Allergies 
iv. Medication List 
e. A completed History and Physical and consent for the procedure should be 
verified in the computer. If needed, the PAT nurse should obtain a signed 
blood consent or refusal and scan into EPIC (EX: Total joints, Bariatrics, 
Colon Resections, etc.).  
f. The patient should be assessed for religious and cultural needs (EX: 
Jehovah witness or need for interpreter services) 
g. The PAT nurse should assess the “Guidelines for Preoperative 
Assessment” recommendation form to determine the necessary lab work, 
clearances, and tests to be performed prior to the procedure according to 
the patient’s age and comorbidities (See attachment). 
i. If possible, preoperative tests should be completed- labs, chest x-
ray (CXR), EKG as ordered. 
NOTE: Labs and CXR results are available via computer for 
physicians within the network. Surgeons outside of the network 
should have copies of the patient’s results faxed/scanned to their 
office. The patient should be given a copy of their EKG. 
ii. Patients who need clearances are responsible to make an 
appointment with their physician 7-10 business days ahead (EX: 
Cardiologist and Primary Care Physician). Clearances should be 
fax/scanned to the surgeon’s office and to PAT nurses. 
h. The patient should be educated on the Pre-Admission Packet:  
i. Instructions should be discussed with the patient regarding NPO 
status, appropriate clothing and skin preparation, transportation, 
etc. (See attachment “Surgery/Endoscopy Special Procedure 
Instructions”). 
ii. Prevention of Surgical Site Infection: Proper use of the hibiclens 
soap the night before and day of surgery (See attachment 
“Hibiclens Guide to General Skin Cleansing at Home”). 
i. After the Pre-Admit appointment, the PAT nurse should begin to fill out 
the “Anesthesia Flowsheet” and send each chart to Anesthesia for their 
review for all surgery cases (See attachment). Anesthesia should assess the  3 
charts to determine if the patient is ready for their procedure. Anesthesia 
should complete the flowsheet to communicate with PAT nurses for 
further tests or clearances required or to give OK for surgery. The PAT 
nurses should implement further orders as requested and scan the 
completed flowsheet into EPIC. 
j. The PAT nurse should communicate with Anesthesia, the surgeon’s 
office, and the patient as appropriate to facilitate a smooth and complete 
preparation for the day of surgery. 
k. Any necessary information deemed important by the PAT nurses should 
be communicated through EPIC notes or via a “handoff report” phone 
message the afternoon before each case to Pre-operative nurses. 
 
IV. REVISIONS: Originated 7/2018  
 
V. REVIEWED:  7/2019, 7/2020, 7/2021; 9/2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 