OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION   
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
 
PLANT OPERATIONS 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
 
12/28/15 
 
NUMBER: STELPLT410 
 
SUBJECT: 
 
CLOSED CIRCUIT TELEVISION VIEWING  
AND MONITORING POLICY  
 
PAGE 1 OF 2 
 
APPROVED BY:  
Justin Brown 
 
        
 
 Page 1 
 
PURPOSE:  
 
The purpose of this policy is to provide guidance and management for the recording,  
releasing, and footage viewing of the Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) Surveillance  
System of Our Lady of the Lake Ascension is used to enhance security, safety, while 
 providing the best quality of life for our guest as well as protect the Hospital’s assets. 
 
APPLIES TO: 
 
Plant Operations / Property Management 
 
 
SCOPE:  
 
A. This policy applies to all team members, visitors, patients, vendors,  with respect  to the 
  installation and use of video security as well as CCTV cameras owned or controlled  
 by STEH. 
B.  All references to video security and CCTV systems throughout this policy are for  
 those systems which were designed and installed with the intent and ability to record  
 video and/or to be monitored for purposes of enhancing hospital safety and physical  
 facility security. 
 
RESPONSIBILITY: 
 
A. Property Management will oversee and coordinate the use of CCTV only on  
 hospital owned/leased properties.   
B.  The Facility Manager authorizes all CCTV monitoring for safety and security  
      purposes on/or off hospital grounds.  The Facility Manager and all individuals granted  
     access to these systems are required to abide by the responsibilities set forth in this          
      policy. 
C.  Video monitoring for security purposes will be conducted in a professional, ethical, 
 and legal manner.  Monitoring individuals based on characteristics of race, gender,  
 ethnicity, sexual orientation, disability, or other protected classifications is prohibited. 
D. Any STEH team members involved in video monitoring will be appropriately trained  
 and supervised in the responsible use of this technology. 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES – CONTINUED     PAGE 2 OF 2  
 
 Page 2 
 
CLOSED CIRCUIT TELEVISON VIEWING & MONITORING POLIGY  
 
E. Video and CCTV monitoring governed by this policy is for enhanced safety and 
 security.  Any interception, duplication, transmission, or other diversion of video and  
 CCTV technologies for purposes other than the safety and security contemplated by 
 this policy is prohibited.  
 
         
Safety and Security purposes include, but are not limited to: 
 
1. Protection of all individuals, including physicians, team members, vendors and guests; 
 
2. The protection of hospital owned or leased and/or operated properties, including the  
 building perimeters, entrances and exits, lobbies and corridors, receiving docks, and cashier 
 location; 
 
3. Monitoring of common areas and areas accessible to the public, hospital entrances, parking  
lots, public streets, and pedestrian walks; 
 
4.  Investigation of criminal activity; 
 
5.  Protection against an act of terrorism or related criminal activity. 
 
F.    Viewing Videos:  
 
a. If a video is viewed, a record will be kept as to who viewed it, when and for what 
  reason. 
b. Any request by third party to view a CCTV recording has to be approved by  
  CEO or Administrator on call along with the Facilities Manager.  
 FMOLHS Risk Management will be notified and need to approve with prior to any  
 release or onsite viewing of the recording.   
c. Under no account will CCTV video recordings be viewed by any unauthorized person. 
d. Any recorded video that is requested by a Law Enforcement Agency or any other  
 organization or by any member of OLOLA can only be approved by OLOLA Hospital  
 Administration. 
e. Any recorded video made by Property Management or Plant Operations will 
 first be given to the Facilities Manager who will assign the copies with a number and 
 record the numbers of copies made and who they were released to and approved by. 
 
Misuse or unauthorized use of the CCTV system will be considered a serious Discipline matter. 
 
  
3/18 changed plant ops director to manager of facilities  
10/19 Name Change, 7/21 No Change 