 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE ASCENSION 
 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES: 
Surgical Services 
 
EFFECTIVE DATE: 
12/2016 
 
NUMBER: 
STELPACU130 
 
SUBJECT:   
Initial and Ongoing Assessment and Patient Documentation 
of the Post-anesthesia Patient 
 
PAGE 1 OF 1 
 
 
        
 
 
I. PURPOSE: To provide guidelines for the initial and ongoing assessment of the 
care of the PACU patient while ensuring accurate documentation of data 
collected. 
  
II. APPLIES TO: Surgical Services 
   
III. POLICY: Under the direction of an Anesthesiologist and assistance from 
CRNAs, patients who have received general anesthesia shall be monitored during 
the immediate postoperative phase to facilitate recovery and prepare for 
discharge. (See additional policies) 
 
IV. PROCEDURE 
A. Prepare the unit to receive a patient who requires maintenance of airway, 
monitoring of vital signs, cardiac rhythm, O2 saturation, delivery of O2, suction, 
maintenance of body temperature fluid balance. Equipment logs should be 
inspected daily in each designated area. 
a. Humidified water bottles should be labeled with the date and time opened. 
Bottles should be replaced every 24 hours. 
b. Opened suction yankauers should be replaced if left opened after the last 
patient is discharged. 
c. Patient refrigerators should be cleaned every Monday with Santi cloth 
wipes and inspected daily. Documentation should be reflected on the log.  
d. Eye wash station should be flushed for a minimum of 3 minutes every 
Monday and then documented appropriately on the log.  
e. If surgeries/procedures were not performed for a 24-hour period in the 
designated area of the log, the staff will document “Closed” for those 
days. 
B. Once the patient arrives to the unit, start O2 as indicated. 
a. Patients who receive general anesthesia shall receive humidified oxygen 
via T-tube adapter for intubated patients and face shield for extubated 
patients. The setting for all O2 is 98% and 10 liters/minute. Exceptions 
shall be made for the patient who is known or suspected to be a CO2 
retainer; these patients shall receive O2 at 2 liters/minute or as ordered by 
physician. 
b. Patients shall be observed for airway patency, hypoxemia, respiratory 
effort and function, oxygen saturation, artificial airway securement, etc. If  2 
patient is unable to maintain airway, interventions such as chin lifts, ambu 
bag, suctioning, use of additional airway equipment (nasal trumpet, oral 
airway) should be used. Airway status and respiratory movements 
shall be primary focus. 
C. Connect the patient to the EKG monitor. 
a. Patient shall be observed for cardiac arrhythmias, bradycardia, 
tachycardia, hypo/hypertension. 
b. Initial vital signs should be obtained (O2 saturation, respirations, pulse, 
blood pressure) and reported to anesthesia care provider. Vitals signs and 
Aldrete score should be taken and recorded every 5 minutes for 15 
minutes, then every 15 minutes for the duration of Phase I recovery (see 
Discharge Criteria from PACU and Phase II policy). A minimum of three 
sets of the vital signs should be recorded. Temperature shall be taken on 
all patients upon arrival to the unit and upon discharge. 
D. Bedside report should be received from the circulating OR nurse and the 
anesthesia care provider upon arrival. Should include, but not limited to: 
a. Type of procedure with findings. Should include length of procedure and 
time into recovery. 
b. Relevant preoperative status and any pertinent medical history including 
allergies. 
c. Type of anesthesia agent administered with additional medications given 
during the procedure as applicable with any adverse drug events. 
d. Pain management interventions (medication, local injections pre-op block) 
e. Estimated fluid/blood loss and replacement. 
f. Surgical site with dressings applied should be verified between RNs 
g. Emotional status on arrival to the operating room. 
h. Vital signs should be assessed and confirmed with anesthesia care 
provider. Pre-op baseline and trends during the procedure should be 
noted. 
E. A complete initial assessment should be documented appropriately into the 
patient’s records. Should include, but not limited to: 
a. Integration of data received at transfer of care (surgeon, procedure, 
CRNA, time of arrival) 
b. Vital Signs with a full head to toe assessment. 
c. Pain level and management. MAR should be addressed 
d. Neurological function to include level of consciousness. Pupillary 
responses as indicated 
e. Sensory and motor function. Should include neurovascular peripheral 
pulses and sensation of extremities as applicable. 
f. Integumentary assessment with condition, capillary refill, and color of 
skin and extremity involved. 
g. Condition of the dressing or surgical puncture site. Amount and type of 
drainage. Type, patency, and securement of drainage tubes and catheters. 
Procedure specific assessment as needed 
h. Fluid therapy including location of IV line and condition/patency of site 
i. Gastrointestinal response such as nausea and/or vomiting present  3 
j. Aldrete Score 
k. Plan of care 
F. Reassessment of the patient condition is an ongoing process. If at any time 
significant changes in patient condition occur, it should be reported to the 
physicians and pertinent nursing actions and/or interventions with outcomes 
should be documented appropriately.  
G. Once the above have been established, the patient can then be evaluated for 
discharge. (Refer to STELPACU131 and STELPACU134 policies). 
 
 
V. EXCEPTIONS: 
1. Patients who had MAC anesthesia (Endoscopy, EUS, peripheral block, surgical 
procedure, etc.) and presented with complications and did not meet Phase II 
criteria should be considered Phase I recovery.  
2. MAC Stretta procedure and ERCP procedures will be considered Phase I recovery  
 
VI. REVIEW/REVISIONS: 
I. Originated by D. Lacombe RN 12/5/2016 combined policies, Review: 7/2017. Revised: 
6/2018 Procedure a-e. Reviewed: 7/2018, review 7/2019, review 7/2020, review 7/2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 