 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 Section/Chapter: Endoscopy 
Title: Posting, Endoscopy Center Policy Reference #: SYA006 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 03/29/1988 Review Date: 11/15/2024 
Revision Date: 01/05/2018 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
To facilitate effective, efficient scheduling of daily elective and emergency endoscopic procedures. 
 
POLICY: 
Cases may be scheduled to be done during hours of operation or on an emergency basis as 
appropriate. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
I. Posting Privileges 
A. In order to schedule cases the physician must be an active or provisional active member 
of the Medical-Dental staff at Our Lady of the Lake RMC with privileges to perform the 
procedure being scheduled.  The physician must also be in good standing; this excludes 
anyone currently suspended due to delinquent Medical Records. 
 
II. Hours of Operation 
A. Monday-Friday, 7am – 1430pm  
B. Saturday-Sunday, 7am – 1630pm 
C. On-Call team available for emergencies/urgent inpatient needs after hours 
D. Procedures requiring 2 RN’s should be scheduled to be completed by 1430pm Monday 
– Friday. 
E. Weekends will be staffed with 1 RN and 1 Endoscopy case technician.  Procedures 
should be scheduled to allow each patient to be safely cared for. 
 
III. Posting Guidelines  
A. Information needed to post a procedure 
1. Name of physician 
2. Name of procedure to be done 
3. Name of patient 
4. Type of anesthesia/sedation 
5. Age of patient or patient date of birth 
6. Patient Classification (inpatient, outpatient or ambulatory patient) 
7. Date of procedure  2 
8. If outpatient or ambulatory patient, telephone number of patient  
9. Time requested for procedure date 
10. Any special equipment needed for the procedure  
11. Name of person posting 
B. Times 
1. Posting shall be done on first come first serve basis 
2. Add-ons for the daily schedule are posted in the requested time slots, if available.  If 
not, the next available time is offered. 
3. Monday – Friday posting can be done from 7am to 2:30pm by calling 765-8946.  
After hours posting on weekdays for next day add-ons, emergent cases, urgent 
inpatients, and outpatients can be done by leaving voice mail on unit phone or 
placing in depot in EPIC. Call RN call phone for emergent cases. 
4. Saturday-Sunday posting can be done from 7am to 1630pm by calling 765-8946.  
After hours posting on weekends for next day add-ons, emergent cases, urgent 
inpatients, and outpatients can be done by leaving voice mail on unit phone or 
placing in depot in EPIC. Call RN call phone for emergent cases. 
C. Rooms available: 
 Posting is done according to Room availability.  This will vary according to staffing 
 and service requirements. 
1. Monday-Friday  
a. 7am-1430pm- inpatient posting, elective (outpatient) and emergencies 
b. After 1430- emergencies and/or urgent inpatients only. 
2. Saturday-Sunday 
i.  7am-1630pm-inpatient posting and emergencies 
ii. After 1630pm-  emergencies and/or urgent inpatients only 
3. Holidays- emergencies and/or urgent inpatients only 
 
D. Add-on cases for the daily elective schedule: 
a) Cases are added onto the schedule as deemed necessary by the physician  
b) The Charge Nurse, in conjunction with Nurse Manager or Supervisor, makes 
decisions on when and where to add cases and notifies the physician of case 
time. 
 
IV. Priority Scheduling and Bumping of Cases 
A. Priority Scheduling  
1. When more than one case is pending at the same time, the physician involved must 
determine which is considered the most urgent.  If an agreement cannot be reached, 
the Chief of Endoscopy will be asked to make this decision.  The cases will be done 
on a “To Follow” basis.  If, in the opinion of the Service Chief, more than one case 
should be done simultaneously, then the Charge Nurse will make the necessary 
arrangements for additional personnel.  If an emergency case will delay any other 
cases, the Charge Nurse will be responsible for notification of the physician. 
B. Rescheduling Cases 
1. When a physician has an emergency that must interrupt the elective schedule, he/she 
must personally contact the physician who will have to relinquish his/her time.  If 
agreement cannot be reached, the Chief of Service will make the decision.   3 
2. Physicians who are late by 30 minutes or more may have their cases rescheduled if a 
room assignment cannot be arranged to assure that other MD will not be delayed.  
Any delayed case will be rescheduled at the next available slot or at the end of the 
day’s schedule. 
3. Physicians who have an unexpected delay during a case shall not start a TF case if 
the TF procedure is expected to delay the following physician more than 30 minutes.  
The Endo staff will assist the physician in rescheduling the case. 
 
 
 
     