 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Surgical Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Endoscopy 
Title: Fire, Alarm/Code Red, Endoscopy Policy Reference #: SYE006 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 05/10/1988 Review Date: 11/15/2024 
Revision Date: 01/05/2018 
 
 
PURPOSE: 
 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the 
conditions that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to 
the danger fires present by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and 
education.  To delineate authority, responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of 
a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
When the fire alarm system is initiated and the operator announces Code Red any procedure 
in progress will continue; however, any procedure requiring anesthesia will not start until it 
is determined whether a real emergency condition exist. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
1. The Nurse Manager or designee will assure that physician and anesthesiologist waiting to 
start cases are aware of the potential emergency. 
2. If the delay is extended, the patient will be notified that the case will be delayed. 
3. Plant Management Supervisor will notify the Nurse Manager or designee of their findings 
as soon as a determination is made. 
4. If it is determined that an emergency situation does not exist, the Nurse Manager or 
designee will notify physicians and staff that the case may proceed. 
5. In case of fire, the following will take place: 
a) Call 5-3333. Pull nearest fire alarm near exit. 
b) RACE (Rescue, Alarm, Confine, Evacuate/Extinguish) 
c) PASS (Pull pin, Aim at base of fire, Squeeze, Sweep) 
d) The Endoscopy techs will clear the hallway of any carts or equipment by moving 
them to supply room or storage nook on back hall. Stretchers will be placed inside 
supply room and or nurses station. 
e) The Endoscopy techs closes doors and windows. 
f) The RN’s confirms automatic fire doors closed (doors held open by magnetic locks 
are to release and close upon activation of the alarm). 
g) The RN’s move patients and visitors to safety explaining, “The hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety.”  2 
h) The Endoscopy techs prevents people from using elevator. 
i) The RN’s assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities. 
j) The unit manager/charge RN ensures all employees are accounted for 
k) The unit manager/charge RN ensures all patients are accounted for 
l) The unit manager/charge RN ensures each room is empty.  (This position will mark 
the door/door frame with chalk to indicate the room is empty.) 
m) Medical gas shut off valves are located outside of ENDO 1, ENDO 2, and ENDO 5 
(MOR 20). (The UNIT MANAGER, CHARGE NURSE, Plant Services or 
Respiratory turns off the medical gas. 
n) The primary horizontal evacuation route is to exit ENDO suite to the right to main 
corridor. The secondary horizontal evacuation route is to exit ENDO suite to the left 
into main hall near CYSTO/URO 
o) The primary vertical evacuation route is to exit ENDO suites into main hall and take 
immediate right to stairwell in main garage. The secondary vertical evacuation route 
is to exit ENDO suite into main hall and take immediate left to stairwell near ECU. 
 
 
 