 1 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: 
 
Perioperative Services 
 
Section/Chapter: Safety/Environment 
Endoscopy 
Title: Disinfection, High Level Policy Reference #: SYE001 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 05/30/1988 Review Date: 5/30/2024 
Revision Date: 06/19/2020 
  
 
PURPOSE: 
To define the process for disinfecting flexible endoscopes manually or with AER (automated 
endoscope reprocessor). 
 
POLICY: 
All endoscopes will be high level disinfected after use, either manually or with an AER. 
 
PROCEDURES:  
According to SGNA, HLD is the standard for reprocessing endoscopes. It destroys all 
viable organisms. 
 
HIGH LEVEL DISINFECTION w/ AER (automated endoscope reprocessor) 
 
After all manual cleaning steps in endoscope reprocessing are completed and protein testing 
has passed, high level disinfection will take place according to endoscope, disinfectant and 
AER IFU’s (instructions for use). Ensure all test strips and disinfectants are labeled with 
expiration date according to manufacturer. Maintain quality assurance for test strips. 
 
MANUAL HIGH LEVEL DISINFECTION 
 
This method will be utilized ONLY when AER unavailable due to breakdown or maintenance 
by Biomed dept. or when connections to AER’s unavailable. Refer to specific manufacturers 
IFU for different endoscope models and for high level disinfectant. 
 
1. Select a basin with a lid, large enough to hold endoscope without over coiling 
2. Prepare, test (for MEC), and monitor (temperature) of high level disinfectant per IFU. 
3. Attach necessary accessories as needed for endoscope models as described in specific 
manufacturers IFU. Completely immerse endoscope. Flush all channels/ports of 
endoscope with 90mls disinfectant. Cover with lid. 
4. Allow dwell time according HLD IFU. 
5. Flush all channels/ports of endoscope with 90mls of air. 
6. Remove endoscope from disinfectant and immerse in basin of water. Rinse and wipe 
thoroughly. Flush all channels/ports of endoscope with 90mls rinse water   and 
thoroughly dry endoscope with soft, clean, lint-free towel.  2 
a. Flush each port/channel with 90ml 70% isopropyl alcohol followed by 90ml of air 
via syringe. 
b. Prepare endoscope for storage by drying with soft, clean, lint-free towel. 
c. Record in log. 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
 
Standards of Infection Control in Reprocessing of Flexible Gastrointestinal Endoscopes, 
Society of Gastroenterology Nurses and Associates, Inc. (SGNA), 2016 
 
Medivators Advantage Plus Operations Manual 
 
OER-Pro Operation Manual, Olympus Medical Systems Corp, 2012 
 
Evis Exera II, Reprocessing Manual, Olympus Medical Systems Corp, 2009 
 
 