 Policy Reference Number 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Surgical Services  Section: Endoscopy 
Title: Procedure for Flexible scopes used outside 
of Endoscopy Department  
Policy Reference #: SYE007 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 10/26/15 Last Date Reviewed: 09/06/2024 
Last Date Revised: 09/27/2021 
 
PURPOSE:   To establish a consistent process for the retrieval and return of endoscope used outside of 
the endoscopy department and ensuring that all endoscopes are handled appropriately before and after 
use. 
 
PROCEDURE: 
A. RETRIEVAL FROM STORAGE: 
All endoscopes will be labeled with an expiration date of 7 days from the date processed. 
Endoscopes should not be used past the expiration date. Gloves are mandatory when 
removing endoscopes from cabinet. To prevent damages, only one endoscope should be 
handled at any given time. Transport container, lid, and liners will be provided. Only one 
endoscope should be placed in transport container. 
 
B. CHECK OUT: 
ALL endoscopes are to be checked out using an Endoscope Use Form which is located in 
file folder 1 in endoscope storage area. The top portion of form will be filled in 
COMPLETELY. The following must be included: 
1. Patient name if available 
2. Surgeon name  
3. OR/area picking up 
4. Model/serial number 
5. Date/time of pick-up 
6. Name of team member picking-up 
7. Yellow copy of endoscope use form to be left in file folder 2, outside of 
endoscope storage room door. 
 
C. PICK-UP/TRANSPORT: 
Endoscopes will be placed in a bag lined (clear) transport container. Obtain provided 
Intercept bedside kit, Intercept foam with label, A/W channel adapter, buttons, and water-
resistant black cap. Clean endoscopes will be concealed with a green (“CLEAN”) cover. 
Upon return, dirty endoscopes will be concealed with a red (“DIRTY/BIOHAZARD) 
cover to the dirty area of reprocessing room. All transport containers will utilize hard 
plastic lid with patient’s ID label affixed to the blue tape.  
 
D. ENDOSCOPE USE: 
Once the endoscope is used, ALWAYS do the following:  Policy Reference Number 
Page 2 of 2 
1. Utilize the provided Intercept bedside kit and Intercept foam to pre-clean 
the endoscope immediately, following the IFU on packaging. Discard 
sponge, packaging, and liquid contents after use. 
2. Place the endoscope into the lined container. Apply Intercept foam. 
Conceal with red cover. Cover with hard plastic lid. 
3. After placement of the lid, place a patient sticker on the container in the 
designated area 
4. Complete Endoscope Use Form, including MD’s name, time, date, 
individual’s name who applied foam, and patient label 
5. Return the endoscope to ENDOSCOPY deontam room for reprocessing, 
placing the container in the designated dirty area.  
6. Return filled in Endoscope Use Form to file folder 3 which is in decontam 
room. 
 
IMMPORTANT NOTE:  Any endoscope that is not used cannot be returned to the 
cabinet. The removed endoscope is now contaminated and must be reprocessed. Please 
place in ENDO decontam room for reprocessing. 
 
 
E. CHECK IN:  
ALL dirty/removed endoscopes are to be brought back  to ENDO decontam room. Return 
filled in Endoscope Use Form to file folder 3 which is in decontam room. Used 
endoscopes should be pre-cleaned immediately, then encapsulated in Intercept foam per 
IFU. The following MUST return with scope: 
1. Completed Endoscope Use Form, including MD’s name, time, date, 
individual’s name who applied foam, and patient label 
2. If endoscope was not used, please check the NOT USED box on 
Endoscope Use Form. 
3. Black watertight cover (if applicable) 
 
      
 
 
REFERENCE: 
 
Standards of Infection Control in Reprocessing of Flexible Gastrointestinal  
Endoscopes, Society of Gastroenterology Nurses and Associates, Inc. (SGNA), 2016 
 