ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0087 Revision: 7Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Mar 6, 2024Department: CE Service Origination Date:       Title: Equipment Repairs
This is a one-time use copy.  Any copies printed or saved outside of the TRIMEDX Document Control System are uncontrolledBefore using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 1of 3
1.PURPOSE -- SCOPEIt is the policy of TRIMEDX that repairs be completed in accordance with appropriate clinical engineering service methods to ensure that TRIMEDX-serviced equipment will meet performance specifications upon clinical use and to ensure that a Repair Work Order/Work Order Task is managed and documented properly through necessary steps from time it is opened until closed.2.REFERENCE DOCUMENTS2.1. TMX-WI-0025 Repair Work Instructions2.2. TMX-SOP-0034 Potential Incident Investigation2.3. TMX-SOP-0076 Equipment Damage and/or Abuse2.4. QMS-SOP-0010 Non-Conforming Product3.DEFINITIONS3.1.Exception Reporting: the specific procedures performed.3.2.Hard Down: The equipment function status (EFS) for a device that cannot and is not being used for its intended purposes. Examples of a device being in hard down include if it is out of service waiting for a repair (scheduled or unscheduled), a broken device or a device not working due to failure such as a blown power supply or other failure stopping use.3.3.NonconformingNonfulfillment of a specified requirement.3.4.Rework The FDA defines rework as an action taken on a nonconforming product so that it will fulfill the specified Device Master Record requirements before it is released for distribution.  Rework is an obligation of the manufacturer.3.5.Servicing The FDA defines servicing as the repair and/or preventive or routine maintenance of one or more parts in a finished device, after distribution, for purposes of returning it to the safety and performance specifications established by the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) and to meet its original intended use.3.3Soft Down: The equipment function status (EFS) for a device that can be safely used and not taken out of service but has a repair issue.  An example is if a work order is called in for a stretcher with noisy casters and the user wants to keep it in service until the parts arrive.Note: There is no EFS consideration for PMs, so no down time will be considered for PM work3.4Work Order Task The documentation generated detailing work instructions for on site TRIMEDX technicians to complete that addresses device needs such as preventive maintenance, remediation, or disposition.ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0087 Revision: 7Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Mar 6, 2024Department: CE Service Origination Date:       Title: Equipment Repairs
This is a one-time use copy.  Any copies printed or saved outside of the TRIMEDX Document Control System are uncontrolledBefore using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 2of 3
4.ABBREVIATIONS4.1.EFS: Equipment Functional Status4.2.PM: Preventive Maintenance4.3.PO: Purchase Order4.4.SM: Site Manager4.5.WO: Work Order4.6.WOT: Work Order Task5.RESPONSIBILITIES5.1.TRIMEDX Technician5.1.1. Ensure all repair WOTs are documented appropriately.5.2.TRIMEDX Field Operational Leadership5.2.1. Ensure technician has appropriately documented the work and close WOTs in a timely manner.6.PROCEDURE6.1. All work that is completed must be accounted for in the appropriate work order task type. All repair work must have a Repair WOT opened and completed for all work done on the device.6.2.6.3. Technicians should follow TMX-WI-0025 Repair Work Instructions to complete the WOT and ensure all requirements are met.6.4. If a repair WOT remains open for longer than 2 weeks,  a monthly service note is required to show current status of the repair WOT.6.5. All parts and vendor service should be requested through the WOT with a PO.6.6. All equipment being repaired or waiting to be repaired should be appropriately  marked and separated from all other equipment in the Clinical Engineering Shop. See QMS-SOP-0010 Non-Conforming Product6.7. Exception reporting on repairs is not acceptable. All outputs of the work should be documented.6.8. All test equipment used on the equipment should be documented in the Test Equipment Used field.6.8.1. If the CEID of the test equipment cannot be found, document in the Service Notesand contact QRC to review the Model ID Classification.6.9. Service Notes will be professional, to the point, and aligned with labor lines and time entries. Service Notes will have logical progression through the events of the repair with a clear conclusion in the end.ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0087 Revision: 7Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Mar 6, 2024Department: CE Service Origination Date:       Title: Equipment Repairs
This is a one-time use copy.  Any copies printed or saved outside of the TRIMEDX Document Control System are uncontrolledBefore using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 3of 3
6.10. If the repair is marked as a Potential Incident, the repair WOT cannot be closed until the investigation complete checkbox has been marked by Quality and Regulatory Compliance. See TMX-SOP-0034 Potential Incident Investigation 6.11. If Damage occurred to the device,  the Damaged checkbox should be marked with notes of the damage and pictures. See TMX-SOP-0076 Equipment Damage and/or Abuse 6.12. WO should be reviewed and closed in a timely manner.7.QUALITY RECORDS7.1. None8.PROCESS FLOWCHART
RevisionRevision history1-5 See ETQ historical files6 3.1 & 3.2 Definition section update with Service and rework verbiage7 Restore document Purpose. 6.8.1 - Addition of QRC notification for missing test equipment classification.END OF DOCUMENT
