ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0011 Revision: 6Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Oct 25, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Sep 1, 2018Title:Temporary Equipment
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 1 of 5
1.PURPOSE -- SCOPETo define the process for management of temporary equipment through all necessary steps from entry into the facility to removal.It is the policy of TRIMEDX that all equipment managed or serviced by TRIMEDX is accurately inventoried and entered into the CMMS as appropriate.NOTE: TRIMEDX does not endorse nor recommend the use of patient-owned equipment within any medical facility. If local policy dictates its use, patient-owned equipment will be managed in accordance with the policy of each facility.2.REFERENCE DOCUMENTS2.1. TMX-SOP-0090 Performance Verification3.DEFINITIONS3.1.6M:00-INVPM Schedule that should be added to each temporary device with a PM frequency of less frequent than 6 months to ensure that the device is being verified in inventory every 6 months.3.2.Temporary Equipment Equipment brought into the facility and intended for short-term use. Typically, the length of time equipment resides in the facility is not to exceed the duration of one validation cycle of six months. Temporary equipment can be classified as a loaner, rental, patient-owned, or physician-owned.3.2.1.Loaner Medical equipment that is provided under an arrangement based on lending, normally provided by a manufacturer or vendor and typically for short-term use.3.2.2.Rental Medical equipment that is provided under an arrangement based on rent for use and typically for short-term use.3.2.3.Demo Medical equipment that is provided under an arrangement based on trying, testing, or demonstrating, normally provided by a manufacturer or vendor and typically for short-term use.3.2.4.Patient-Owneduse and not owned by the facility. Examples Patient-owned medical equipment such as CPAPs, BiPAPs, and Ventilators, etc. Patient-owned non-medical equipment.4.ABBREVIATIONs4.1.WOT Work Order TaskApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0011 Revision: 6Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Oct 25, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Sep 1, 2018Title:Temporary Equipment
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 2 of 5
5.RESPONSIBILITIES5.1.TRIMEDX Technicians5.1.1. Will perform a visual inspection and an electrical safety inspection (ESI) on identified temporary equipment prior to clinical use:5.1.1.1. In the case of a two-pronged device where an ESI cannot be done, a visual inspection will take place to ensure the physical integrity of the device and the power cord and to confirm it is a double insulated device.5.1.2. Will place the appropriate TRIMEDX label(s) on all temporary equipment in the proper location; (see Performance Verification Policy TMX-SOP-0090)5.1.3. Are responsible for timely, accurate, and appropriate entry and disposition of temporary equipment included in the CMMS;5.1.3.1. Verifies that temporary equipment entered into the CMMS passes the incoming inspection and is appropriately documented.5.1.3.2. Assigns Temporary CEID, and Temporary device status/substatus in the CMMS for temporary equipment5.1.3.3. Submit PM schedule change update to include the 6M:00-INV on CEID as needed.(Required for equipment with PM less frequent than every 6 months.)5.1.4. Locates temporary equipment upon work order task generation or during semi-annual inventory revalidation to determine status/disposition and updates CMMS appropriately5.2.Field Operations Management5.2.1. Will ensure completion of ESI and appropriate labeling on all temporary equipment prior to clinical use. (see Performance Verification Policy TMX-SOP-0090)5.2.2. Responsible for ensuring timely, accurate, and appropriate entry and disposition of temporary equipment included in the CMMS database.5.2.2.1. Provides timely review and approval of all temporary equipment incoming inventory and disposition work orders.5.2.2.2. Verifies that all temporary equipment in CMMS has an appropriate Temporary CEID and Temporary status.5.2.2.3. Verifies that an appropriate Preventative Maintenance (PM) schedule is assigned to all temporary equipment.5.2.2.4. Verifies that a 6 month inventory check is assigned to all temporary equipment with a PM frequency less than every 6 months.5.2.2.5. Assigns and approves appropriate temporary equipment coverage and strategy in CMMS5.2.2.6. Ensures appropriate management, device status change, and/or disposition of temporary equipment from the CMMSApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0011 Revision: 6Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Oct 25, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Sep 1, 2018Title:Temporary Equipment
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 3 of 5
5.3.Quality & Regulatory Compliance Associates5.3.1. Responsible for, through periodic audits, evaluating the compliance to this procedure5.4.Client Services5.4.1. Establishes amendments to reflect any coverage changes for temporary devices, i.e., a change from temporary to hospital-owned6.PROCEDURE6.1. Clinical/Biomedical Engineering is notified of temporary equipment received into the facility for clinical use.6.2.If equipment is patient-owned:Refer to local hospital policy if a local policy exists. If not, use this policy as the primary guide. Perform an electrical safety inspection (ESI) (refer to the acceptable exception noted under TRIMEDX Technicians Responsibilities section above) and tag equipment with TRIMEDX "Approved for Use" label. If hospital policy dictates entry into CMMS database, follow the "All other temporary devices" instructions below. Follow local hospital policy/PPE guidelines to ensure equipment is safe for handling by staff.6.3.If equipment will be in facility for less than 24 hours: Perform a visual inspection and an ESI (unless it is a two-prong device, which warrants visual inspection of the cord to make sure it is double insulated and intact) , tag equipment with TRIMEDX "Approved for Use" label, document and track on a Service Request WOT (see Performance Verification Policy TMX-SOP-0090).6.3.1. The device should be tracked to ensure the device has left within the same day that it arrived. If the device crosses over 24 hours, then the equipment should be added to inventory (see Performance Verification Policy)6.4.All other temporary equipment:Enter into the CMMS database as outlined per TRIMEDX Performance Verification Policy TMX-SOP-0090 with the following variations:6.4.1. Enter the following via the Performance Verification process:6.4.1.1. Affix Temporary Equipment ID Label to the equipment. Enter the equipment ID number as it appears on the label into the CMMS database (i.e., TXXXXXXXX)
ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0011 Revision: 6Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Oct 25, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Sep 1, 2018Title:Temporary Equipment
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 4 of 5
   6.4.1.2.6.4.1.3. Select Substatus as either "Loaner, Rental, Patient-6.4.1.4. Under the Coverage and Strategy TabEnter 'None' under Warranty TypeDelete the dates in Warranty Start Date and Warranty End Date6.4.2. Place TRIMEDX Temporary Device sticker on equipment.6.4.3. If the PM schedule is less frequent than every 6 months, submit a PM schedule change to ensure the PM schedule includes a 6M:00-INV. This will be in addition to the PM schedule assigned to the device when added to the inventory. 6.4.3.1. Example: AEM Schedule is 1Y:00-MFG, then the new PM schedule for this temporary device should be 6M:00-INV, 1Y:00-MFG6.4.3.2. The 6M:00-INV schedule is to ensure the device is still in the facility and the status of the device shall remain temporary.6.5. When PM WOTs generate or when conducting semi-annual inventory revalidation, locate temporary equipment.6.5.1.If equipment is no longer in the facility: Follow TRIMEDX Disposition of Equipment Policy/Process TMX-SOP-0091.6.5.2.If equipment cannot be located or is in use by a patient:Follow TRIMEDX Equipment Could Not Locate (TMX-SOP-0001) or In Patient Use (TMX-SOP-0067) Policy/Process.6.5.3.If equipment ownership is changing to hospital-owned:6.5.3.1. Remove Temporary Equipment ID Label.6.5.3.2. Assign CEID number and Affix Equipment I.D. (CEID) Label.6.5.3.3. Within CMMS equipment record:Update Sub-statusUpdate actual cost Update warranty information.Update customer entitlement6.5.3.4. Ensure appropriate PM is performed and documented, if required.6.5.3.5. Affix completed PM label.
ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0011 Revision: 6Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Oct 25, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Sep 1, 2018Title:Temporary Equipment
This is an uncontrolled document unless viewed online.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 5 of 5
6.5.4.If equipment is not dispositioned and ownership is not changing:6.5.4.1. Ensure PM is performed and documented, if required. Follow TRIMEDX Preventive Maintenance policy (TMX-SOP-0088)7.QUALITY RECORDS8.PROCESS FLOWCHART
RevisionRevision history1-5 See ETQ revision change history6 Clarification throughout document, 6 month inventory requirement applies to temporary equipment with PM frequency less than every 6 months. END OF DOCUMENT
