ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0058 Revision: 8Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Jul 17, 2024Department: CE ServiceTitle: Alternative Equipment Management (AEM)
This is a one-time use copy. Any copies printed or saved outside of the TRIMEDX Document Control System are uncontrolled.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 1 of 4
1.PURPOSE -- SCOPEIt is TRIMEDX procedure that all TRIMEDX-managed clinical equipment must follow an appropriate maintenance program. This policy ensures the maximum function of medical equipment with minimumpatient risk.This procedure outlines the process for determining and documenting the appropriate Equipment Management (EM) Score and Alternative Equipment Maintenance (AEM) Schedule for all descriptions/models in RSQ Database.An AEM Equipment Review will be conducted on TRIMEDX-managed medical equipment by the AEM Committee. The purpose is to determine the risk associated with the items listed below and an appropriate AEM Schedule.Function of EquipmentConsequence of FailureRegulation and Accreditation Standards Manufacturer's Requirements/ RecommendationsIncident, Alert, Recall, Repair History, and Probability of Failure2.REFERENCE DOCUMENTSAEM Equipment Assignment Criteria (attachment)3.DEFINITIONS3.1.Alternative Equipment Maintenance An adjustment to PM frequency for a medical device, not otherwise regulated, based upon data reviewed by qualified field personnel and committee approval3.2.Alternative Equipment Management A program that allows a healthcare facility to adjust its maintenance, inspection, and testing frequency for medical equipment from what is recommended by the manufacturer, based on a risk-based assessment by qualified field personnel3.3.Consequence of Failure Rating (C)Description and corresponding number value assigned based on what would be the potential effect on the patient/operator if the device were to fail to operate as intended3.4.Equipment Management Score (EM)The sum of the Function of Equipment Rating and the Consequence of Failure Rating3.5.Factor Score An additional value added to the EM score based on Regulatory Requirements, Mean Days Between Failure, Industry Standards, or Manufacturer Recommendations3.6.Function of Equipment Rating (F)Description and corresponding number value assigned based on the devices intended purpose3.7.Mean Days Between Failure (MDBF)Describes the expected days between two failures for repairable medical equipment3.8.Occurrence Score Value that demonstrates the probability of failure based on the Mean Days Between Failure calculationApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0058 Revision: 8Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Jul 17, 2024Department: CE ServiceTitle: Alternative Equipment Management (AEM)
This is a one-time use copy. Any copies printed or saved outside of the TRIMEDX Document Control System are uncontrolled.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 2 of 4
3.9.PM Variance TRIMEDX utilizes the PM Variance process to roll out AEM PM Schedule changes that will result in an increased frequency of maintenance to the field3.10.Qualified Field Personnel In the case of medical equipment, a clinical or biomedical technician or engineer with specialized knowledge or training3.11.TRIMEDX AEM CommitteeA committee, comprised of qualified field personnel and other supporting departments, that performs risk-based assessments and establishes the AEM requirements for TRIMEDX and associated partners3.12.TRIMEDX Operations Variance Committee (OVC)A committee comprised of multifunctional TRIMEDX departments that may review the impact of changes affecting the organization4.ABBREVIATIONS4.1.AEM Alternative Equipment Maintenance4.2.CMMS Computerized Maintenance Management System4.3.EM Equipment Management Score4.4.GM General Manager of Operations4.5.MFG Manufacturer4.6.MDBF Mean Days Between Failure4.7.OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer4.8.OVC Operations Variance Committee4.9.PM Preventive Maintenance4.10.QRC Quality & Regulatory Compliance5.RESPONSIBILITIES5.1.Quality & Regulatory Compliance (QRC):5.1.1. Disseminate pertinent information/documentation to selected qualified field personnel5.1.2. Facilitate the AEM Committee Meeting by providing conversation topics and documentingmeeting minutes and decisions based on review.5.1.3. QRC leadership will communicate changes to the Operations Variance Committee (OVC)5.1.4. Communicate changes in the QRC Spotlight and on the Quality & Regulatory Compliance ConXion page5.1.5. Applicable devices will be updated in the CMMS accordingly5.2.Qualified Field Personnel5.2.1. Participate in AEM Committee when requested5.2.2. Complete the AEM Review surveys prior to the meeting5.2.3. Attend AEM Review Committee Meeting5.2.4. Participate in the conversation by sharing qualified knowledge and experience5.2.5. Request re-evaluation of description/model as necessaryApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0058 Revision: 8Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Jul 17, 2024Department: CE ServiceTitle: Alternative Equipment Management (AEM)
This is a one-time use copy. Any copies printed or saved outside of the TRIMEDX Document Control System are uncontrolled.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 3 of 4
5.3.TRIMEDX AEM Committee:5.3.1. Perform an Equipment Review for descriptions/models in the CMMS5.3.2. Review Federal & State Regulations and Accreditation agency standards to ensure compliance is maintained when assigning the AEM Schedule5.3.3. Participate in conversation regarding but not limited to function of equipment, consequence of failure, manufacturer maintenance recommendations, regulatory requirements, alerts/recalls, repairs, and incident history 5.3.4. Use the established criteria to determine the EM Score/ AEM Schedule (Refer to AEM Assignment Criteria)5.3.5. Assign a maintenance program of either MFG or AEM to each description/model6.PROCEDURE6.1.AEM Review Request6.1.1. AEM Review Requests may be initiated by but not limited to:6.1.1.1. Regulatory and/or accreditation standard requirements or changes6.1.1.2. Survey/Inspection finding or feedback6.1.1.3. New description of equipment created6.1.1.4. Communicated concerns from customer, operations, strategic modality, etc...6.1.2. If the description/ model has been accepted for review, QRC will schedule an AEM Committee Meeting6.2.Preparation of AEM Committee Meeting6.2.1. QRC will communicate expectations and tasks to selected qualified field personnel6.2.2. Qualified field personnel shall complete the survey by designated due date, based on relevant experience and knowledge regarding equipment. This can include other qualified staff's input and expertise6.3.AEM Committee Meeting6.3.1. Qualified field personnel shall attend and participate in AEM Review Committee Meeting6.3.2. QRC will commence the meeting and complete the required documentation6.4.Post AEM Review Communication6.4.1. QRC will review proposed changes of PM frequency and communicate the decision to the Operations Variance Committee6.4.2. Operations Variance Committee communicates implementation plan6.4.3. QRC will communicate changes to the field in the QRC Spotlight and on the Quality & Regulatory Compliance ConXion page6.4.4. QRC will update PM scheduled accordinglyApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0058 Revision: 8Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Jul 17, 2024Department: CE ServiceTitle: Alternative Equipment Management (AEM)
This is a one-time use copy. Any copies printed or saved outside of the TRIMEDX Document Control System are uncontrolled.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 4 of 4
7.QUALITY RECORDS7.1. Documentation shall be retained as specified in QMS-SOP-0003 Record Control.8.PROCESS FLOWCHART
RevisionRevision history1-7 See Change management documentation in ETQ8 Major changes to entire document. Alignment of AEM program with Operations Variance Process, incorporation of additional risk indicators, redesign of AEM committee membership/participation. The entire document is considered changed. Changes made to accompanying attachment Alternative Equipment Maintenance Assignment CriteriaEND OF DOCUMENT
