ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0036 Revision: 10Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Oct 25, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Apr 1, 2015Title: PM Schedule Assignment
This is a one-time use copy. Any copies printed or saved outside of the TRIMEDX Document Control System are uncontrolled.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 1 of 3
1.PURPOSE -- SCOPEIt is TRIMEDX policy that all TRIMEDX-managed clinical equipment is set to a compliant and environmentally appropriate PM Schedule. The following should be consulted when setting a PM Schedule:1. Federal, State, and Local regulations and Accreditation Agency standards2. Manufacturer's Requirements and/or Recommendations3. Equipment Management (EM) Score, Alternative Equipment Management (AEM) Schedule, Manufacturer (MFR) Schedule, and Default Maintenance Program (as applicable)4. Customer Preference with appropriate rationale2.REFERENCE DOCUMENTS2.1. Attachment 2: CMMS Database PM Schedule Assignment Algorithm2.2. Attachment 3: Device Maintenance Program Assignment2.3. TMX-SOP-0028 Request for PM Schedule Change3.DEFINITIONS3.1.CMMS Software that centralizes maintenance information and facilitates the processes of maintenance operations.4.ABBREVIATIONS4.1.AEMAlternative Equipment Management4.2.CMMSComputerized Maintenance Management System4.3.MFR- Manufacturer4.4.OEMOriginal Equipment Manufacturer4.5.PMPreventative Maintenance4.6.QRCQuality & Regulatory Compliance Department5.RESPONSIBILITIES5.1.Site Manager5.1.1. Ensure all devices are set to a compliant PM schedule (Refer to Compliance with Applicable Regulations and Accreditation Standards Policy)5.1.2. Guide continuous discussion and manage feedback from the customer to create awareness and understanding regarding PM Schedules5.2.Technicians5.2.1. Notify Manager of increase in repairs, incidents, or concerns regarding a particular model/description5.3.QRC5.3.1. Review/resolve questions presented by TRIMEDX associates regarding PM Schedules.ApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0036 Revision: 10Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Oct 25, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Apr 1, 2015Title: PM Schedule Assignment
This is a one-time use copy. Any copies printed or saved outside of the TRIMEDX Document Control System are uncontrolled.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 2 of 3
5.3.2. Continuously review Federal, State, and Local regulations and Accreditation Agency standards to ensure compliance is maintained when assigning maintenance / PM Schedules.6.PROCEDURE6.1.Device PM Schedule Setting:6.1.1. The Computerized Maintenance Management System (CMMS) sets the device-level PM Schedule6.1.1.1. For Regulated Sites, the device-level PM Schedule will be set based on the developed algorithm specific for regulated states. (Attachment 2: CMMS Database PM Schedule Assignment Algorithm)6.1.1.2. For Non-Regulated Sites, the device-level PM Schedule will be set based on the DefaultMaintenance Program. (Refer to Alternative Equipment Maintenance (AEM) Procedure)6.2.Device Maintenance Program Setting:6.2.1. The CMMS database calculates a DeviceMaintenance Program for each device based on the following: 6.2.1.1. The device's primary and secondary PM Schedule(s)6.2.1.2. The AEM Schedule(s)6.2.1.3. The MFR Schedule(s) 6.2.1.3.1. Refer to Alternative Equipment Maintenance (AEM) Procedure and Attachment 3: Device Maintenance Program Assignment).6.3. It is the site's responsibility to provide manufacturer recommended maintenance information to the QRC for any model in the CMMS database where the MFR Schedule is blank.6.4. It is the site's responsibility to have the manufacturer procedures on sitefor all equipment. 6.4.1. If manufacturer procedures are unavailable, procedures for like-and-kind equipment or industry best practice standards can be used. If no procedures are available, a generic procedure can be developed by qualified personnel (received OEM/third-party or on-the-job training for model or like-and-kind equipment), must be documented, and available upon request.6.5.Site Manager must ensure that all device-level PM Schedules are compliant with applicable Federal, State, and Local regulations and Accreditation Agency standards. (Refer to Compliance with Applicable Regulations and Accreditation Standards Policy)6.5.1. If the PM Schedule needs updated per regulations, Request for PM Schedule Change Policy and Procedure should be followed.7.QUALITY RECORDSApprovedStandard Operating ProcedureDocument #: TMX-SOP-0036 Revision: 10Document Type: TMX Effective Date: Oct 25, 2023Department: CE Service Origination Date: Apr 1, 2015Title: PM Schedule Assignment
This is a one-time use copy. Any copies printed or saved outside of the TRIMEDX Document Control System are uncontrolled.Before using this document, the user must verify that the current version is being used.Copyright © TRIMEDX All information contained herein is confidential and proprietary to TRIMEDX and should not be shared outside of TRIMEDXPage 3 of 3
7.1. Documentation shall be retained as specified in QMS-SOP-0003 Record Control.  8.PROCESS FLOWCHART NoneRevisionRevision history1-9 See ETQ for change history.10 Minor changes to format and grammar, no document content changes. Clarification changes made to Attachments.END OF DOCUMENT