 TR-001 
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Trauma Specialty Program Section: Administrative 
Title: Registration for Trauma Activations Policy Number: TR-001 
Date of Origination: September 9, 2011 Last Date Reviewed: September 5, 2023 
Last Date Revised: September 5, 2023 
 
PURPOSE: 
The purpose of using Trauma Anonymous Naming Template on Level 1 and Level 2 Trauma Activation 
is to have the ability to register the patient upon arrival to expedite care. 
 
GUIDELINES: 
• Level 1 Activations, adult and pediatric from the field: Register as anonymous   
• Transfers Level 1 Activation, adult and pediatric, identified: Register under known identity 
• Level 2 Activations, adult: Register under known identity 
• Level 2 Activations, adult and pediatric unknown identity: Register as anonymous  
• Level 2 Activations, pediatric, parents present on arrival: Register under known identity.    
Otherwise: Register as anonymous  
 
 
Population Activation 
Level 
Identity Register As 
Adult from Field l Known Anonymous  
 l Unknown Anonymous  
    
Adult Transfer l Known self 
 l Unknown Anonymous  
    
Adult from Field ll Known self 
 ll Unknown Anonymous  
    
Pediatric from Field l Known Anonymous  
 l Unknown Anonymous  
    
Pediatric Transfer  l Known self 
 l Unknown Anonymous  
 
    
Pediatric from Field ll Parent present  self 
 ll Without parent Anonymous  
 
  TR-001 
Page 2 of 2 
PROCEDURES: 
 
1. Patient arrives as Level l Adult or Pediatric Trauma Activation or unknown Level 2. 
2. Access clerk activates the medical record according to the anonymous naming template. 
3. For pediatric arrival; if patient is being registered as anonymous, change the date of birth to  
(T-1). Failure to change date of birth on an anonymous pediatric patient will affect the patient’s 
order sets.  
4. Patient will remain registered under the anonymous name for 12 hours from admit, unless patient 
is being discharged to home from the ED, then name is to be changed prior to discharge  or death 
occurs in the ED.  
5. After 12 hours from admission, the receiving unit nurse will communicate with access to confirm 
and update the patient’s identity, if known at that time. 
6. Patient access clerk updates the name in the medical record with confirmed identity –MRN does 
not change. Access clerk will complete a request to merge MRN if patient has previous MRN in 
EPIC. 
7. Patient access clerk generates updated face sheet , stickers and hospital armband  for patient and 
caregiver. 
8. Patient access clerk delivers, or tubes updated face sheet, stickers, and hospital armband to unit. 
9. The armband will be applied by unit clinical team member after completion of 2ID/3ID 
(pediatric) verification.  
10. Clinical team will notify blood bank of patient name change.  Once the name is changed, if blood 
may be ordered, a new type and cross match order must be entered under the new identity. The 
old blood band must only be removed and discarded by blood bank or RN prior to placing new 
blood band on patient.   
 
 
   
 
 
 