ECLS-012  
Page 1 of 2 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: RMC ER Trauma  Section:  
Title: 
Department Code RED Safety and 
Response Plan for RMC ER Trauma 102-
10314-2453 
Policy 
Reference #: ECLS-012  
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: 7/31/18 Review Date:  
Revision Date: 1/25/2024 
 
PURPOSE: 
To ensure the safety of patients, visitors, and team members in the event of a fire or to the conditions 
that indicate the presence of a fire. To prepare staff to appropriately respond to the danger fires present 
by addressing aspects of fire prevention, preparedness, control, and education.  To delineate authority, 
responsibilities, and procedures to follow in the event of a fire. 
 
POLICY: 
In the event of a fire, all staff will follow Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Regional Medical Center’s 
written Code RED Safety and Response Plan to guide and prepare all in the proper response to fires.  
 
Contractors, students, licensed independent practitioners (LIP), and vendors are to follow the instruction 
of unit manager or designee. 
 
Each OLOL department will have their own Department Specific Code RED Safety and Response Plan. 
 
Each location’s Code RED Safety and Response Plan will be used in conjunction with the Emergency 
Operations Plan (ECEP001)) to guide the preparation and response in the event of a fire. 
 
PROCEDURES: 
 
Training Opportunities include: 
a. General Orientation 
b. Department Orientation 
c. Annual In-Services 
d. Fire Drills 
e. Department-Specific Training 
 
Locations of Exits and Fire/Smoke Compartments 
• Illuminated Exit sign in the trauma area above entrance door from the ER hallway. The 2nd sign 
is in the hallway to Peds ER at the trauma bay 3 area. Third illuminated exit sign is at the trauma 
bay 4 sign pointing toward the exit to waiting door with the 4th sign at the exit to waiting door. 
The 5th illuminated exit sign is at the trauma bay 1 room. 
• Adjacent Smoke Compartment(s):  
o Smoke door from trauma bay hallway to Peds er, LN.2.2.4A 
o Smoke door from trauma to ER Pod C ECLS-012  
Page 2 of 2 
 
Specific roles of staff related to Code RED drills or Code RED response 
 
• Charge nurse or designee will clear the hallway of any carts or equipment by returning them to 
the room or area they came from 
• No windows in trauma bay area, doors will be closed by the nurse assigned to that room or 
designee 
• Registration clerks or designee will move visitors to safety explaining, “the hospital is 
conducting an emergency exercise to ensure your safety.”  Any patient in the trauma bay will be 
moved by the nurse assigned to that patient along with the trauma doctor as needed 
• Trauma tech or designee will prevent anyone from using the elevator 
• All available staff will assists those with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and those with 
sensory or mobility disabilities 
• Charge nurse or designee will ensure all employees are accounted for 
• Trauma nurse or designee will make sure all trauma patients are accounted for 
• Trauma tech or designee will ensure that each room is empty and will mark the door/door frame 
with chalk to indicate the room is empty 
 
The location of medical gas shut off valves and who has authority to shut them off 
There is 1 medical gas shut off in each of the 4 trauma bays. Respiratory, plant services, nurse 
manager, or house supervisor are authorized to turn off medical gases 
 
Location and proper use of equipment for transporting patients between Fire/Smoke Compartments  
• No special transport devices needed   
• All patients in this area are automatically placed on a transportable stretcher and will be 
transported by the nurse assigned to that patient 
 
Location and proper use of fire-fighting equipment and manual pull stations. 
• Fire pull on the outside door of trauma bay 4.  Fire extinguisher directly across from the CT 
equipment room 
 
Anything that makes the department unique from a life safety standpoint.  
• Medical gases need to be turned off and Oxygen tanks removed from area 
• All trauma doors can be accessed with an employee badge 
 
The location of the horizontal and vertical evacuation routes and destinations. 
• Primary exit route is horizontal with the employees, patients and visitors departing through the 
exit to waiting door between trauma 2 and trauma 3 and directly out the ambulance door to the 
ER parking lot 
• The secondary route is horizontal through the doors to the ER hallway, turning to the left, 
through the waiting room and directly out the door to the ER parking lot 
• Only horizontal routes from the trauma area (being that this is on the 2nd floor, there may be 
vertical evacuations) 