 
 
Update 12/2024 EL/CA/TL 
 
Part 1:  
A. PURPOSE: 
USP General Chapter <800> Hazardous Drugs – Handling in Healthcare Settings describes best practices 
healthcare facilities may implement to reduce the overall risk of exposure of hazardous drug residues to 
team members.  Hazardous drug residues may be found throughout an entity where hazardous drugs are 
received, stored, handled, administered, or disposed.   
This SOP will be used to describe appropriate safe work practices implemented during the preparation, 
administration, and disposal of hazardous drugs.  By utilizing the steps outlined below, team members 
will reduce their overall risk of exposure to themselves as well as further spreading HD residues 
throughout the organization.   
All team members administering high risk hazardous drugs will be educated on this SOP.  A copy of this 
SOP will be made available for all applicable team members.   
Hazardous signs to be placed where high risk HDs are administered.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Update 12/2024 EL/CA/TL 
 
B. PROCEDURE:  
                Receipt and Delivery: 
1. Hazardous drug will be received double bagged from pharmacy and delivered to the blue 
bins in the medication room. 
2. Nurses receive drugs from medication bins in Medication Room wearing 1 pair of chemo 
rated gloves.  
 
3. Nurses transport drugs directly to the IV pole of the patient who will be receiving the 
drugs. Do not remove hazardous drugs from the double bag until PPE is donned and 
the patient is ready for infusion. 
 
 
 
Update 12/2024 EL/CA/TL 
 
4. Once drugs have been transported to the patient’s IV pole, remove gloves and wash 
hands.  
 
 
Administration: 
1. Nurses attach closed system male luer to the end of all primary lines of which hazardous 
drug will be administered. (Device is dependent on company product) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Update 12/2024 EL/CA/TL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Don PPE - gown and 2 pair of gloves (1st glove under cuff and 2nd glove over cuff). 
Disposable gloves should not be used more than once. (Color may differ; currently utilize 
pink for IV/SQ/IM administration).   
 
Update 12/2024 EL/CA/TL 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Donned nurse removes HD from bag and hangs on IV pole when it is time to prepare for 
administration. 
 
 
Update 12/2024 EL/CA/TL 
 
 
4. Donned nurse attaches tubing to patient's venous devise making sure all clamps on 
tubing remain closed so there is no free flow on chemo.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Update 12/2024 EL/CA/TL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Donned nurse removes outer glove (dispose of in chemo Ziplock bag) and threads tubing 
through pump channel and open clamps using only the first layered glove.  
 
6. 2nd nurse scans the patient, scans the medication med label, scans the pump and 
provides dual sign. 
7. PPE nurse programs pump.  
 
 
Update 12/2024 EL/CA/TL 
 
8. PPE nurse removes (doffs) remaining PPE by removing then the gown inside out, and 
then the last pair of gloves and disposes of PPE in a yellow bin. 
 
 
 
 
9. Wash hands  
 
Completion: 
1. All IV lines should be flushed with a minimum of 20 ml of compatible primary fluid 
administered at the same rate as the last drug administered.  
2. Don PPE - gown and 2 pair of gloves (1st glove under cuff and 2nd glove over cuff) 
3. Disconnect primary line from patient and take down all IV lines without breaking the 
closed system. 
4. Place all IV contents of closed system in bag and dispose of it in a yellow bin. 
5. Transport linens used by patient to linen hamper which contains a yellow bag. 
 
 
Update 12/2024 EL/CA/TL 
 
 
6. Clean pod according to wet time guidelines with purple Cavi wipes unless orange Cavi 
wipes are indicated. Orange cavi wipes will deactivate chemotherapy if Peridox is 
unavailable.  
 
 
7. Remove (doff) PPE by removing outer loves first, then the gown inside out, then the last 
pair of gloves, and dispose of PPE in a yellow bin.  
8. Wash hands. 
9. Apply Clean tag to IV pole.  
 
 
Update 12/2024 EL/CA/TL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Handling of Body Fluids: 
1. All body fluids excreted by a patient receiving hazardous drug should be handled 
wearing donned PPE - gown and 2 pair of gloves (1st glove under cuff and 2nd glove over 
cuff). 
2. After handling body fluids excreted by a patient receiving hazardous drugs, nurse 
removes (doff) PPE by removing outer loves first, then the gown inside out, and then the 
last pair of gloves and dispose of PPE in a yellow bin. 
3. Wash hands.  
 
 
 
 
 
Update 12/2024 EL/CA/TL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 2: 
USP 800 
• U.S. Pharmacopeia Convention (USP) 
• Sets standards of handling hazardous drugs 
 
USP 800-Spill Process 
 
• SRT team for large spills (when needing to utilize more than one spill kit or the spill is out of control). 
Overhead page ‘Spill Response Team’  
o Outpatient: 
▪ Charge nurse and nurse will respond. Pharmacy will be notified where pharmacy is 
present (not all outpatient locations have a pharmacy).  
o Inpatient:  
▪ Call 5-1776 and notify operator to call a SRT plus location. 
• Only activate on HIGH RISK HD SPILLS that cannot be contained with more than 
one spill kit. 
• If spill occurs on another unit, notify Inpatient Oncology first 
▪ Consist of: 
• The person who found the spill 
• Unit supervisor/designee 
• Team member from pharmacy- will bring Peridox and PPE  
• Team member from EVS- will conduct a clean after the spill has been cleaned. 
Will assist in removal as needed. 
• All patients going home on infusions will receive a spill kit 
• Bleach and peroxide base will deactivate. Peroxide based solutions will be brought from pharmacy when 
SRT is called on an inpatient unit.  
• Follow spill kit instructions if spill occurs. Spill kit located in central supply area on unit.  
• Spill kit will follow chemotherapy during patient transport 
• Urinate on floor or spill urine container should be treated as a chemo spill (do NOT call SRT) 
  
 
Update 12/2024 EL/CA/TL 
 
USP 800 - Signs 
• High Risk (IV infusions-ONLY) 
o Chemotherapy sign posted to the patients door. Bathroom sign posted above toilet in the 
bathroom.  
o For locations other than oncology units a chemotherapy cart will be ordered from central 
 
USP 800- Algorithm  
• Drugs will be labeled on the MAR and in the Pyxis and then you follow algorithm on which PPE you should 
wear before administer drug. 
• High Risk Drugs 
o Group 1 Drugs (Antineoplastics) 
o Signage on door and in bathroom 
o Blue pad over the toilet 
o Traveling Group 1 medication (HIGH RISK HD) 
▪ Pharmacy tech brings the medication to the unit with gloves donned. Medication will be 
brought up in a specific container designed only for Group 1 medication as well as a 
Chemotherapy Spill Kit 
▪ The medication is given to a nurse and/or placed into a bin designed only for Group 1 
medication 
▪ Pharmacy tech will have nurse sign book once delivered to unit 
 
• Low Risk Drugs 
o Group 2 and 3 Drugs 
o Will notify staff per MAR/Packaging/flowsheet on administration and PPE   
• Chemo cart and eye wash station will be brought to non-oncology INPATIENT units 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Update 12/2024 EL/CA/TL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAR VIEW 
 
PYXIS VIEW 
 
 
 
 
Update 12/2024 EL/CA/TL 
 
 
*** Purple gloves are chemo gloves. Pink ones are used for IV infusion 
*** Utilized hazardous drug sing for Group 1/high risk drugs 
*** Locate Safety Data Sheets (SDS):  
TeamLink→ Applications→ SDS 
 
 
