Page 1 of 12 
OUR LADY OF THE LAKE REGIONAL MEDICAL CENTER 
Policy Manual: Perioperative Services Section: Administration / 
Operational 
Title: Vendor Access Policy – Surgical Services Policy Reference #: VEN108 
Supersedes #:  
Date of Origination: June 25, 2012 Last Review Date: 02/11/2025 
Last Revision Date: 2/1/2022 
 
PURPOSE 
 
The purpose of this policy is to establish a uniform protocol for the interaction between Surgical 
Services staff and Vendor Representatives representing new equipment and supplies, and to establish 
guidelines which govern the activity of Vendor Representatives in the Surgical Services Division patient 
care areas. 
 
POLICY 
 
Our Lady of the Lake (OLOL) Surgical Services Division uses a Single Point of Entry (SPE) process 
that structures the pre-acquisition phase of new equipment, products, and standardization projects 
through a value analysis review.  “Single Point of Entry” means there is only one supported method for 
new equipment or products to be evaluated / trialed, acquired, and/or implemented in any Surgical 
Services department.  The purpose of the SPE policy is to promote patient safety, increase effective 
communication and timeliness of processing requests and reduce variation of equipment and products 
through the Surgical Services Division. 
 
The role of the Vendor Representative is to provide essential clinical and/or technical training related to 
surgical devices for patient care.  As the Surgical Services Division offers access to surgical areas, as 
such, access is considered a privilege and therefore contingent on the Vendor Representative’s 
compliance with the Surgical Services Division guidelines.   
 
PROCEDURES 
 
Vendor Certification: 
 
1. All vendors entering the Surgical Services Division departments must be credentialed through and 
maintain compliance with the Hospital Vendor Credentialing System. All appropriate clearance in 
relation to training/competency assessment, immunizations, and administrative credentialing is 
warranted by the Vendor Credentialing System.  
 
• Operating Room Protocol Training: Acceptable documentation includes: (1) 
Letters/certificates from employer stating completion of OR Protocol training including 
dates, or (2) Training certificates from Health Stream, Med Com or other accredited training 
courses.  
• Product Training: Acceptable documentation includes letters/certificates from employer 
stating completion of product training with completion dates for the product/ service 
represented in the participating hospital. Page 2 of 12 
2. Changes in Employment / Product Line: It is the responsibility of the Vendor Representative to 
notify OLOL / Franciscan Missionaries of Our Lady Health System (FMOLHS) Materials 
Management of any changes in employment status or representation in product line. A new Vendor 
Representative profile must be completed any time employment status changes. Failure to do so may 
result in the inability of the Vendor Representative to conduct business within OLOL. 
 
Vendor Visitation and Expected Behavior: 
  
1. Prior to visiting any Surgical Service Division department, Vendor Representatives must sign in 
through the Vendor Kiosk and sign out when exiting the facility. Failure to log in or out will 
jeopardize further business with the hospital.  
 
2. Badges and Attire.  All Vendor Representatives will wear a hospital issued identification badge 
visible at all times within the hospital and Surgical Services Division departments and must comply 
with OLOL Surgical Area dress code standards while in the Surgical Services area.  
 
3. If the Vendor Representative is acting as an independent contractor operating patient care 
equipment, adjusting devices, or otherwise providing direct patient care services he/she must have an 
independent contractor agreement executed and on file with FMOLHS Materials Management. 
 
4. Vendor Representative visitation will be limited in the OR area and only permitted during a surgical 
procedure when requested by the Surgeon and / or approved by the surgical service Nurse Manager / 
Supervisor / designee to provide training/education to the OR Staff.   
 
5. The Vendor Representative should notify the appropriate surgical service Nurse Manager or 
Supervisor / designee of a Surgeon’s request for his/her presence in the OR in advance of the case.  
If the product, equipment or service requested by the Surgeon for utilization in the case is a new 
product, the vendor must adhere to the new product process for introducing new products or 
equipment to the OR.   
 
6. Vendor Representatives will not distribute equipment, implants, devices or products in any Surgical 
Services department without authorization.  OLOL Surgical Services Division is under no obligation 
to pay for equipment, implants, devices or products delivered without prior approval and a valid 
OLOL / FMOLHS purchase order (PO) number. 
 
7. Prior to use in any surgical procedure, any loaner / trial equipment brought in by a Vendor 
Representative must be transported by the Vendor to the OLOL Bio Medical Department for safety 
evaluation.  The Vendor Representative must allow adequate time before the procedure for the safety 
check and set up time in the OR.  Once the equipment leaves OLOL, it must be re-evaluated upon 
return.  
 
8. All biological products requested by a Surgeon for utilization in a case will comply with FDA 
requirements.  (See Biological Policy # VEN107)  
 
9. Medical equipment, instrumentation and supply products may not be removed from the OLOL 
premises without the notification and written approval of Materials Management. Page 3 of 12 
10. Upon arrival to O.R., the Vendor Representative must check in with the OR control desk staff and 
identify self, the Surgeon and case to attend. 
 
11. In consideration of patient privacy and compliance with AORN & infection control standards, only 
the Vendor Representative who is providing assistance/education or training will be permitted in a 
case.  A Vendor Representative who is only an observer will not be permitted in the OR.  
 
12. The Vendor Representative is not permitted in the OR until the patient is prepped and draped or at 
the appropriate time in the procedure.  
 
13. Once the Vendor Representative enters the operating room he/she must remain until the completion 
of the procedure or until released by the surgeon.  Traffic should be minimized and all Vendor 
Representatives must refrain from using OR telephones or cell phones in the surgical area. 
 
14. The Vendor Representative may not scrub in the procedure or open sterile items directly to the 
surgical field. 
 
15. Documentation of a Vendor Representative’s presence during the procedure, with the exact in and 
out time, must be included in the permanent medical record.  
 
16. The Operating Room or Suite is not an arena for “sale of product”. 
 
17. Vendor Representatives may only discuss the attributes and specifications of the equipment or 
product(s) representing with clinical staff. Any request to deliver or ship any product or equipment 
to OLOL shall be directed through the Surgical Materials Management department. 
 
18. Vendor Representatives will not solicit procedure or patient volumes or competitive cost information 
from OLOL staff unless the information is provided in conjunction with a contractually established 
consulting project. 
 
19. Conversely, OLOL staff may not provide or share surgeon or operating room schedules, volumes, or 
pricing with any Vendor Representatives. 
 
20. Vendor Representatives are not permitted to lounge or wait in the physician or staff lounges.  If the 
Vendor Representative is not required to be in the OR but the Surgeon or staff has asked him/her to 
be available, the Vendor Representative should leave a contact number and wait outside of the 
operating room suite.  
 
21. Conflict of Interest. To reinforce OLOL’s commitment to upholding the highest possible ethical 
standards and to foster greater transparency, OLOL has implemented a Conflict of Interest Policy # 
OrgOps/ET/002.  Conflict of Interest involves a situation in which staff, Vendor Representative or 
surgeons have financial or other personal considerations that may compromise, or have the 
appearance of compromising professional judgment or integrity in clinical care.  If a Conflict of 
Interest exists, the Vendor Representative may not be allowed to conduct business at OLOL. 
 
22. The Surgical Services Division reserves the right to restrict access, at any time, to a Vendor 
Representative for any suspicious, inappropriate behavior or misconduct.  Page 4 of 12 
Surgical Area Dress Code: 
 
1. OLOL scrub clothes may not be worn to and from or taken outside of the hospital. 
 
2. A short sleeve T-shirt may be worn under the scrub shirt. Turtle neck shirts are not allowed under 
scrub shirts. 
 
3. All persons who enter the semi-restricted and restricted areas of the surgical suite will change into 
freshly laundered surgical attire provided by OLOL. 
 
4. Scrub clothes should be changed whenever they become visibly soiled or wet. 
 
5. In the semi and restricted area the attire is scrub suit and a long sleeve warm up jacket.  
 
6. Socks or hose are worn with shoes. Sandals and bare feet are not allowed. 
 
7. Red bouffant hats must be worn (if available) ensuring all hair is covered. 
 
8. Hoods will be worn for a beard or sideburns. 
 
9. Cloth hats are not permitted.   
 
10. Shoe covers are required only in cases when exposure to blood or potentially infectious materials is 
reasonably anticipated. The shoe covers must be removed prior to leaving the OR.  
 
11. All persons entering the restricted area of the surgical suite will wear a mask, e.g., in the core areas 
and the operating room, whenever sterile supplies or instruments are open. 
 
12. The mask will cover both mouth and nose and be secured in a manner that prevents venting. 
 
13. Once the patient has departed the operating room, the mask may be removed; however, during room 
clean up masks should be worn if there is a risk for a splash to the face. 
 
14. Masks will be discarded when soiled or when staff leaves the Operating Room area. Masks should 
be handled by the ties only when removing. 
 
15. Jewelry (watches, bracelets and neck chains) will be totally confined within the scrub attire or 
removed. 
 
16. Earrings should be small and covered by the surgical hat or removed. 
 
17. Nail polish and artificial nails may not be worn.  
 
18. Strong scented products (colognes and perfumes) should not be worn. 
 
19. Depending on the risk of exposure Personal Protective Equipment (gloves and/or eye ware) is 
available. Page 5 of 12 
 
20. Hands should be cleaned with waterless antimicrobial solution when entering and leaving the OR. 
21. All scrub attire provided to a Vendor Representative is the property of OLOL.  After use, scrub attire 
must be placed in the appropriate receptacle designated for these soiled garments and should 
NEVER be removed from the facility. 
 
Introduction of New Equipment, Implants, Devices and/or Products: 
 
1. Products, devices, equipment and technology will not be purchased without evaluation through a 
value analysis review process, which includes committee review/approval process (e.g., OR Supply 
Committee, OR-MEC Supply Committee).   
 
2. All new equipment and/or products must be introduced to the Surgical Services Division through 
this process for review and approved prior to the beginning of an evaluation period or utilization of 
any product or equipment.  Only products, devices, and equipment that have been approved by the 
OR Supply Committee may be purchased by OLOL Surgical Services Department.  
 
3. Vendor representatives may not introduce any new supplies or equipment for utilization or 
evaluation in any OLOL Surgical Services area prior to review and approval by the OR Supply 
Committee.   
 
• Product samples may not be left by Vendor Representative in any inpatient or outpatient 
clinical area, and may not be evaluated for patient use without being submitted for review 
and approved.   
 
• Any equipment and/or product(s) utilized without prior authorization will be considered a 
donation, the patient will not be charged for the item(s), the vendor will not be paid for 
the product(s), and the Vendor Representative will be subject to disciplinary action.  
  
• Approvals for use retrospectively will not be granted. 
 
4. New product or equipment requests will only be accepted on behalf of members of the Surgical 
Division Medical Staff. No new product request will be accepted / processed on direct behalf of a 
Vendor Representative.   
 
• If a surgeon would like to use or evaluate new product(s), equipment or technology, a 
new product request must be submitted to the Nurse Manager / Supervisor of the surgical 
service to initiate the new product review process.  
   
• Any Vendor Representative solicited by a member of the Surgical Division Medical Staff 
requesting the purchase or evaluation of a product, service or equipment must obtain 
prior authorization before the demonstration / evaluation or use of the Vendor 
Representative’s product(s), service(s) or equipment. 
 
• Individual physicians are not authorized to enter OLOL into any binding financial 
commitment(s), approve any purchase(s) or product evaluations or trials on its behalf.  In 
the absence of a valid purchase order, the vendor will not be paid. Page 6 of 12 
 
 
• FMOLHS Materials Management is the only agent authorized by OLOL to approve 
pricing or a contract with a vendor or Vendor Representative.  All contracts, price 
agreements, lease/rental agreements, service agreements or product evaluation 
agreements must be reviewed and approved by FMOLHS Materials Management. 
 
• Contracts and agreements negotiated with a representative of the Hospital without 
authorization by Materials Management will not be honored.  Any product(s) left by a 
Vendor Representative under an arrangement without prior approval by OR Supply 
Committee are considered donations, and no further obligation will be assumed by 
FMOLHS or any of its facilities or departments. 
 
5. The surgical service Nurse Manager / Supervisor assumes New Product request ownership for the 
item and follows the New Product request process for approval through the OR Supply Committee.  
The OR Nurse Manager / Supervisor / or requesting Physician will complete a NEW PRODUCT 
REQUEST FORM.   
 
• The Vendor Representative will be asked to complete the vendor section of the form to 
provide all pertinent information about the product including cost, billing codes and 
expected reimbursement, product effectiveness, previous trial results and scientific 
evidence.  
 
• Should any faculty, physician or staff member practicing or working at OLOL/FMOLHS 
have any financial or other interest in the equipment, product, and/or service being 
evaluated, the Vendor Representative must disclose the specific relationship to Materials 
Management and on the NEW PRODUCT REQUEST FORM during the initial request 
for evaluation of product.  Failure to disclose such relationships will result in sanctions 
determined by OLOL. 
 
• All equipment, implants, devices and products must be FDA approved.  The Vendor 
Representative is responsible for clearly identifying non-FDA approved items. 
 
i. Non-FDA approved items must be reviewed by the OLOL Internal Review Board 
(IRB).  Before use, the Vendor Representative must contact the surgical service 
Nurse Manager / Supervisor to initiate IRB review.  
 
6. The completed NEW PRODUCT REQUEST FORM will be forwarded to the OLOL OR Supply 
Committee for review.   
 
7. If a product is approved for evaluation, the Vendor Representative will be notified to execute a New 
Product, Equipment and Tissue Trial Agreement (Appendix B) which must be finalized prior to 
delivering any loaned equipment or products to OLOL Surgical Services areas.   
 
• The specifics of the trial agreement will include detailed items such as service(s) / 
physician(s) determined to be included in evaluation of product or equipment, anticipated 
duration and number of product samples necessary for evaluation / trial.  Page 7 of 12 
 
• Vendor Representatives are responsible for providing, at the vendor’s expense, an 
adequate quantity of product / samples to conduct the evaluation free of charge. 
• Product samples are not to be distributed by Vendor Representative directly to 
departments for use on a patient.   
 
• Prior to entering the Hospital, any equipment or products provided to Surgical Services 
for evaluation or trial purposes must be itemized on a ‘no-charge’ purchase order 
arranged through the Surgical Materials department. 
 
• Materials Management will not issue a purchase order for any sample product or 
equipment for use in an evaluation unless approved prior to evaluation.     
 
8. Vendor Representative is required to provide Sterile Processing Department with Inventory and 
control sheets (when applicable) and OR personnel with Surgery Proof of Delivery Requisition.  
 
9. Vendor Representatives will be required to provide education, training and demonstrations on initial 
product use for all personnel using a new product or technology prior to the evaluation period.  
Vendor Representatives will provide training competencies for OLOL staff. 
 
• It is required that Vendor Representatives are credentialed (See Vendor Access Policy # 
OrgOps/GN/033) by their employers to be able to train medical staff on the specified 
products’ use. This requires a statement or certificate from their employer. 
 
• Vendor Representatives will be required to provide education/demonstrations on several 
occasions depending on the number of individuals involved in the trial, the level of detail 
in the training, and during implementation of product use. 
 
10. Vendor Representatives may be asked to be present or available in the department during all or the 
first few trials to facilitate safe and effective patient care. 
 
11. Results of the evaluation may be shared with the Vendor Representative at the conclusion of the trial 
period. 
 
12. If a product has patient safety concerns or problems have been identified the Vendor Representative 
will be contacted immediately; however, the used product will not be released to the Vendor 
Representative. 
 
13. At the conclusion of the product or equipment evaluation / trial, a summary of the evaluation will be 
completed and reported to the OLOL OR Supply Committee.  
 
14. The OLOL OR Supply Committee will evaluate the Trial Summary, determine cost/benefit analysis 
and form recommendation(s). 
 
• Negative Outcome – Stop new product process. Communication to vendor and physician 
product denied.  Information kept on file for 1 year (no other request for trial on product 
within 1 year unless determined by OLOL otherwise). Page 8 of 12 
 
• Positive Outcome – Completion of new product process. 
 
15. Any new product or equipment evaluation / trial initiated independent of this process is prohibited.  
A Vendor Representative determined to be participating in an evaluation / trial outside of this 
process is subject to reprimand and/or dismissal from the facility. 
 
Invoicing and Payment of Non-Stock Items “Walked-In” by the Vendor: 
 
1. Vendor Representatives must register with the Vendor Credentialing System in order to perform 
business with OLOL.  
 
2. Devices or products furnished by the Vendor Representative shall have current (as applicable) FDA 
approval, be within the expiration date of the manufacturer and shall be in a clean, sterile (as 
applicable) and unopened condition at the time it is brought into the hospital. 
 
3. Any non-stock item (e.g., implantable, patient chargeable items or billable services) “walked-in” by 
a Vendor Representative on the day of the surgical procedure must have prior approval for use.  If 
the product, service or equipment has no prior approval and does not have proper documentation, the 
Hospital reserves the right to refuse responsibility for service, equipment or supplies left without 
prior approval.  If accepted, such service or merchandise would be considered a donation to the 
Hospital and any related invoice will not be processed for payment.   
 
4. OLOL is a member of the FMOLHS which utilizes a centralized purchasing function, therefore the 
FMOLHS Purchasing Department is the only agent authorized to issue purchase orders. FMOLHS 
Purchasing Department provides final review and execution of purchase orders committing the 
Hospital to purchase goods, services and equipment.   
 
Vendor Case Invoicing Protocol: 
 
a) Special order or non-stock implant or product, services or equipment (Bill Only) purchase 
requests, known as the Proof of Delivery (POD) Surgery Requisitions, should be completed by 
the Vendor Representative at the end of the case.  The completed POD must accurately 
document the implantable, patient chargeable items or billable services and equipment utilized 
per case and include the patient label, date of service, manufacturer item number(s), complete 
product description, quantities used / wasted,  reason item wasted when applicable and correct 
pricing. 
 
b) The circulating nurse will validate the POD Surgery Requisition by comparing what was 
documented on the implant record and confirm vendor supplied items utilized/wasted on the 
case.  If there are no discrepancies, the circulating nurse will sign the vendor POD Requisition 
verifying such for the Vendor Representative to submit for requisition of “Bill only” purchase 
order.  If the vendor POD Requisition does not match what is documented on the implant record 
or supply item utilized per case, the circulating nurse and Vendor Representative should review 
and resolve any discrepancies prior to submission for payment processing.   
 Page 9 of 12 
c) Vendor Representatives must submit Proof of Delivery (POD) Surgery Requisition(s) within 24-
hours of the surgical / procedural case or the next business day.  NOTE: Failure to provide this 
information with the appropriate verification sign-off or within the allotted time frame will result 
in non-payment of invoices and be considered a donation.  Additions to billing information are 
not allowed after the 24-hour time span.  
 
d) Authorization for payment will be based on the following criteria: 1) receipt of POD Surgery 
Requisition within 24-hours of case or the next business day, 2) quote on a negotiated price, and 
3) approval by the OLOL OR Supply Committee or 4) one-time use approval by Surgical 
Services Administration.  If an item fails to meet any of these criteria, the POD Surgery 
Requisition will be submitted to the OR Administrator for a second review. Any item(s) deemed 
unauthorized after the second review, will be entered into non-payment status and will not be 
paid. 
 
e) Vendor invoices that do not match an OLOL purchase order line-for-line will be rejected by the 
OLOL / FMOLHS accounts payable system and may be vigorously disputed. 
 
5. Two locked mailboxes are provided for easy invoice drop-offs. One mailbox is located at the Tower 
OR desk and the other box is located across the hallway from the Main Materials Warehouse 
entrance at the back entrance to Surgical Materials.  Effective August 1, 2012, all Proof of Delivery 
(POD) Surgery Requisitions must be scanned or faxed to (225) 765-9227.  
 
 
Loaners, Instruments and Implants brought in for Surgery - Sterile Processing Department (SPD) 
Protocol: 
 
1. All instrument and implant sets must be approved prior to utilization at OLOL.  Any new instrument 
and implant set to be considered for utilization at OLOL must be submitted for review and granted 
approval by the OR Supply Committee.  All new instrument and implant sets are not allowed in SPD 
for processing or utilization until such approval has been granted. 
 
2. All loaner instruments or implant sets, instruments / implants not owned by or stored in facility, must 
be received, inspected, recorded, decontaminated, and sterilized in SPD. Loaner instruments will not 
be accepted by SPD without the manufacturers’ tray content lists and FDA-cleared manufacturers’ 
written instructions for disassembly, cleaning, packaging, and sterilization methods and cycles 
(pictures must be provided and on file within the department for each tray/set). Any deviation in this 
policy may result in immediate termination of relationship with responsible Vendor Representatives. 
All items are considered “non-sterile” anytime instrumentation is provided as a loaner from any 
company and/or it’s Vendor Representative. 
 
3. Vendor Representatives must provide educational in-service to SPD staff for any tray(s) that are 
brought in as a loaner at a minimum of 48 hours prior to scheduled case. This includes, but is not 
limited to, decontamination, inspection, assembling, packaging, sterilization, handling, and any other 
information that is needed for proper processing of the instrumentation.  
 
4. All instrumentation sets will require an inventory sheet to be logged into the Surgical Instrument 
Tracking and Management System and control sheet.  This is required prior to any approved new Page 10 of 12 
set(s) being processed for service.   The inventory sheet must indicate total instrument and implant 
count.   
 
The control sheets must include the following: 
 
a. Surgeon 
b. Date/Time of Surgery 
c. Scheduled Procedure 
d. Name of each set and how it is to be labeled 
 
Note:  SPD must receive complete inventory sheets on all vendor sets processed at OLOL 
within 30 days of the effective date of this policy.  Failure to provide an inventory sheet 
within this timeline will result in the hospital assuming no responsibility for lost instruments 
and the set(s) will be removed from service and not allowed to be processed until complete 
information is received.   
 
5. All vendor instrument and/or implant sets must weigh 25 pounds or less (ANSI/AAMI ST79:2006).  
If a set contains multiple layers and the set weighs more than stated amount, the Vendor 
Representative is responsible for breaking down the set to meet the weight requirement.   
 
6. Vendor Representatives must check-in and check-out all loaner instruments or implant sets in the 
Surgical Instrument Tracking and Management System at every occurrence that the set is transported 
into and removed from the hospital.  
7. All implants and instrumentation must be delivered 48 hours prior to the scheduled procedure.  All 
instruments/implants must be terminally cleaned and terminally sterilized prior to use in the OR.  
Timely arrival allows for adequate processing, cooling and biological result identification (if 
applicable) prior to release. 
 
8. Late Deliveries:  Instrumentation that is unable to be delivered by Vendor Representatives within 
the above SPD time frame must be communicated to the OR and SPD management/designee. 
 
a. The following departments shall be notified of any late deliveries: 
OR:  Main OR (225) 765-8830 or Tower OR (225) 765-8888 
SPD: Main SPD (225) 765-8318 or Tower SPD (225) 765-7645 
 
 
b. The following information shall be communicated:  
i. Time of delivery 
ii. Date/Time of surgery 
iii. Scheduled procedure 
iv. Type and number of sets (Instruments vs. Implants) 
v. Vendor Representative name and contact number 
 
9. SPD will not receive items by courier or freight delivery.  Vendor Representatives must deliver the 
instrument sets to validate surgeon, surgery date, surgical procedure, instrumentation/implant sets 
and provide inventory sheet or complete control sheet. 
 Page 11 of 12 
10. Vendor packing material and shipping cartons will not be received in SPD.  Such vendor material is 
not allowed in SPD. 
 
11. Instrumentation Guidelines: 
 
a. All instrumentation will be cleaned and processed according to manufacturer 
recommendations. 
 
b. The Vendor Representative assures there is an adequate amount of instrument sets to 
provide terminal sterilization for all sets and avoid use of flash sterilization. 
 
c. The Vendor Representative will be responsible for routine replacement due to dullness 
and wear & tear of instruments. 
 
d. Instruments will be inventoried upon arrival by both the Vendor Representative and SPD 
staff against the vendor’s inventory sheet. 
 
e. Instrumentation must be decontaminated prior to use at OLOL regardless of method of 
transport. 
 
f. When sets are to be used in a case, it is recommended that the Vendor Representative be 
present. 
g. Once the surgical procedure is complete, loaned instruments will be returned to SPD via 
the dirty elevator. 
 
h. Before any instruments leave OLOL, all instruments will be decontaminated following 
the same process that is required prior to use. 
 
i. The Vendor Representative must inventory the set along with SPD staff prior to leaving 
the set or OLOL will not accept responsibility for the set of instruments. 
 
j. If the inventory of items upon completion of the case does not match the count prior the 
OR and SPD manager must be notified immediately. 
 
k. No OLOL owned set may be removed from Hospital property without prior approval 
from Surgical Services Administration. 
 
Disciplinary Action: 
 
1. Activities granted to Vendor Representatives are privileges that have been extended by OLOL / 
FMOLHS.  Surgical Services in conjunction with Materials Management is responsible for 
enforcing this procedure. 
 
2. Disciplinary action for infractions will be taken by following the three steps listed below. 
 
a. 1st infraction – A meeting will be scheduled with the Vendor Representative to discuss 
his / her infraction. Page 12 of 12 
b. 2nd infraction – All privileges of the Vendor Representative will be suspended for a 
period of 30 days.  A letter will also be sent to the Vendor Representative’s immediate 
supervisor and reference any previous violations leading up to the suspension. 
c. 3rd infraction – All privileges will be suspended and OLOL / FMOLHS will demand a 
new Vendor Representative. 
 
3. At the discretion of OLOL, the three-step process may be accelerated at any time.  If any 
disciplinary action is taken, at every step the Vendor Representative and his / her immediate 
supervisor will receive a written report stating the details of the infraction and the disciplinary action 
taken.  This information will remain on file in the Vendor Representative’s credentialing file. 
 
 
 
 
 