Our Lady of the Lake - ED Scripting for Consent Forms 
All phrases in quotes are to be stated exactly as written 
 
 
O L O L  R M C  P a t i e n t  A c c e s s  E D  S c r i p t i n g  8 / 11 / 16        P a g e  1 | 
2 
 
“Good morning/afternoon Ma’am/Sir” Said with eye contact and a warm sincere smile. 
“Welcome to Our Lady of the Lake, how may I help you?” 
• If the individual is looking for a patient refer them to guest services. If individual is checking in, 
proceed with quick reg. Always maintain eye contact and a smile, be patient and empathetic. 
“Are you having any chest pains or shortness of breath?”  
If yes: 
• Notify quick nurse immediately. 
• Obtain ID and Ins cards. If patient does not have his/her cards ask for name, DOB and SS# 
If no: 
• Proceed with quick reg. 
 “Ma’am/Sir,” Present consent to treat form to patient. 
“This is our consent to treat form. It gives us permission to provide treatment; file a claim with your 
insurance; contact you via phone/text/email based on the information you provide; and release 
information to your healthcare provider and/or insurance company.“ 
“Please initial this line indicating you have been offered a copy of our Patient Rights and 
Responsibilities.” Always maintain eye contact and a smile, be patient and empathetic. 
“Please initial this line indicating you have been offered information about Advanced Directives.” 
Maintain eye contact and smile. 
“Would you like to be included in our patient directory so that you can be located by family and 
friends?” 
If yes: 
• Ask patient to initial next to the line that says, “I do not object.” 
If no: 
• Ask patient to initial next to the line that says, “I object.” 
For Therapeutic Patients Only                                                                                                                           
“Please initial this line indicating you understand this agreement will apply to any/all outpatient Our Lady of the Lake - ED Scripting for Consent Forms 
All phrases in quotes are to be stated exactly as written 
 
 
O L O L  R M C  P a t i e n t  A c c e s s  E D  S c r i p t i n g  8 / 11 / 16        P a g e  2 | 
2 
 
therapeutic services provided during the course of treatment from the date indicated below for the 
same diagnosis and service.”  
Always maintain eye contact and a smile, be patient and empathetic. 
“Please sign and date the bottom line stating you understand and accept the terms and conditions of 
this form.” 
• If patient is a minor or incompetent to give consent, authorized representative will sign in 
designated area.   
“Thank you Ma’am/Sir.”  Retrieve consent form. Sign and date. Remember to smile! 
 
 
 
 
 